Development of a C4I Collection Management System to an Intelligence Sensor Simulation InterfaceFrederick G. SmithAllyn W. DunstanOptiMetrics, Inc.3115 Professional DriveAnn Arbor, MI  48104-5131734-973-1177, ext. 201; ext. 213smith@omi.com, dunstan@omi.com Matthew R. MaierU.S. Army STRICOM / NAWCTSD12350 Research ParkwayOrlando, FL 32826407-384-3667Matt_Maier@stricom.army.milKeywords:C4I, Collection Management, Intelligence, JCMT, TACSIMABSTRACT:  This paper reports the development of an Interface between a C4I collection management system, the Joint Collection Management Tools (JCMT), and an Army intelligence simulation system, Tactical Simulation (TACSIM).  JCMT workstations have been deployed to collection management staffs at Division level and above throughout the Army, and at similar levels for the other services.  TACSIM is a constructive U.S. Army intelligence simulation system that is used in Army and Joint staff-level training exercises.  The goal of this project is to automate the translation of collection requests generated in JCMT to specific taskings for assets/sensors represented in TACSIM.  The paper reports on issues arising during the development process and how they were addressed. The Interface development is compared to the proposed C4I/M&S Interoperability Reference Model.JCMT to TACSIM Interface Project RequirementsThis paper reports the results of a Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase II effort to develop an Interface between a C4I intelligence collection management system, the Joint Collection Management Tools (JCMT), and a U.S. Army constructive intelligence simulation, Tactical Simulation (TACSIM). JCMT workstations have recently been deployed to collection management staffs at Division level and above throughout the Army, and at similar levels for the other services.  JCMT is a DoD All-Source collection management system that includes asset characteristics and target databases to assist the intelligence collection manager in requirements development, mission planning, and message processing. The interface developed under this effort specifically addresses JCMT Version 1.1.5.  It was designed to be generic and robust/scaleable enough to support other message based collection management systems as they become part of the existing U.S. Army C4I inventory.  TACSIM is an Army intelligence simulation that is used in Army and Joint staff-level training exercises.  The Interface supports TACSIM 2.1.5.4.2, and will soon support the TACSIM T3.A broad DoD goal is to integrate C4I Systems and training simulations so soldiers can “Train as They Fight”.  The goal of this project is to automate the translation of collection requests and requirements generated in JCMT into specific taskings for intelligence assets and sensors represented in the TACSIM simulation.  There are two types of translation processes that are performed by the Interface:Translation of the intent of the collection requests, into the specifics of positioning an asset, tuning its sensors, and reporting the resultsTranslation of the C4I data (formats, units, terminology) used by JCMT into the simulation data used by TACSIMThe translation of intent is required because in the operational world, collection requests from JCMT are sent to Asset Managers that control the detailed operation of the assets.  In the simulation world, the asset managers do not exist in the training audience and their functions must be performed by an automated means utilizing the exercise controllers.  In this effort, the asset manager functions were included as a part of the interface rather than the simulation itself. These functions include prioritization of requirements, selection of optimum assets/sensors and supplying tasking details.In addition to the translation issues, the Interface must also deal with the issues of accessing a number of diverse data sources and functioning in a complex, national security driven network environment.  Translation services were provided as a part of the interface for both simulation and real world C4I formats.If the Interface is successfully integrated in staff-level training exercises, its benefits will include:Improved “Train as They Fight” realism for the S2/G2/J2 collection management staffs.A reduction in controller staff needed to support the simulation tasking function.A more automated and repeatable tasking process.This project specifically addressed an interface to TACSIM; however, lessons learned and software reuse for the new Warfighters’ Simulation 2000 (WARSIM) Intelligence Module (WIM) were also goals.  Current plans call for transition of the software for WIM.Simulation of Collection Management and Intelligence Collection ProcessesEarly in the development, we visited an Aggregate Level Simulation Protocol (ALSP) Joint Training Confederation (JTC) exercise to understand how collection management is currently performed for TACSIM.  Our review of the collection management process and the comments from the exercise participants highlighted the fact that the interface between collection management and asset simulation is not just a one-way street. Collection management helps to provide asset tasking, as well as asset collection is reported back to collection management systems.  In addition, JCMT and several other collection management systems share requirements and asset data across several echelons of training.  A complete simulation of the intelligence collection management process should include feedback loops and information sharing between the simulation components.  This is shown in Figure 2.1.This figure shows the various paths where information flow is required to provide a complete and seamless simulation of intelligence processes.  Each path also lists an example of the type and format of information that would flow along that path.  Two of the required information flows are obvious:Information requirements from the commander’s Priority Information Requirements (PIRs) are broken down into Specific Information Requirements (SIR’s) and Technical SIR’s (TSIR’s) and must be passed from JCMT to the JCMT to TACSIM Interface.Taskings must go from the JCMT to TACSIM Interface into TACSIM  (in the TACSIM internal process formats).However, there are many other information flows needed, including:Requirement status feedback (Response to Requests for Information (RRI)) should be sent from the Interface back to JCMT.Flight status information, particularly for aborted flights, needs to be sent from TACSIM back to JCMT.Information on pre-planned missions, which is maintained in JCMT, should be available to the Interface for mission planning.There are also databases whose information is needed by JCMT, the Interface and TACSIM to perform their respective functions.  These databases include:Sensor capability data that is required by all three components.Sensor availability data that is needed by the Interface and by TACSIM.While the above databases can be separately maintained (duplicated) in the different components, doing so Figure 2.1.  Components of a Complete Collection Management and Asset Simulation Processincreases the chances that they will be inconsistent.  Since the sensor availability data may be updated during an exercise, there is also the problem of keeping distributed databases in synchronization.Optimum solutions for all of the above information exchange and common databases could not be implemented on the present prototype development. However, the prototype developed demonstrates that this can be accomplished. Figure 2.1 indicates the desirable features that would need to be included in the simulation and C4I environments for an optimum interface.  This is a notional diagram and the components shown could be included in the interface, the simulation, or the C4I device, as appropriate.JCMT to TACSIM Interface Performance Specifications and Top-Level Design3.1	Performance SpecificationsBased on our review of JCMT’s capabilities, the TACSIM simulation, and the user requirements, OptiMetrics developed the following performance specifications for the JCMT to TACSIM Interface, i.e.:Accept formatted requirements messages from JCMT, parse the messages, and store data extracted from those messagesProvide a Graphical User Interface (GUI) that displays the requirements data so a controller can review that data, edit the data and/or create derivative requirementsConstruct an optimized set of asset taskings, given a set of requirements, a set of candidate intelligence assets and their characteristicsProvide a GUI that displays the proposed taskings so a controller can review them, edit them, and release them for execution by TACSIMOutput the released taskings data in a format that can be accepted by TACSIMThe above list describes exactly what the Interface must do.  How the interface is to accomplish those functions, within the constraints of the JTC exercise environment, is the described in the Interface Design.3.2	Top-Level DesignThe top-level design of the Interface is shown in Figure 3.2.1.  As can be seen from that figure, the Interface can be separated into three general areas:Figure 3.2.1  Top-Level Design for JCMT to TACSIM InterfaceAccepting inputs from JCMT and transforming those inputs into TSIR’s (Technical Specific Information Requirements)Developing an optimum set of missions/taskings that will fulfill those TSIR’sDeveloping a GUI supporting controller review of the candidate tasking and approving communication of them to TACSIMDetails of the JCMT to TACSIM Interface Processes4.1	Accepting Requests from JCMT and Translating into TSIR’sThe standard method for the JCMT user to communicate with intelligence asset managers is via formatted text messages.  In an exercise situation, the exercise Collection Management Controller (CM Controller) performs the function of asset manager, and TACSIM simulates the intelligence asset’s function.  To approach the “train as we fight” goal, it makes sense to have the JCMT User “Trainee” prepare intelligence request messages similarly as he would in the real world.  Thus, we have selected three message types to allow collection requests for three of the standard intelligence disciplines, Imagery Intelligence (IMINT), Signals Intelligence (SIGINT), and Human Intelligence (HUMINT).  In addition, the Interface will accept standard U.S. Message Text Format (USMTF) messages, including the general Request for Information (RI) message.  The RI will allow a means for the JCMT User to communicate to the CM Controller a “General” SIR.  The text of the RI messages will be displayed for the CM Controller.  He/she can then construct specific TACSIM missions that answer the RI’s needs.  The messages that the Interface accepts and processes include:IINS -- Imagery Information Need Specification (also called SEEDNOM)SIGINT AMP/TSR -- SIGINT Requirements SpecificationsHUMINT ASR/TSCR  -- HUMINT Requirements SpecificationsRI -- Requests for InformationThe Interface provides for semi-automated translation of the above request messages into the TSIR’s used to develop the specific taskings.  The Defense Information Infrastructure Common Operating Environment (DIICOE) Common Message Processors (CMP), developed for U.S. Army Communications and Electronics Command (CECOM) by UNIXPROS Inc., was used to parse the above messages.  Whenever the Interface receives a message, the CMP parses that message and auto-fills most data elements of a TSIR.  The raw message and the TSIR screen are displayed for the Controller.  He can then complete the TSIR’s definition and release it to the optimization process.  An example TSIR screen is shown as Figure 4.1.1.4.2	Developing an Optimized Set of Mission TaskingsAs discussed in the introduction, in some cases the interface provides a substitute for the functions that would normally be performed by an intelligence asset manager in the real world.  One of the responsibilities of the asset manager is to optimally allocate the available collection platforms to fulfill the various collection requests.  To assist the exercise controller in scheduling collection missions, the Interface includes a mission optimization tool.  Given a set of TSIR’s and the available collection platforms, the Optimizer process computes a recommended set of mission to fulfill those TSIR’s.  The optimization can include assets with pre-planned flight paths, point-to-point paths or single purpose missions.  It also considers the specific sensor characteristics and range of the asset.  The TSIR characteristics considered include the priority, signature and timing of the target.The optimization process is broken into two steps.  In the first step, the potential effectiveness of each asset against each target, or groups of targets, is computed.  At that point, a feasibility matrix of the asset’s capability to collect against multiple targets is also generated.  The second step computes the optimum set of collection missions given all available assets.  A non-linear optimization is performed using either a simulated annealing or a genetic search algorithm.  The final result is a set of missions that provide optimum collection against the TSIR’s.  Figure 4.2.1 illustrates the control window for the optimization algorithm.The numerical optimization algorithms have been thoroughly tested against a true optimum determined from an exhaustive search algorithm.  The results show that the two non-linear methods approach within 0.1% of the true optimum.  The optimization has also been tested on some practical scenarios, and has given reasonable results.  More extensive testing and the addition of graphical aids to allow the CM Controller to more easily monitor optimization process is planned.In all cases, the set of missions generated by the optimization process is presented to the CM Controller for his review.  The Controller can accept the recommended missions or he can modify or delete them.  He can create new missions and add them to the list.  Once he has created a desired mission set, he then releases those missions to be executed by TACSIM.4.3	User InterfaceThe JCMT to TACSIM Interface provides a Graphical User Interface (GUI) that allows the CM Controller to control the flow of information through the Interface.  The GUI consists of a number of windows that allow management of lists of input messages, TSIR’s and missions.  The entries in these windows are linked to other pop-up windows that are used to set the detailed parameters of the item.  The CM Controller operates the Interface by moving data from one window to another.  A screen capture of the GUI is shown in Figure 4.3.1.To control the Interface process the CM Controller uses the GUI in the following manner.Incoming JCMT messages are registered on the message list“Double clicking” a message item brings up an appropriate TSIR windowThe CM Controller fills the open TSIR fields, and clicks “OK”TSIR’s accumulate in the candidate TSIR listThe CM Controller selects TSIR’s for optimizationThe CM Controller sets the optimization parameters, and initiates the optimizationThe optimization process generates a list of candidate missionsThe CM Controller reviews, modifies or adds to the missionsWhen the CM Controller is satisfied, he clicks “OK” which releases the selected missions to be executed by TACSIMThe Interface translates the missions to TACSIM format and sends them to the TACSIM input processThe Interface also saves a record of the executed missions for future review or recall by the CM ControllerThe CM Controller then returns to the TSIR generation steps to prepare for the next collection periodFigure 4.1.1. TSIR Window Auto-Filled from Raw IINS MessageFigure 4.2.1.  TSIR to Mission Optimization Control PanelFigure 4.3.1  Main Screen of JCMT to TACSIM Interface GUI The interface is intended to be synchronized with the intelligence collection cycle of the exercise.  For JTC exercises, that is typically a 24 hour cycle.  If required however, ad hoc missions can be generated or a complete replanning cycle can be executed as needed.Future Development5.1	Interface Support for Future Versions or Other Collection Management Systems and SimulationsAs of the date of this paper, JCMT Version 1.1.5 will be the last version of the message based JCMT application.  The requirements and characteristics of a replacement for JCMT are still being defined.  It is likely that the replacement would be a web-based design encompassing some of the capabilities of the current JCMT.  The basic design and components of the JCMT to TACSIM Interface could easily be adapted to other Collection Management systems and whatever replaces JCMT.A new version of TACSIM, TACSIM-T3, is currently being installed.  It is planned that the JCMT to TACSIM Interface will soon be modified for use with TACSIM-T3.  This modification will be completed by July of this year.  The Interface could also be adapted to task other Joint Training Confederation (JTC) intelligence simulation models, such as the National Reconnaissance Office’s (NRO) National Wargaming System (NWARS) or the Air Force’s Joint Operational Intelligence Simulation (JOISIM).5.2	Interface Development for the WARSIM Intelligence Module (WIM)The WARSIM Intelligence Module (WIM) is one of the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) models that are under development to replace the current, service-specific JTC models.  WIM will provide improved simulations of a similar, but larger, set of intelligence collection systems as are currently simulated with TACSIM.  It is currently planned that the JCMT to TACSIM Interface will be modified to provide a similar capability for WIM.  Adaptation to WIM is scheduled to begin in the 4th Quarter of 2000, and the enhanced Interface would be available in the 2nd Quarter of 2002.Comparison with the C4I/M&S Interoper- ability Reference ModelA C4I/M&S Interoperability Reference Model proposed by Michael Hieb and co-authors is being considered by the SISO Study Group on C4I-Simulation Interoperability.  While this framework was not available when we began development of the present Interface, in retrospect it provides an instructive view of the various factors to be considered in such a development.  Table 6.1 below, illustrates how various categories of data exchange defined in the Reference Model (see Hieb, 1998) are actually handled in the JCMT to TACSIM Interface in combination with TACSIM.When broadly interpreted, the various categories of the Reference Model do correspond to issues that had to be addressed in the JCMT to TACSIM Interface.  This indicates that the model should be of value for future interface development efforts.One factor, which was incorporated in our Interface but is not fully described in the Reference Mode, is a requirement to add or transform information within the interface.  The example in our Interface is the need to transform a general collection request into a specific asset tasking.  This requirement arises because normally C4I systems have humans on each end interpreting the data elements.  In our case, and often in the other C4I/M&S interface cases, a desire is to minimize the human (manpower) requirements on the simulation side.  Thus we have incorporated (artificial) intelligence and (automation) assisted components into the JCMT to TACSIM Interface.  It may be helpful to more fully consider such factors in future version of the C4I/M&S Interoperability Reference Model.SummaryA software interface has been developed and demonstrated for linking the JCMT collection management system to TACSIM.  The development of the interface required the solution of specific issues including:Definition of a communication architecture, including special security considerationsDevelopment of means for translation and expansion of data elementsIntegration of necessary shared and exercise-specific data needed for the tasking and simulationAddition of artificial intelligence to represent operators not present in the exercise environmentTable 6.1.  Comparison of Reference Model Data Exchange Categories with JCMT to TACSIM Interface QuantitiesReference Model CategoryInterface Quantity ExampleExchange MethodExercise Control InteractionsInitialization/ExecutionInitialization of target databaseJCMT and TACSIM databases with target characteristics must be manually reconciled.Data CollectionCollection requestsInterface stores input requirements messages and output mission taskingsNon-Persistent DataOrdersRequirements messagesAutomation assisted translation from requests to TSIR’sReportsCollection request responsesTACSIM-T3 will generate mission execution feedbackImagery (or intelligence reports)Collection reports (TACELINT, TACREP, etc.)TACSIM generates collection reportsTracksActual status of collection assetsTACSIM-T3 will generate mission execution feedbackCommunication EffectNot applicablePersistent DataUnit DataAsset characteristicsJCMT and TACSIM asset characteristics must be manually reconciled.  Interface reads TACSIM asset filesMission and Plan InformationPreplanned mission tracksInterface accepts and parses RECON1&2 messages from JCMTCommunications PlanReporting planManually configured in TACSIM setup filesWeather DataNot applicableTerrain specificationNot applicableThe demonstrated approach and software is potentially useful for linking a broad range of collection management systems and intelligence simulations.  Future plans call for adapting the Interface to future versions of TACSIM and the new WARSIM Intelligence Module (WIM).Author BiographiesFREDERICK G. SMITH is the Chief Scientist of OptiMetrics, Inc. in Ann Arbor, Michigan.  He has led the development of two distributed simulation models.  Those simulations address SIGINT systems and vehicle integrated defense systems.  He is the program manager for the JCMT-to-TACSIM Interface project.ALLYN W. DUNSTAN is a software development engineer at OptiMetrics, Inc. in Ann Arbor, Michigan.  He was the primary software developer for the MultiSIM-IDS DIS simulation software used to simulate the performance of an Integrated Defense System for the M1.  He is also the primary developer for the JCMT to TACSIM Interface.MATTHEW R. MAIER is Intelligence Integration Technical Manager for PM-WARSIM at U.S. Army Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM).  He provides engineering support to STRICOM as a Naval Air Warfare Center Training Systems Division (NAWCTSD) engineer.  He is the current technical lead on the TACSIM Post-Deployment Software Support (PDSS) program, and previously the technical lead for the WIM development program. A SIR expresses the commanders intelligence need (what, where and when).  A Technical SIR adds specification of the technical collection means (e.g., SIGINT, IMINT or HUMINT). Hieb, M.R., C4I/M&S Interoperability Reference Model, Presentation at SISO Study Group on C4I-Simulation Interoperability, August 1999;  Ressler, R.L., et. al., M&S/C4ISR Conceptual Reference Model, Fall SIW, September 1999;  Carr, F.H. and M.R. Hieb, Issues and Requirements for Future C4ISR and M&S Interoperability, 7th CGF Conference, 1998.