Design of a Command Post Configuration ToolThomas J. Pawlowski III, Ph.D.The MITRE CorporationP. O. Box 3320Fort Leavenworth, KS 66027(913) 684-7587 HYPERLINK mailto:pawlowst@mitre.org pawlowst@mitre.orgSteven J. RingThe MITRE Corporation202 Burlington Road, Rte. 62Bedford, MA 01730-1420(781) 377-7205 HYPERLINK mailto:sring@mitre.org sring@mitre.orgKeywords:C4ISR, Command Post, Architectures, Simulation, StandardsABSTRACT: This paper describes an effort to design a Command Post Configuration Tool (CPCT) in support of training exercises, mission rehearsals, system tests, and experiments that will provide an Army Corps or Division commander and his staff with the capability to configure the layout of a command post. The Army's Command Post (CP) is a headquarters facility where the commander and staff perform their activities. With this tool the commander will be able to input scenario-specific information, lay out the command post structure, and test the configuration through a simulation capability that is a part of the tool. After making adjustments to the configuration, the commander can use the tool to generate technical products needed by the support staff to physically set up the command post. These technical products include the communications network layout, information flow diagrams, simulation configuration files, and other exercise related products. The CPCT will consist of three major components: a commander/staff interface, an information repository, and a simulation capability. The commander/staff interface will allow input of operational information such as staffing levels, scenario, and performance criteria. It will also allow configuration of the CP layout and examination of simulation results with the CP running under designated operational conditions. The repository will maintain all relevant data related to the operational conditions as well as the operational and system architecture information. The commander and staff will be able to modify the layout by changing role assignments or network connectivity and make minor changes to the operational or system architectures. The simulation capability will drive the scenario with specific loads under which the commander will exercise the CP.1.	IntroductionFor the past several years, the Army has invested enormous amounts of resources in acquiring and fielding Information Technology (IT) systems at Fort Hood, TX, to transform the 4th Infantry Division (4ID) into the Army's First Digitized Division (FDD), to make it truly an information age organization. As part of this process, the FDD has participated in training exercises, experiments, and tests of many of the systems that provide the digitization capability. The planning and preparation associated with these events require enormous amounts of time and manpower to properly configure the command posts. The substantial resources required to plan and prepare for a major exercise is primarily due to using a manual process with industrial age automation tools to develop the planning products. The products consist of PowerPoint, Excel, and Word documents, and in some cases, MS Access databases. This paper will describe an effort to design and prototype an information age CPCT to automate the planning and preparation process while reducing the personnel and time requirements needed to support it. The Army's Command Post (CP) is a headquarters facility where the commander and staff perform their activities [1]. The basic concept of a CPCT is to provide the commander with a capability to articulate mission requirements, configure the CP layout, and then dynamically test the configuration via an internal simulation capability. Once the CP design is deemed satisfactory, the tool will generate technical diagrams for the support staff who will then use them to physically layout the CP with all workstations, telephones, faxes, and communication networks. The intention of having such a tool is to reduce the amount of time it takes to produce those technical diagrams, as well as ensuring that the CP design meets the mission needs of the commander.Underlying the design of a CPCT is the Command, Control, Communications, Computer, Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) Architecture Framework provided by the Department of Defense as guidance to the services for developing Information Technology (IT) systems and linking them with other systems that must exchange information on the battlefield [2]. The Framework identifies three different architecture views: Operational, System and Technical. By capturing each of these views within the CP Configuration Tool, it will be possible to document operational requirements, system structure and standards required to physically configure the command posts in support of a major exercise.2.	BackgroundAs the Army moves toward becoming a highly automated force that uses sophisticated C4ISR systems to conduct military operations, it is also having difficulty in planning and preparing for training exercises that require the establishment of these C4ISR systems. Planning for these events currently can take as long as 12-24 months. Over that planning time many changes can occur that will affect the configuration of communications networks, simulation feeds, and general interaction among the various organizations.In the days of a non-digitized force, planning for a training exercise was still manpower intensive and required many months to prepare and setup. However, the reliance on automated, interoperable C4ISR systems that needed to constantly communicate with one another was less prolific than in the case of a digitized force.The planning process being used by FDD staffs still rely, for the most part, on the same planning tools and same processes used in its non-digitized days. This process relies on manually produced technical documents that provide the necessary information to those support personnel required to physically configure and connect all participating units and their command posts. These technical documents, in the form of diagrams, tables, and charts, address some technical aspect of electronically connecting all the workstations, telephones, faxes, and communication networks together as needed. Additionally, much of the support to the FDD comes from Ft. Hood contractors in the Central Testing Support Facility (CTSF) who generate these documents. The problem with this process and its products is that, in the fluid environment in which the planning occurs, some key elements will change and require manual updates. When a change occurs, a person must manually work his/her way through the set of technical products to determine any impact that the change might have on the other documents. This leaves much room for error and/or omission.The creation of a tool that helps automate the planning process and then generates the required technical documents should significantly reduce the time and manpower requirements and the potential number of errors that might get generated. Additionally, as digitization expands to units beyond the FDD and Fort Hood, those units will not be able to rely on a CTSF-like organization for technical support in planning and preparing appropriate technical products for training exercises.3.	ObjectivesFour key objectives of a Command Post Configuration Tool include:Reduce planning timeStandardize technical productsMaintain consistency across productsProvide insight to the commanderFor the first objective, reducing the time it takes to plan a training event (exercise, test, or experiment), the current planning time for a major Corps or Division exercise is extremely long. This invites more opportunities for changes that must then be accounted for in the planning process. Given the OPTEMPO of digitized units such as the 4ID, there is not enough time to perform the necessary planning as well as the training that is needed. By reducing planning time, the training unit will free up more of its time and resources to perform other critical mission-related functions.For the second objective, standardizing technical products required to plan and prepare for a training event, as other units become digitized and have to plan for their own exercises, there will be an established set of products that everyone will understand. Standardized products will also ensure that the necessary information to effectively conduct planning will be generated through these products. For the third objective, maintaining consistency across products when changes are made, with an automated tool maintaining the required information, changes that are made are captured are reflected consistently throughout the generated products.  For the fourth objective, providing insights to the commander on the functionality of the CP configuration, the CPCT tool should give the commander sufficient feedback about the layout of his/her command posts. Thus, the commander will understand where bottlenecks may appear, where staffs may be undermanned, or where other potential problems or weaknesses may occur.4.	MethodologyThe methodology for development of the Command Post Configuration Tool examines the requirements for both the inputs and the outputs of the tool and determines technologies that can be applied to inputting, integrating, displaying, and outputting the required information. This methodology uses a five-step process:Examine the type of output requiredDetermine shortcomings in the current productsStandardize the set of technical productsDetermine all the input requirementsDetermine what and how to capture required data Step one examines the type of output required by the tool. It begins with a review of what is currently being used by the technical staff to support training and testing events. Training events include Corps and Division Warfighter Exercises, and Ulchi Focus Lens and the RSOI in Korea. An example of an experiment is the Division Advanced Warfighting Experiment (DAWE). An example of a test is the Force XXI Battle Command, Brigade and Below (FBCB2) Limited User Test (LUT) at Fort Hood. In this step it is necessary to identify the types of technical products currently being used, the required information for each of those products, the source of that information, and the user of the product. Step two determines any shortcomings in the current set of technical products. In this step, it is critical to determine, for each product, what information is missing, extraneous, or improperly displayed. Additionally, it is important to determine if any technical products are missing from the set of products currently in use. This will be accomplished through an analysis of the information requirements to support the exercise planning process.Step three standardizes the set of technical products. This includes identifying each product that make up the standard set and, for each product, the standard format of that product. The next step determines all the input requirements that will be need to be captured by the tool. Additionally, it will be determined the best means to input that information to make it easy for the user in providing information in a logical manner. The final step determines what and how to capture the data required for the CPCT information repository.5.	 Analysis of Current CapabilityThe initial examination of the current set of 4ID products indicated that they are generally ad hoc diagrams that were developed during the initial digital exercises. These products either (1) continue to be used in their original form, or (2) are evolving products whose form has changed as a better understanding of the information requirements occur. In some cases, products were applicable to non-digitized exercises and were used prior to the first digitized event. In most cases, products are manually created without the benefit of a underlying database to store the product information. Products take the form of PowerPoint slides, Excel spreadsheets, Word documents, and, in some cases, Access databases.The major problem with the current process is that products are all generally developed manually and on an individual basis. This means that the responsible individual manually creates his/her product directly in PowerPoint, Excel, or Word using information provided from other sources in an incompatible form and format. For example, subordinate units currently send unstructured emails to the Corps G6 to identify their exercise requirements. Information must be taken from one product and manually transferred to another product rather than entering the information once and automatically transferring it to a new document in the right form. This current method opens the door for potential transfer errors. Perhaps more critically, any changes to some of the information must be tracked down manually to every location where that information has been used. Recently, III Corps has begun documenting the process and technical products required for planning and preparing for an exercise. III Corps has identified five areas and has designated work groups in each area to be responsible for generating their respective products [3]. A matrix outlining the work groups and their products is shown in Table 5.1. The CPCT will generate all products except those appearing in italics.From this initial set of products, it will be determines what is the right set of products needed and what is the correct information needed in each product.6.	Design of a Prototype ToolThis section describes the key elements of the design of a prototype command post configuration tool. 6.1 Design Principles There are a number of design principles that should be applied:Data should be entered only once - at the point of entryAll data inputs should be made via web-based entriesData should be importable/exportable from/to COTS tools Use of information visualization should be maximizedData structure must follow the CADM meta-data structure For the first principle, data should be entered only once and at the point of entry, any tool that requires reentry of the same data violates this principle and this should not be considered [4]. As an adjunct to this design principle, data entry should be performed electronically via a user-friendly interface. For the second principle, all data inputs should be made via web-based entries, since most sources of data are distributed among units that are participating in the exercise, it would be difficult to use stand-alone products to enter data and then pass this data to a central repository for consolidation. This approach avoids the problem of changing media forms (i.e., diskette) to transfer data from the input source to the CPCT repository. Bill Gates in his book, Business @ the Speed of Thought, describes the concept of a digitized central nervous system for an organization that provides and readily shares all key data and information to all members of the organization, particularly those that are geographically distributed [4]. The CPCT design should apply the same concept to ensure that the appropriate units involved in planning a major exercise event are able to share information quickly and easily.For the third principle, data should be importable/ exportable from/to COTS tools that facilitate data entry and data manipulation, some organizations will have legacy tools they use for data entry or data capture. Also, some tools, such as ISYSCON and Tactical Internet Manager, are being specifically designed to provide some of the technical products that support the planning process for an exercise or real operation [5]. The CPCT must be capable of interfacing with these tools to allow their use. It is not the intention of this effort to duplicate functionality that is already in other tools.For the fourth principle, maximize the use of information visualization, it is important to be able to take advantage of this technology for data entry, data manipulation and information generation and reporting. For the fifth principle, capture all relevant data associated with the Operational and System Architecture views, the data structure must follow the meta-data structure of the C4ISR Core Architecture Data Model (CADM) prescribed by DoD [6]. Major ComponentsThere are three major components of the CPCT (see Figure 6-1):Commander/Staff InterfaceCPCT RepositorySimulations CapabilityThe Commander’s/Staff’s Interface is a computer application that allows the commander or staff member to input mission-specific requirements and visually configure and examine the CP. By linking the CP layout to the simulation capability via the repository, one can simulate the Command Post in its operational environment and then examine results to determine if the design will successfully support the mission needs. Once the design is satisfactory, the interface can generate the technical diagrams for the support staff.The second component is the CPCT Information Repository that collects all the pertinent data associated with the CP configuration. The repository contains all the data to produce the unit's Operational Architecture (OA) and System Architecture (SA) views as well as scenario-specific data. The third component is the Simulation Capability that provides the capability to examine the CP design under the operational conditions described by the commander. The simulation capability will allow the CP design to be exercised under conditions described by the scenario information entered by the commander or his representative. The simulation will have significant resolution to show CP design potential problems. These might be bottlenecks in the communications network, undermanned staff cells, or problems in the business processes being employed by the unit. The technical approach for the simulation engine is the Multi-tier Simulation of Executable Architecture Views methodology currently under development by Hamrick and Pawlowski [7]. This methodology links together several models representing the Operational Architecture and various components of the System Architecture through the High Level Architecture (HLA). Each model is built in a tool with a simulation capability, thus allowing the models to interact through HLA. Barr, et al, describe the modeling tools and the Executable Model Process for linking together the OA, SA and TA models [8].Outputs of the tool are the technical products as identified in Table 5-1.7.	SummaryA Command Post Configuration Tool is a necessary capability for a digitized unit to properly plan and execute a major training exercise. Without such a tool, a digitized unit will have difficulty in meeting its Operational Tempo while planning and preparing for a major training event. The number of details and the amount of precision required to capture the right information for the technical support team to physically configure a command post for an exercise will be overwhelming without the use of an automated tool. Likewise having a capability to test run the configuration in a simulated environment prior to physically connecting all the systems will help provide valuable insight to the commander on where his organization may have weaknesses that need correcting.8.	References[1] 	Department of Defense, Joint Pub 1-02, "Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms," 23 March 1994, as amended through 24 January 2000.[2]	Department of Defense, "C4ISR Architecture Framework, Version 2.0," 18 December 1997, http://www.c3i.osd.mil/org/cio/i3/AWG_Digital_Library/pdfdocs/fw.pdf.[3]	U.S. Army III Corps, "Exercise Planning Guide," Fort Hood, TX, May 2000. [4]	Gates, W.H., "Business @ the Speed of Thought," Warner Books, 1999.[5]	Hilger, J. "Tactical Internet Manager Overview," Briefing by Project Manager, Tactical Systems Division, 20 April 2000.[6]	Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Command, Control, Communications, Intelligence) Information Integration and Interoperability Directorate, "C4ISR Core Architecture Data Model (CADM)," Final Report, 1 December 1998, http://www.c3i.osd.mil/org/cio/i3/AWG_Digital_Library/index.htm. [7]	Hamrick, M. and Pawlowski, T.: "Technical Approach for Multi-tier Simulation of Executable Architectures," MITRE Product 00W0000131, June, 2000. [8] 	Barr, P.C., Bernstein, A.R., Hamrick, M. Nicholson, D., Pawlowski, T., Ring, S.: "Executable Architecture for the First Digitized Division," Proceedings of SPIE, Vol. 4037 Digitization of the Battlespace V and Battlefield Biomedical Technologies II, 26-27 April 2000.9.	AcknowledgmentsThe authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the work in this paper by the US Army National Simulation Center (NSC), the Office of the Director of Information Systems for Command, Control, Communications, and Computers (DISC4), and the US Army Communications Electronics Command (CECOM). We thank John Diem for his guidance and expertise on training exercises. We also thank Major Jim Blalock and Dr. Mike Heib for their efforts in guiding this project.10.	Author BiographiesTHOMAS J. PAWLOWSKI III, Ph.D. is a Lead Operations Research Analyst at the MITRE Corporation. He served for over 26 years in the Army as a Field Artilleryman and Operations Research Analyst, retiring as a Colonel in 1998. He has been involved in the development and application of modeling and simulations for C4ISR systems for much of his Army career. He received his PhD in Industrial Engineering from Georgia Tech in 1990.STEVEN J. RING is a Lead Information Systems Engineer at the MITRE Corporation. He has over 29 years experience including technical and lead roles in commercial/ military product development, integration, and project management. Since 1993, he has focused on applying information and knowledge-based technology to the issues of C4ISR architecture information integration in support of system interoperability and simulation based acquisition. He received his MS in Systems Engineering from Case Institute of Technology in 1971.(footnote continued) EMBED Word.Document.8 \s  EMBED Word.Picture.8  