Synthetic Range Study OverviewEdward T. PowellStephen T. BachinskyJeff OlszewskiRyan HenryScience Applications International Corporation1100 N. Glebe Rd. Suite 1100Arlington VA 22201703-587-8036epowell@sito.saic.comNancy BucherDefense Modeling and Simulation Office1901 N. Beauregard St Suite 500Alexandria VA 22311703-998-0660nbucher@mail.arc.nasa.govSteve PringlePacific Missile Range FacilityP.O. Box 218Kekaha HI 96750pringles@pmrf.navy.milKeywords:Test and Training Range; Interoperability; HLA; Foundation Initiative; TENA; PMRF; High-Performance Computing ABSTRACT: The Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, in coordination with the Pacific Missile Range Facility (PMRF) and the Foundation Initiative (FI) 2010,  is engaged in a year-long study to determine the best way to augment PMRF's capabilities using advanced HLA-based simulation technologies.  The long range goal of the study is to implement a portion of the FI 2010 Synthetic Range Vision tailored to PMRF's unique needs and capabilities.  The study, intended to provide a road-map for a multi-year experimental effort to bring new realism and interoperability to PMRF, consists of three basic components: a requirements analysis, a technical feasibility analysis, and a system development roadmap.  To date, the study has identified critical driving requirements, key relevant technical innovations, and a number of possible experiments for next year and beyond.  This paper explores the Synthetic Range Vision, states the important requirements, describes the relationship of the Synthetic Range to the HLA and the Test and Training Enabling Architecture (TENA), and gives a status report on plans to integrate simulation and high-performance computing capabilities into PMRF using HLA and TENA in the coming years.IntroductionCurrently, the US military tests new weapons and concepts at a series of test ranges throughout the world.  Some of these ranges operate also as training ranges.  In general, each range has evolved to meet a few important needs, usually for a single service.  While highly capable, our ranges tend to have different suites of sensor technology, communications technology, and computer hardware and software, leading to separate “stovepipe” testing and training facilities.  This state of affairs is unacceptable for future military range needs for two primary reasons.  First, to test and train as they fight, the military needs to test and train with new “smart” weapons in joint arenas.  The use of these smart weapons in live test ranges is either impossible or very expensive.  Secondly, the general decline in the funding available for training and testing means that existing range assets must be much more efficiently used.  Just as weapon systems are becoming more sophisticated and complex, our ability to test and train with them is becoming more difficult.  The only solution to this problem is to combine the training and testing assets we have built over the years with the advanced computer and simulation technology that is becoming increasingly available.We call such an integration a “Synthetic Range”, created by integrating testing, training, simulation, and high-performance computing technologies, distributed across many facilities.  In a Synthetic Range real military assets, such as ships, aircraft, or ground vehicles, can interact with each other and with simulated weapons and forces, no matter where these forces actually are throughout the world.  Creating a global Synthetic Range will necessarily be a complicated and long term task.  Three major DoD initiatives have been initiated to create both enabling technologies and an overall system architecture.  The Joint Advanced Distributed Simulation (JADS) Program was a Joint Experiment to determine the feasibility of using simulation in testing environments, to investigate new evaluation methodologies, and to determine economic and performance benefits of integrated simulation technologies.  The Foundation Initiative (FI) 2010 is an OSD effort to consolidate four separate but related DoD programs (Test & Training Enabling Architecture (TENA), Common Displays Analysis & Processing Systems, Virtual Test & Training Range and Joint Regional Range Complex) with the objective of creating a common architecture.  The FI 2010 architecture, also called TENA, is based on the creation of object models, services, application programmers’ interfaces, standards, and protocols throughout the range community, enabling interoperability between facilities and re-use of developed software.  The third DoD initiative, the High Level Architecture for Modeling and Simulation (HLA), sponsored by the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO), created a technical architecture for all DoD simulations which also promotes interoperability and reuse among simulation programs.  The Synthetic Range will necessarily draw heavily from all three of these initiatives as it evolves.The goal of the current Synthetic Range study is to create a plan that puts a “stake in the ground” for building a Synthetic Range, and to do so in a controlled, evolvable, standards-compliant fashion at a reasonable cost.  The focus of the study is the Pacific Missile Range Facility (PMRF) augmented by the Maui High-Performance Computing Center (MHPCC).  The basic approach taken for this study is to create a plan for a series of incremental experiments to introduce simulation and high-performance computing technology to PMRF, resulting eventually in a fully functional synthetic range partner, able to operate and interoperate with sister ranges and HLA-compliant simulations throughout the world.  The incremental approach is based on the experience of introducing new technology and capabilities employed throughout DMSO’s simulation and High-Level Architecture activities and has been shown to be both highly successful while minimizing risk and disruption to the customer.Synthetic Range VisionFigure 1 shows a conceptual diagram describing the composition of an individual range today.  While the figure is a broad generalization, it is useful to point out that ranges generally have a few basic components: participants (either live systems, systems under test, targets or other live-but-not-go-to-war systems, and the EW systems that create the EW environment of the range), the range environment itself, the sensors that make the instrumented range “instrumented”, the analysis and display software used to understand what transpiring on the range, and other software used to help run the range.  Each range is of course different in some way, but generally they all can be described in the terms illustrated in the Figure.What is a Synthetic Range?A Synthetic Range is a composable set of range systems, sensors, software, and simulations, potentially in multiple geographic locations, that can be rapidly composed into a working system to meet a given mission or set of missions.  As such, a Synthetic Range is a union of two basic concepts, that of a logical range and a virtual world.“A logical range is a range without geographic boundaries.  An instance of the Logical Range is created at a point in time when specific customer requirements dictate a need for interoperability, sharing or reuse of resources. Resources or assets may include platforms, instrumentation, software modules, test or training exercise plans or data products, models, simulators, air or water space, computers and stimulators.  The Logical Range meets customer requirements when it creates a dynamic entity which schedules and integrates resources, plans, executes and delivers a customer data package.  It allows facilities and test or training ranges to expand their capabilities and provide more comprehensive resources and services assembled to meet customer requirements.” [1]A virtual world is created by one or more simulations and is a selective re-creation of the real world that includes actors, systems, and the environment.  The virtual world can be created by a suite of simulations or by a single simulation.  The parts of a Synthetic Range are shown in Figure 2. The most important augmentation is the creation and maintenance of the “Virtual World” which replaces the real world as the core of the mission space.  That is, the entirety of the test and training event is represented in the virtual world, while only a part of the event is now represented in the real world on the Range Environment.  Live assets are projected into the virtual world along with simulated assets.  Interactions between assets occur both in the real world and the virtual world.  The virtual world consists of a representation of the natural environment, a well-defined set of objects that populate and evolve in that environment, and a communication mechanism to make sure that all interactions between assets occur in a managed and time-consistent fashion.Other important aspects of the synthetic range are:A mechanism (labeled “Virtual/Live Mediation” which is the mechanism for injecting information from the virtual world into the systems of the live assets on the range.  For live assets to properly interact with virtual assets, their sensor systems and C4I systems need to be able to access and properly interpret information from the virtual world as if it were coming from the real world.Gateways allow the Synthetic Range to interact with legacy ranges, simulations, C4I systems or other software.Real-Time Visualization allows (potentially widely distributed) users to have awareness of what is going on in both the real world and the virtual world at any given time, and enough information to distinguish between what is real and what is not. A repository for storing data, software, object models, etc. between events, so that new exercises or tests can be readily constructed from the basic components and data sets.A suite of tools for planning, executing, collecting data from, analyzing and reviewing a training or test event.Driving RequirementsTo decide how best to create a Synthetic Range, a requirements analysis was performed focused on PMRF’s requirements.  Unlike conventional requirements analyses, which might list hundreds or even thousands of detailed requirements, the requirements analysis of this study focused on a few fundamental generalized requirements that drive how an eventual synthetic range might be architected.  These “driving requirements” are broad guidelines for the system architects and designers and in particular are the primary guidelines used by the study participants in selecting and evaluating potential experiments for the next few years.There are two categories of driving requirements, the “Functional” driving requirements and the “Global System Performance” driving requirements.  Functional driving requirements focus on what a system must do, while global system performance requirements focus on how a system must do it.  This study is focused on identifying both types of requirements.There are four primary Functional Driving requirements:Increased Realism – the ability of the system to better represent reality such that training and testing events are more realistic and thus more effective at matching go-to-war conditions.  This requirement matches DoD guidance that both training and testing events be more like how we fight.Increased Automation – currently, with declining budgets, it is necessary to do more work with less money, thus more automation is a critical requirement.  The areas of event scenario planning, setup, and checkout, all currently highly manual processes, are especially amenable to automationEnhanced Range Awareness – This requirement specifies that the managers and users of a range have an improved ability to understand what is happening on the range—in the past, in the present, and what might potentially happen in the future.  Derived aspects of this driving requirement are enhanced analysis, playback, visualization, planning, and range safety calculations.Enhanced Feedback Capability – this requirement specifies that the range should have the ability to present feedback to trainees or testers in near-real time.  Currently, feedback of what precisely happened on the range may be presented days or weeks after the event, compromising training value and delaying effective test understanding.There are five primary Global System Performance Driving Requirements:Interoperability – The ability of separately designed and built components, applications, or systems to work together to meet a mission need.  There are many aspects to interoperability but the main ones are a shared language, a shared communication mechanism and a shared context in which to communicate—in particular, a shared concept of the environment and of the passage of time.Composability – the ability for a system to be created in a short period of time, close to the point of use, by assembling independently designed and built components.  This requirement is sometimes also called “modularity” or “sharability”Scalability – the ability for the system’s infrastructure to perform adequately at any system size of interestLife-Cycle Cost Reduction – This requirement specifies that the cost associated with creating, planning for, setting-up, managing, executing, analyzing and reviewing a test or training event be continuously decreased in the future.  This requirement is related to other requirements above and will be achieved as these other requirements (such as automation or composability) are achieved.Connectivity to other sites/ranges – this requirement specifies that the PMRF range be able to be connected with and integrated with other sites and ranges throughout the world as a pre-requisite for creating the Synthetic Range. The previous Global System Performance Driving Requirements are generally achieved by creating a common architecture and infrastructure and building the system (or system-of-systems) based on this blueprint.  The Functional Driving Requirements are generally achieved by building specific applications addressed to their specific needs.Integrating Range Assets and Live Users with Simulation AssetsCurrently range assets, while integrated with each other to a certain extent, are not integrated with simulation assets very well at all.  In principle, a Synthetic Range will have simulated assets and live assets as “co-equal” partners in a given range exercise or test.  Achieving this goal is extremely difficult.  There are any number of safety, security, administrative, physical and cost issues to be resolved before simulated assets can be fully integrated with range systems or live assets, not to mention the important technical challenges in doing so.  A number of different programs (such as JADS) have addressed some of these issues, but many remain.  The goal of the current study is to try to identify as many of these specific issues as possible and suggest possible mechanisms for overcoming them that are acceptable to all parties.In principle, at first, integration must occur using gateways and translators as the languages spoken by the fleet, the range, and the simulations will all be different.  Similarly, the communications mechanisms for each of these components will also be different.  As the system evolves, the goal will be to create and use a single common language for interaction among all assets.   Achieving such a common language (or common object model in the HLA sense) will be difficult, but can be done in an incremental and iterative fashionAchieving the VisionWe believe that to achieve the vision of the Synthetic Range at PMRF, a multi-track approach is required.  First, additional strategic planning is needed to align the PMRF facility and personnel towards the goal of creating a Synthetic Range.  Second a series of experiments are needed, each one building on the previous and addressing one or more of the Functional Driving Requirements.  Finally, alignment with FI 2010 and the adoption of TENA as the basic infrastructure architecture will address the Global System Performance Driving Requirements.  These aspects are discussed in more detail below.Iterative Experiment ApproachThe approach we are taking for this Synthetic Range program is one of incremental, iterative, and measured progress toward the goal.  This study will determine the appropriate driving requirements that will guide the Synthetic Range program, the basic architecture of a Synthetic Range and the technologies that are important to fulfilling that architecture, and the initial plan for a series of experiments that address these requirements in an incremental, iterative fashion.An iterative development process is one in which the long-term vision is understood and the broad architecture is defined, but that the individual iterations are defined as they occur based on feedback from previous iterations as well as changes based on the insertion of new and unforeseen technology.  An iterative development plan is thus much more flexible than a traditional “waterfall” plan, but also less specific.  Alignment with FI 2010 and the Transition from INet to TENAA primary recommendation of this study will be to align as closely as possible the Synthetic Range program with the Foundation Initiative 2010 program and its TENA architecture.  TENA addresses all of the Global System Performance Driving Requirements defined above, thus alignment with TENA solves (or begins to solve) all of the problems associated with achieving those requirements.  The experiments, therefore, can focus on addressing one or more of the functional driving requirements, and we will be secure in the knowledge that the Global System Performance Driving Requirements will be incrementally satisfied as TENA evolves and matures.Another major benefit of aligning the Synthetic Range with FI and TENA is that TENA is fully compatible with and complaint with the DoD High-Level Architecture for Modeling and Simulation (HLA).  TENA is in fact a superset of HLA tailored to benefit the testing and training range community.  The heart of TENA is a single shared common object model for use among all ranges.  Such an object model is fully consistent with the HLA’s concept of a “Federation Object Model” or FOM.Finally, PMRF’s current software and communications infrastructure is very reminiscent of the Distributed Interactive Simulation, making transition to TENA/ HLA relatively straightforward.  PMRF’s infrastructure consists of an extensive switched computer network (called the Instrumentation Network or INet) in which applications communicate via protocol data units using multicast.  While not all of these INet PDUs are consistent with TENA’s object model as it stands today, both the INet PDUs and the TENA object model are in the process of review and modification based on customer needs and new technologies.  It is easy to conceive that PMRF’s INet PDUs can be transitioned to TENA objects over the next few years with minimal disruption to PMRF’s day-to day activities.  The key to achieving this is to provide the capability to simultaneously run two networks, one containing applications that speak INet PDUs, one containing applications that speak TENA objects with a gateway in between performing translation services.  At the start, very few TENA applications will exist and almost all applications will be INet applications.  As more and more applications are made TENA-compliant, the number of a applications on the TENA side of the gateway will increase, while the number of INet applications will decrease until the entire range infrastructure will be TENA-compliant.  Notice that this plan will not preclude an application from existing for as long as necessary on both sides of the gateway, thus range operations should not be unduly affected the by testing and integration of a new application.Possible Future ExperimentsInitial planning for experiments for next year is  currently being performed.  Experiment ideas are being brainstormed in each of the four different phases of an exercise:Pre-Mission PlanningMission Setup and Check-outExecutionPost-Mission SupportExperiments are being considered for each of the four different primary customers that PMRF supports:Submarine trainingFleet trainingAegis testing and evaluationMissile defense testing and evaluationThe experiments fall into a very few broad categories (with the Driving Requirement they address in parentheses afterward):Automating the currently difficult and tedious scenario generation and mission planning process (Automation)Helping to automate the setup and checkout process (Automation)Near-real time flight safety analysis and failure analysis using real up-to-the-minute weather surface and subsurface information (Range Awareness)Creating virtual targets, opponents, or environments and injecting the effects of these onto a live platform (Realism)Linking the PMRF range to one or more other ranges to aid in training or testing (Realism)Near-real-time feedback of exercise results to the trainees (Feedback)It is expected that numerous other experiment ideas will be invented before the list is narrowed down to the three experiments that are planned for initiation in FY2001.The current thinking is that the first experiment next year will be a variant of the Virtual Torpedo concept demonstrated at the Atlantic Underwater Test and Evaluation Center (AUTEC) recently under the Synthetic Environment Tactical Integration (SETI) program run by the Naval Undersea Warfare Center (NUWC).  In this experiment, the electronics of a real torpedo sitting on a lab bench are integrated with a live submarine operating on the range through the use of a sophisticated underwater environment simulation running at a high-performance computing facility.  To the trainees on the submarine, it appears as if they are firing a real torpedo as feedback from the simulated environment is injected into their sensors and C4I systems.  Similarly, the trainees guide the simulated torpedo as they would a real torpedo and get the same type of feedback from it as it travels toward and potentially impacts a real or simulated target.The virtual torpedo concept allows more training in torpedo firings at much less cost than when actual torpedoes are fired.  It also allows for immediate feedback on the results of the torpedo firing.  Thus this experiment would address two of our four Functional Driving Requirements: increased realism and near-real-time feedback.  It is proven technology with direct impact to PMRF’s primary business, low-cost and low risk, includes a component that can leverage the high-performance computing capability located at the Maui High Performance Computing Center and would have a significant leave-behind component that would enhance day-to-day submarine training at PMRF, while moving forward towards the Synthetic Range vision.The Virtual Torpedo Experiment also perfectly positions PMRF to expand on the concept and create other virtual targets operating in virtual environments.  Thus the Virtual Torpedo Experiment is not just a one-time event but a first step on the road to a more capable future based on the Synthetic Range concept.ConclusionsThe Synthetic Range Study is the first step in a multi-year program to upgrade PMRF capabilities using HLA-based simulations and to bring it in alignment with other DoD architecture initiatives such as TENA that will pave the way to make a Synthetic Range a reality in this decade.References [1]	TENA Baseline Project Report Volume V: Logical Range Business Process Model”, prepared for the USD(A&T) Director CTEIP, September 1997.Author BiographiesDr. Edward T. Powell is a senior scientist with Science Applications International Corporation.  His interests include large-scale system architectures and designs, and the integration of simulations with C4I systems and live test and training facilities.  He has served as a lead system architect for many simulation programs including JPSD, STOW, and JSIMS, and is now the technical lead for the Synthetic Range Study.Stephen T. Bachinsky is a division manager with Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC) in Alexandria, VA.  Recently he has been working on distributed computing frameworks, and in particular, leading the Next Generation Run-Time Infrastructure (RTI) program in support of the High Level Architecture (HLA) standard for modeling and simulation applications.  His interests include the software architecture, design, and development of high performance distributed information systems.JEFFREY OLSZEWSKI is a senior computer scientist in the Distributed Computing Technology Division of SAIC, and is a member of the development team for the RTI 1.3 Next Generation implementation. His interests include distributed simulation infrastructure, object oriented systems design and development, and software engineering and software process improvement. Christopher “Ryan” Henry currently serves as the Vice President for Strategic Planning and Development in SAIC’s Technology Research Group.  Ryan’s professional career spans leading-edge technology engagement, national security policy and strategy development, front-line combat in two wars, 24 years of naval aviation operations, and hand’s on involvement in the legislative process.Dr. Nancy M Bucher is the Manager of the Advanced Modeling & Simulation (AMSIM) Complex  under the U.S. Army Aviation and Missile Command (AMCOM). Dr. Bucher is  Program Manager of the CHAMELEON Program, the objective of  which is the development of an engineering level HLA Federation of  AMC RDEC M&S labs and TRADOC centers in support of RDA and ACR.  Dr. Bucher  is  currently on a special assignment to the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office supporting the Modeling and Simulation S&T Initiatives Program and is the Government Study Director for the Synthetic Range Study.Steve Pringle is an electronic engineer with the Pacific Missile Range Facility.  He heads up the Real-time Instrumentation Processing section. His major duties include software development in the areas of radar data processing, impact prediction, and networking.  He is the technical point of contact for PMRF for the Pacific Synthetic Range Study.PAGE \# "'Page: '#''"  Don’t sound like we won’t know what we’re doing in the futureFigure 1: Parts of today’s ranges showing their interactions and relationshipsFigure 2: The components of a Synthetic Range