Standardizing the Codification of Environmental Objects:The Environmental Data Coding SpecificationRobert F. RichbourgInstitute for Defense Analyses1801 N. Beauregard StreetAlexandria, VA 2311rrichbou@ida.orgDale D. MillerLockheed-Martin Information SystemsAdvanced Simulation Center3605 - 132nd Avenue SE, Suite 400Bellevue, WA 90006 HYPERLINK mailto:ddmiller@lads.is.lmco.com ddmiller@lads.is.lmco.comPaul G. FoleyQuantum Research International1901 N. Beauregard StreetSuite 500Alexandria, VA 22311 HYPERLINK mailto:pfoley@dmso.mil pfoley@dmso.milGuy A. SchiavoneInstitute for Simulation and TrainingUniversity of Central Florida3280 Progress DriveOrlando, FL 32826-3229guy@ist.ucf.eduKey words: environmental representation, terrain database, synthetic environment, classification, standardization, SEDRISABSTRACT:   The community concerned with abstract and digital representations of the environment has long recognized the need for a standard set of codes that identify each type of environmental object, condition, property, or phenomenon.  Several sets of such coding or classification schemes exist, and one, the Digital Geographic Information Exchange Standard (DIGEST) Feature and Attribute Coding Catalog (FACC), has been adopted as a NATO Standardization Agreement.  However, none of these classification systems fully covers the spectrum of environmental data now found in simulation databases.  The Environmental Data Coding Specification (EDCS) was initiated as a part of the DMSO-sponsored SEDRIS project and is designed to address a very wide domain of applicability. The EDCS will eventually provide a classification code for each object and attribute likely to be included in any simulation database describing the physical environment.  In parallel with development, the EDCS is also going through the process to become an international standard under processes of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC).  Recently, the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) began the process of adopting EDCS implementations and supporting mappings to other code lists as SISO Products.This paper presents an overview of the EDCS (as defined by the July, 2000 Third Working Draft, ISO/IEC 18025) and provides references to SEDRIS documents that detail the currently defined classification codes, attribute codes, and units.   We also describe use cases and organizational schema illustrating EDCS application to well-known simulation domains.  Finally, based on documented needs within the SISO community, we consider potential improvements to the coding system itself, the proposed EDCS configuration management process and the mechanisms to register new EDCS contents.1.  IntroductionThe Synthetic Environment Data Representation and Interchange Specification (SEDRIS) project was initiated in 1994 as a joint effort of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and the U. S. Army Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM). The primary goal of the research and development effort was to permit the unambiguous and complete interchange of environmental data as a pre-run-time activity among simulation systems.  The Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) became the primary sponsor in 1995.  All sponsors support a fundamental SEDRIS design decision; SEDRIS is modular and comprised of several primary components, some of which have intrinsic, stand-alone value.The Data Representation Model (DRM) is the basic component of SEDRIS that provides the form, location, and inter-relationships of environmental data objects.  Environmental data is presented in terms intended to facilitate the geometric manipulations useful for data modeling by simulation developers.  The DRM leaves the task of characterizing geometric forms according to semantic identifications to a second key component, a data dictionary, which must provide the authoritative descriptions of data elements.  The data dictionary has proven to have significant value independent of other SEDRIS components and has come to be know as the Environmental Data Coding Specification (EDCS). 1.1.  What About Existing Dictionaries?The notion of using data dictionaries for semantic identification has been recognized as a useful concept for many years and several such systems now exist. A very prominent dictionary, the DIGEST Feature and Attribute Coding Catalog (FACC), NATO Standardization Agreement (STANAG) 7074, was used as the starting point for a data dictionary to accompany the SEDRIS DRM.  By design, FACC is limited to data elements of interest in the mapping, charting, and geodesy (MC&G) domain.  Thus, it does not describe all data elements routinely represented in simulation databases.  As examples, the FACC does not fully address the ocean, atmosphere, or space domains, mobile entities, characteristics of terrain objects in non-visual spectra, abstractions useful for Synthetic Forces reasoning (e.g., centerline / nexus), or things which have short temporal existence (e.g., tank ditch, survivability position).  Nevertheless, the SEDRIS team began by defining a data dictionary that was a strict superset of FACC.  With increased experience using this dictionary in the simulation domain, other undesirable characteristics became apparent.  Some definitions of data elements are judged inadequate, and perhaps more importantly, data elements are tightly bound to the units used to represent them (e.g., length must be represented in whole meters). This gives rise in FACC to multiple data elements describing the same thing but using different units.  Finally, the FACC includes an inseparable and specific organizational scheme that does not serve well in the full EDCS domain. (These aspects are described more fully in Sections 2 and 3).  As a result, the SEDRIS team abandoned the strict superset relationship, allowing use of improved definitions and the elimination of mandatory units of measurement for each attribute. This new data dictionary is the Environmental Data Coding Specification (EDCS).  Its relationship to FACC is maintained by the explicit description of mappings from FACC data elements to those of the EDCS.1.2.  The EDCS Problem SpaceAs a data dictionary, the EDCS purpose is to provide for the shared understanding of the semantic that should be associated with specific environmental data, without regard to the data modeling strategy employed to represent that data.  As an example, a data modeler could utilize the SEDRIS DRM to represent a “house” as a model in a model library, a point feature, a collection of polygons in an aggregate geometry, an areal feature, or a number of other data forms.  However, the EDCS will allow the unambiguous identification of any of these representations as that of a “house”, so that automated systems can reason about that data and its implications as appropriate.  Clearly, this could become a very large enumeration problem; the EDCS must provide for the identification for any data item that could potentially be included in any simulation environment.  This includes data that might be present at any time during a live, virtual, or constructive simulation life cycle, spanning all functional and physical domains.  The EDCS challenge does not end at this point.The complete and unambiguous identification of data includes requirements well beyond simply providing a classification identity.  A more complete description includes the properties or attributes that should be associated with each data item.  Continuing with the “house” example, reasoning systems may require knowledge of the composition of the house (cinder block, timber, siding, etc) as equally important to its semantic identity.  One method to address this situation would be to add descriptive information to the name itself (e.g. “cinder block house”, “siding house”, and so on).  However, as the important properties of the “house” might be large in number (“red, peak roof, 10-window, 2-door, 10 year old, cinder block house” and so on), this approach seems to have very limited utility for most interesting application domains.   Instead, the EDCS includes attribute codes that can be associated with the classification codes to provide such information.  That is, the EDCS provides classification codes to identify a data element as a house and attribute codes to specify that the house has concrete walls and other attributes, including many more than just those few exemplified above.  Note that measurement types of attribute data must have some unit of measure for the associated value to have clear meaning.  Accordingly, the EDCS also provides a standard system of units to accompany the classification and attribute codes.A SEDRIS data interchange might describe the representation of air, land, sea, or space useful in entertainment, training, mission rehearsal, or C4I applications of live, virtual, or constructive simulations.  The EDCS is intended to provide semantic information for any of the potentially associated data elements.  The EDCS strategy is to provide a base set of classifications that identify the semantic type of these data elements and to augment these classifications with attributes and units of measure to fully describe data element properties and characteristics.  This is a challenging problem not completely unlike the legendary nightmare of a final exam question, “Define the Universe, be specific, and provide a complete example.” Fortunately, other systems have also attempted to resolve this same problem. The EDCS profits greatly by starting with the FACC system, expanding on its restricted domains of applicability, and engineering to overcome design limitations that have come to light during FACC use.  Thus, the “terrible final exam question” has become a larger group effort that will be resolved in an evolutionary fashion.The following sections describe the three main components of the EDCS that have been introduced above.  These are the EDCS Classification Codes (ECC), the EDCS Attribute Codes (EAC) and the units (known as the EDCS Unit Codes, EUC) used to describe the quantitative measures that can be associated with attribute values.  These sections describe the EDCS according to the July 2000 Third Working Draft, ISO/IEC 18025. !SO/IEC 18025 is the document registry number  assigned to the EDCS as it progresses through the process of international standardization (see Section 6).2.  EDCS ClassificationsThe ECC constitute the EDCS mechanism to identify (or classify) environmental data objects through the assignment of codes and corresponding labels and definitions.  A code in this context is a machine-parsable symbol that is uniquely associated with a specific semantic.  A label is a corresponding name or phrase intended for human comprehension.  Each code-label pair also has an associated definition.  As noted above and originally developed under the SEDRIS Data Coding Standard (SDCS, the EDCS precursor), the ECC were designed to ensure complete correspondence to the classification codes, labels, and definitions enumerated in the FACC.  In fact, the original concept for the ECC was to ensure complete consistency (upward compatibility) with the FACC classification codes themselves; when the FACC specified that code “AP030” would be assigned to all “Road” data objects, then the ECC also included the code “AP030”, its label, and its definition. Thus, each classification provided by the FACC had a simple, direct translation to an ECC classification.  This “identity-mapping” relationship is no longer maintained. The ECC is now being revised to replace all 5-character codes with integers.  As an example, the Third Working Draft code for “Road” data objects is 668 instead of “AP030”.  There are several reasons for this shift, one in particular pertains to the FACC classification hierarchy.  Originally, the ECC necessarily adopted this classification hierarchy as an inseparable part of the FACC classification codes; the FACC classifications themselves are built from the hierarchy.  Continuing with the “AP030” example, the ‘A’ signifies the FACC “Culture” category, ‘P’ signifies the subcategory “Transportation – Road”, and the “030” signifies the exact item within that category, subcategory structure (e.g. the “Road”).  In direct contrast and by intention, the code 668 has no relationship to any type of hierarchical structure, taxonomy, or categorization system.In addition, FACC codes are, to a limited extent, human readable (the authors have memorized more than they care to admit). The EDCS codes are intended only for computer processing. The human readable labels are intended in discussions, writings, and computer source code. The example ECC above (668) is the only explicit example of a code given in this paper.While the simple direct, relationship between the FACC classification codes and the ECC is no longer maintained, there is a complete mapping from the FACC classification codes to the ECC.  For each FACC classification code, there is a single ECC code that represents the same semantic.  The actual codes themselves will differ, although they may share the same label (e.g. “Road”) and definition.  Of course, not every ECC has a corresponding FACC classification.  The ECC include 860 distinct classifications, over 50% more than exist in the FACC, version 2.0.The ECC also include classifications corresponding to those of other classification systems.  The Digital Feature Analysis Data (DFAD), produced by NIMA, does not utilize the FACC classification system.  Instead, DFAD uses Feature Identification (FID) codes.  The ECC also represents each of these (although some FID classifications are mapped to ECC that must have specific attributes and values).  The ECC also maintain correspondence with other NIMA products, such as DTED and earlier vector product databases using the Defense Mapping Agency Feature File (DMAFF) coding system.  Other federal, commercial, and international products and their associated coding systems are also important sources during modeling and simulation database generation.  The important notion of creating and maintaining mappings into and out of the EDCS is presented in discussions that follow.The content of the ECC is constantly evolving to include a growing range of data objects.  Clearly, the range addressed by all NIMA products as well as those described by the FACC are included.  While this represents a significant amount of the data used in modern simulation systems, the ECC is far from complete coverage of the intended domains of applicability.  The concept of evolutionary growth is central to the EDCS design.  Methods to influence ECC evolution are discussed below.  The general areas of coverage addressed by the classification codes are exemplified below in conjunction with the section on organizational schema.3.  EDCS Attributes The EAC design has progressed in close concert with that of the ECC.  Like the ECC, it was originally intended to constitute a superset of the FACC attribute codes.  The EAC is now much larger than its FACC counterpart, including 1325 attribute codes and 6885 enumerated values.  Also, the EAC are currently being revised to use positive integers as code values and the EAC are also organized as triplets of corresponding codes, labels, and definitions (as well as other information).  Finally, evolutionary change is key to EAC growth and the same maintenance mechanisms supporting ECC evolution also support the EAC.There are also unique aspects of the EAC.    While the ECC are intended to associate a type identity to each environmental data object, the EAC are designed to describe the properties, characteristics, material composition, quantifiable measures, or, most generally, the describable state of the data objects.  Further, each environmental data object will only have one assigned ECC, but may have multiple associated EAC ( as many as required to fully describe the object’s complete state.  As used with the SEDRIS DRM, any specific EAC is expected to appear only one time per individual data object.  (This is not an EDCS requirement as defined by the ISO/IEC Third Working Draft.)  Finally, while the EAC also have codes, labels, and definitions, they must also have an assigned value to complete their semantic.EAC values can be represented using one of only a few information types.  In Computer Science terms, these types are strings (including free text), true or false Boolean types, integer index types, enumerated types, or real-valued numeric types.  Each of these has the expected characteristics.  There is also a limited-use “contextually-determined” type.   These are only assigned to “control-value” attributes (as allowed in the SEDRIS DRM) that specify, as examples, the intensity, hue, or saturation values for color rendering purposes.  The associated values may vary in type and must be determined from context.The enumerated types account for a large percentage of the EAC.  The EAC enumerants are also comprised of a label, a code, and a definition. Each enumeration applies to a specific attribute, although the same enumerant label may be assigned as possible values for many different attributes.  As an example, the enumerant label “CONCRETE” appears as an enumerated values for 6 different attributes including “PRODUCT CATEGORY” “RADAR SIGNIFICANCE FACTOR”, “MATERIAL COMPOSITION CATEGORY”, “MATERIAL COMPOSITION SECONDARY”, “SURFACE MATERIAL CATEGORY”, and “SUFACE TRAFFICABILITY GROUP CCTT”.  Clearly, the same code need not be used in every case, and each use of the “CONCRETE” label may require separate definition, as appropriate for the associated attribute.  Thus, the code semantic can only be evaluated in the context of a specific attribute, with the exception of codes with value less than 11, including those in Table 1. Codes 1 through 10 have been defined as applicable to every attribute having enumerated values, without change in enumerant definition. Codes 1 through 5 have definitions as shown. Codes 6 through 10 are simply reserved for future use.The numeric type attributes have a key difference from the others.  Each must have an associated unit and unit formula.  In this regard, the EDCS design is a major departure from that of the DIGEST FACC.  Each FACC attribute includes an assigned unit of measure.  As an example, the FACC attribute for “length” requires that the assigned value be provided in integer meters.  To provide more accurate length quantities, another attribute, “length of greater precision”, must be used (associated unit is decimeters).  If millimeter length measures are important, there is no FACC attribute capable of representing a value to this precision.  This experience with the FACC was valuable during the design of the EDCS.  Here, units of measure are treated on the same level as classifications and attribute codes.4.  EDCS UnitsAs above, the FACC approach of including the unit specification in the attribute definition has required the creation of multiple attributes that really represent the same quantity.  Avoiding this pitfall, the EDCS has separated the specification of quantity from the unit of measure.  Further, the EDCS approach is based on the ISO-approved International System of Units (SI) which is already an international standard.  It provides for the specification of quantification in terms of base units, dimensional formula, derived units, and associated units.  The EDCS expands on this design by defining a set of units (currently 113) constructed according to SI specifications and assigning an EDCS Unit Code (EUC) to each of them.  An EUC is a unique integer index value that designates the unit.  Only positive integer indices (values greater than zero) are defined.  There are seven SI base units, as shown in Table 2.  These quantities are assumed to be the mutually independent, basic building blocks used to construct other quantification measures.The dimensional symbols are used in equations that express new quantities in terms of the base quantities.  In the EUC, dimension equations are products of powers of the base quantities multiplied by a specific numerical coefficient.   When the zero exponent is applied to some base unit, the expression evaluates as 1.  A SI quantity may be “unitless” when it has a dimensional formula where all base units have exponent 0.  These quantities are also known as dimensionless.  As an example, the EDCS attribute “SEDIMENT TO WATER SOUND SPEED RATIO”, defined as “the ratio of the sediment sound speed to the water column sound speed at the sea floor”, has numeric type and the “unitless” unit formula.  The dimensional formula are important as they define comparability; direct comparison may be made between units that have the same dimensional formula and units may be converted into other comparable units.  Note that unitless types can be expressed in equations of the appropriate dimensional symbols with exponent 0 to facilitate comparison eligibility decisions.The SI also recognizes “associated units” as accepted for use.  These are units that are important and widely used, but are not included as part of the SI itself.  The associated units have their own unique labels, symbols, dimensional formula, and each describes values that can be directly expressed in SI units.  Examples of associated units include the liter, metric ton, electron volt, and the angular degree.  Use of associated units is accepted, despite their non-compliance with the SI standard.The derived units constitute the majority of EUC entries.  Their dimensional formulas are combinations of the seven base units.  The EUC includes base, associated, and derived units.  Examples are provided in Table 3.  Note that astronomical units (ua) are associated units while A/m and N are derived units.5.  Organizational SchemaAs stated earlier, one impact of moving away from the FACC-like character strings that define codes is that the FACC organizational scheme, tightly embedded in the code strings, is also discarded.  While there are some aspects of that scheme that are not appropriate for its application to all EDCS domains, it did provide a mechanism to locate associated codes.  That is, the organizational scheme was useful in reducing search when attempting to locate codes that might be applicable for some specific representational problem.  Without some organizational mechanism, a potential EDCS user is faced with the task of examining every code to locate the single most applicable one.  Such a level of effort dramatically decreases utility and increases the likelihood that less than optimal codes might be used to classify data objects, potentially distorting associated semantics.An organizational scheme useful in this context will permit efficient location of the subset of codes applicable to a specific problem.  As an example, suppose that a data producer wishes to use the EDCS to classify agricultural-area data.  If the “identity mapping” relationship to the FACC had been maintained, the most appropriate classification codes would probably be found among those with  “EA”  (signifying the “vegetation – cropland” category) as their first two characters.  However, if a “rice field” was included in the data, the correct classification code would be found in the “BH – hydrography – inland water” category, rather far from the agriculture-related classifications. Further, there is no such organizational relationship available for finding the most appropriate FACC attribute codes, and these greatly outnumber the classification codes.  Thus, linear search through the attribute codes remains the only viable method to locate applicable attribute codes.This kind of experience with the FACC organizational schema offers at least two lessons.  First, the organization should be applicable throughout the EDCS, not just within the classifications.  Second, the organization must be very flexible and support multiple viewpoints.  Clearly, a rice field is used for crop production, but it is also interesting data when the requirement is planning surface vehicle movement, which requires some information on all bodies of open water.The EDCS approach is to define an organizational schema as a set of groups, where each group must have a name, a definition, and a non-empty set of EDCS classifications and/or attributes as members.  Multiple organizational schemata may exist simultaneously, and each should be comprised of member groups that are appropriate for a specific functional context (i.e. a domain-specific point of view).  Each organizational schema must include each code in at least one group, although any code may be a member of several groups within that organizational schema.  A single organizational schema has been defined as default.  New organizational schema may be defined and registered as part of the EDCS (using a standard registration mechanism).The default organization currently includes 46 groups.  Codes have been assigned as members within groups based on natural or general scientific principles.  Many individual codes are members of multiple groups.  As an example, the rice field is a member of 3 groups; agricultural, surface materials, and hydrography.  This arrangement, assigning the rice field to several groups within the same schema, would support both the “agricultural area” and the “bodies of open water” problems mentioned above.  The organizational schema also includes the EDCS attributes, which are independently assigned to groups That is, the assignment of an EDCS attribute to an organizational group is not required to align with the group assignments of EDCS classifications with which the attribute have regular associations.The organizational scheme also provides a synopsis of EDCS scope and range of coverage, much like a table of contents provides a compressed view of information that follows.  The EDCS itself is much too voluminous to present in its entirety in a paper of this scope.  However, Table 4 (at the end of the paper) lists the General (default) Organizational Scheme groups and their definitions and provides example group members.  Thus, Table 4, which appears at the end of this paper, provides a general overview of EDCS content.A primary goal during the organizational scheme design was to facilitate the retrieval of codes that are appropriate for a specific application.  That is, reference to a group would yield all codes associated with that group as a set, thus reducing the linear search necessary to utilize the EDCS.  Accordingly, another plausible view of the group names is that of keywords.   The organization is only a partial solution to the general problem however.6.  Standardization EffortsIn parallel with its development, the EDCS has been progressing through the process to become an international standard according to the established guidelines of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC).  This is a lengthy process that will not be completed until 2002 or later.  Also as a parallel undertaking, the Simulation Interoperability and Standards Organization (SISO) has approved the formation of a Product Development Group (PDG) that will make recommendations concerning SISO modeling and simulation community adoption of the EDCS as a SISO Product.  SISO PDG efforts are directed toward assuring that the EDCS meets the needs of the simulation community during its evolution to become an ISO/IEC standard.  SISO is participating in the international standards development process through membership in the sub-committee on computer graphics and image processing of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) National Committee on Information Technology Standards (NCITS) that is providing U.S. national input to the ISO/IEC during EDCS standard development.  When the EDCS becomes an ISO/IEC standard, related SISO products will reference that standard.The reality of simultaneous efforts in these three areas (ISO standardization, related SISO product processing, and EDCS evolutionary development) presents a unique opportunity.  Every SISO member has the opportunity to influence the EDCS as it develops based on the very open nature of the SISO/SAC product development process.  Through direct participation or other interaction with the EDCS PDG, SISO members can recommend additions, deletions or modifications to the EDCS that will ensure the standard serves the needs of their community.  Such interaction will not only help shape SISO EDCS implementation products, but also has the potential to influence an emerging international standard as well.  Thus, each SISO member has the opportunity to help define an international standard to ensure it serves the needs of their specific community interests.  The only requirements to participate in the EDCS PDG deliberations and review process are membership in SISO, willingness to volunteer, and ability to justify recommended actions.7.  Current Uses of the EDCSThe EDCS is still developing, but it has already reached a useful level of maturity.  It is being used in a variety of settings that include database creation and runtime description of data.  The use trend is on the rise and will only increase as the EDCS encompasses a continuously enlarging domain.  As examples, STRICOM has established a policy that all of their environmental data will be delivered in SEDRIS format.  This, of course, includes use of the EDCS as the mechanism for characterizing environmental phenomena.  The DMSO Environment Federation Project has used the EDCS as the basis for developing a Federation Object Model (FOM) in an HLA federation.  This federation will use the EDCS to identify data at runtime.  The Terrain Common Data Model (TCDM, now expanding after initial design for the Army’s WARSIM program) is based on the EDCS in an effort to achieve greater potential for data reuse and consistent data requirements definition.  The developing Ocean – Atmosphere Common Data Model (OACDM) is also based on the EDCS.  Space issues will soon be addressed as part of the EDCS-based Environment Common Data Model (ECDM).Other projects also rely on the EDCS. A DoD tri-M&S Executive Agent (Terrain, Ocean, Air & Space) developed Integrated Natural Environment (INE) Strategy is being implemented through an INE Authoritative Representation Process (INEARP) using SEDRIS/EDCS. The INEARP will support environmental scenario generation–requirements for a broad spectrum of applications. Additionally, a continuing effort to develop a World-Wide Terrain Database and production capabilities will produce SEDRIS/EDCS data archives.  Contents of the Navy Oceanic and Atmospheric Master Library (OAML) and products developed using World Meteorological Organization (WMO) formats are all addressed in the EDCS. Space data resources of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) National Geophysical Data Center are also codes in the EDCS.  The United Kingdom’s Defence Evaluation Research Agency (DERA) fundamentally relies on the EDCS in several of its Ministry of Defence projects, and the UK-Combined Arms Tactical Trainer (CATT) development is using SEDRIS/EDCS.  These few examples suffice to show that the EDCS is already suitable for use in a variety of programs and roles.8.  Improving the EDCSDespite a useful level of maturity, there are areas where the EDCS will benefit from community input.  The EDCS goal is to define a complete and consistent dictionary of the environment that meets the broadest simulation community requirements, including pre-simulation and runtime phases of federation interactions.  Attainment of this goal requires wide community support during development.  No single individual or small group has complete knowledge of community-wide requirements.  Thus, the first, and perhaps most important, potential improvement to the EDCS is its expansion in a consistent fashion.8.1. Extending ContentThe EDCS began with the FACC codes and expanded from that base.  However, the FACC was not focused on the same domain of applicability as the EDCS and generally rested on a much more narrowly defined level of descriptive requirements.  The EDCS should be as applicable to high-resolution simulation databases as it is to those supporting theater-level applications.  The FACC was never intended to apply to this range of application.  Thus, there are many database objects that currently have no appropriate EDCS codes.  Examples include many “things” that might be found in Military Operations in Urban Terrain (MOUT), Special Operations Forces (SOF), and Virtual Emergency Response Training System (VERTS) simulation databases. Fire hydrants, post office boxes, telephone booths, bike paths, curbs, and many similar high-resolution objects have no appropriate EDCS entry. The issue of mappings is closely related to consistent evolution towards complete coverage.  Complete and consistent mappings to other formal systems of classification are central EDCS concepts.  Current mappings include FACC; standard NIMA products codes (FID, DTED, DMAFF); selected oceanographic, atmospheric, and space products; specific simulation systems and database formats (Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT), Theater Analysis and Re-planning Graphical Execution Toolkit (TARGET), and S1000-based systems); selected Image Generation Systems; and Computer-Generated Force databases.  Other useful mappings require development.  The EDCS could be used in conjunction with the Real-time Performance Reference (RPR) Federation Object Model (FOM) work as an example.  Again, community-wide participation is the key to such development.8.2.  Improving AccessAs noted above, the use of the currently available organizational scheme is not sufficient to completely resolve all ease of access issues.  There are at least two major improvements that could be made to the organizational scheme itself.  First, the EDCS should provide multiple organizations where each would be appropriate for a specific point of view on EDCS use.  Secondly, a much higher level of automated support is desirable.Above discussions note that the default organizational scheme is based on general relationships or scientific principle.  However, this viewpoint does not always coincide with each perspective that an EDCS user would see as natural.  As an example, there are many functionally dependent views of a bridge.  It can be noise generator for radar systems, a strike target for military planners, a mobility asset for ground movers, an obstacle for water or air vehicles, and may have other roles as well.  One organizational scheme will not likely include all these viewpoints.EDCS ease of use could be improved given automated support to facilitate locating the most appropriate EDCS code.  In fact, some new system development work is required in this area.  While such system development work is beyond the scope of the current EDCS development (which is primarily focused on the EDCS architecture and content), groups of users, such as those represented by the SISO PDG, can value-add to the EDCS by providing these kinds of utilities.  As an example, the EDCS could be accompanied by supporting software or integrated into software systems that would facilitate assembling sets of codes applicable to any specific purpose.  This is a challenging undertaking that requires solutions to several key problems if a complete, error-free mechanism for access is to be provided.  The difficulty is that the system would be required to interpret user desires based on the limited bandwidth communication available between man and machine.  Machine translation capabilities are required so that the system can provide a “Do What I Mean” utility, mapping user free-text input to keyword and group names known to the system. The best access system would also be able to suggest attributes and units that should be considered, given individual classification codes, in context.   The Third Working Draft of the EDCS provides hyperlinks between related ECC and, to a lesser extent, between related EAC as well.  However, there is no linkage between individual ECC and sets of EAC that are frequently associated with them.A complete solution along these lines is probably not achievable given available technology.  However, any level of automated support would be useful and would improve the current situation, which relies primarily on human search.  Even a simple database or word processing search utility would be useful.  Thus, there is a range of options to explore, all of would improve the utility of the EDCS.8.3.  Included DefinitionsAnother area of potential improvement concerns the included definitions.  At least three types of required improvement are readily apparent.  Some definitions have poor precision.  Others suffer from an unspecified but clearly influencing context.  Finally, some definitions for attribute enumerates are currently missing.Some definitions, primarily including those inherited directly from the FACC system (during early development when close correspondence between the two was important) are ambiguous or imprecise.  Also, each definition should stand alone, not requiring reference to the label for interpretation.  Such is not always the case.  As an example, consider the definition, “A relatively tall structure of undefined purpose.”  This could be equally appropriate for many ECC entries because it is far too general to be of real value.  (As it happens, this definition accompanies the EDCS classification TOWER GENERAL, and is taken directly from the FACC.)  Similar kinds of difficulties arise from the context that seems to underlie the definitions themselves.Consider the definition of “Power Transmission Line”, “A system of above ground wires including their supports, which transmits electricity over distance. (See also CABLE and OVEHEAD_CABLE.)”  Again, this definition is taken directly from the FACC, where the domain of applicability is, essentially, the information that might appear on a standard map.  Simulation databases have a much wider need to represent power transmission lines than simply those that are provided by the local electric company (consider the on-ground, unsupported power line from a small generator).  Should an EDCS user rely on the classification Power Transmission Line for use in this case?  That is the probable result.  However, the cartographic context (from FACC) is too involved in the definition in this case.  The result here is semantic loss; it will not be possible to differentiate between substantially different kinds of “power transmission lines” when one general definition seems equally applicable to all types.There are also many EAC enumerated values that do not include definitions.  Some are perhaps trivial (red, liquid) while others are fully descriptive in the context of the EAC itself (aerosol type: mist, fence type indicator: metal), but these have no EDCS definition.  Others more clearly require definition to avoid ambiguity.  As an example, the attribute “Mast Type Category” includes an enumerant “light support.”  Does this indicate that the mast can support lightweight objects or that it is intended to support lighting equipment. 8.4.  Standard UsageDespite the potential improvements discussed above, the EDCS offers a rich set of choices to encode specific objects.  As an example, it is possible to identify a library using the Library ECC or by using the Building ECC with the EAC Building Function Category and enumerated value Library.  The equivalence of these two alternative representations is uncertain.  Also, there is no guidance on which representation is preferred if they are intended to be equivalent.A somewhat related usage issue concerns the EAC that should be associated with any specific ECC (and similarly with EAC to EUC associations).  Are there times when a ECC identification is ambiguous unless specific EAC are also present?  As an example, must every Building also have an associated Building Function Category, even if it has only the universally applicable enumerant value of 5, indicating that this information is undesignated (see Table 1)?Again, resolution of the “standard usage” type of issue belongs most properly within the group(s) of EDCS users.  The EDCS developers (either members if the ISO SC24 Working Group 8 or representatives of the SEDRIS project) are concerned with providing a flexible system that can satisfy requirements in many domains.   That is, they are focused on providing a “complete” system.  The issue we discuss here is more properly related to “consistency”, in that it would be easier for the data consumer if there were a 1:1 mapping between the codes as used and the data as categorized.  By analogy, there are other domains that provide numerous examples of important functions based on many to one mappings that would have greatly reduced value if required to be simple 1:1 relationships.  Consider the many to one arcsine function that maps infinitely many real numbers into another finite range of real numbers.  It is incumbent on the user to interpret the arcsine(x) value appropriately.  Similarly, equivalent, multiple EDCS categorizations must be appropriately interpreted by the user.  Forcing the EDCS to be a 1:1 mapping in this regard introduces added risk to achieving completeness.  However, user groups can focus the EDCS usage to ease interpretation within their specific domain of application.  This can be achieved with EDCS interpretation much the same as we routinely interpret trigonometric functions.8.5.  Maintenance and UpdatesClearly, the EDCS problem space is quite large and the specification is intended to expand and improve as an evolutionary process.  The SEDRIS Change Request (SCR) is the current mechanism to propose new or revised EDCS content.  The revision process seems to work reasonably well from the viewpoint of quality control, consistency maintenance and record keeping, all imperative considerations.  However, the process includes a tight bottleneck that precludes timely response in most cases.It would be useful to include an intermediate status for proposed EDCS revisions.  Currently, a revision is either available for use as fully included in the EDCS or it is completely unavailable for use pending further review and approval actions.  If an intermediate status were available, indicating that a short-duration preliminary review had been completed, codes could be assigned and used (at risk of revision disapproval) in a much more timely fashion.  This change would have great utility when the EDCS is used in FOM applications.8.6.  Implementing Improvements: The MechanismAll of the improvements discussed are within the areas to be reviewed by the SISO EDCS Product Development Group.  The PDG has an open communication channel (through the SISO Standards Activity Committee) to both the SEDRIS Organization and the appropriate ISO/IEC working group.  Any SISO member is able to join the PDG simply by subscribing to the EDCS reflector (send the message “subscribe SAC-PDG-EDCS” to  HYPERLINK mailto:listproc@itcenter.org) listproc@itcenter.org).  All PDG members are eligible to review the EDCS documents, and suggest changes.  More importantly, each member can choose to become actively involved by forming, joining, or leading PDG Drafting Groups.Currently, there is a single Drafting Group (DG) within the EDCS PDG.  The DG is in the process of reviewing the EDCS, as described in ISO/IEC documents, to determine its potential as a SISO Product, provide input to the international standards development process, and assess configuration management (change registration and review) processes.  Many of the areas introduced above are large in scope and thus beyond the capability of the current DG limited membership.  However, new drafting groups, specifically intended to address any topic in this paper or other related area of interest, can be formed given sufficient community support.9.  SummaryThe EDCS is an evolving standard dedicated to implementing a set of codes for complete and consistent identification and description of all objects included in environmental databases.  This is a highly ambitious project that, almost by definition, can never be finally complete.   Instead, the EDCS will be involved in a process of constant evolution so that, as environmental databases continue content growth, the EDCS will be modified to keep pace.  An ISO/IEC connected registration and review process is being proposed for managing EDCS content changes.The EDCS does not need to be fully complete to have substantial (pragmatic) utility.  It is being used today in a variety of applications that support both pre-simulation and runtime data interchange and such usage is growing.  However, to assure wide applicability, EDCS evolutionary growth should be managed by the entire simulation community, including those outside the Simulated Natural Environment Forum.  The SISO PDG is a mechanism that allows total community involvement and is in place.  The SISO approved EDCS Product Development Group has been formed to review and propose improvements to the EDCS, ensuring that it meets the diverse requirements of the broad simulation community.  This is an important task as the EDCS is very likely to become both a SISO standard product and an international standard.  10.  The EDCS Organization SchemeTable 4 provides the 46 groups now included in the EDCS organizational scheme, including definitions and one or more examples from the ECC and EAC (note that some groups contain only ECC or EAC, but not both, so that some group’s example lists are blank).  This information provides a condensed overview of the scope of EDCS content.  The entire EDCS, as considered by the ISO/IEC Joint Technical Committee (JTC) 1 Sub-Committee (SC) 24 (Computer Graphics and Image Processing), Working Group 8 (Environmental Representation), is available to all EDCS PDG members as an HTML format document.  A similar version is available from the SEDRIS organization and can be found at  HYPERLINK http://www.sedris.org http://www.sedris.org.References1.	Birkel, Paul A., “SEDRIS Data Coding Standard”, Proceedings of the Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 1999, 99S-SIW-011.2.	Birkel, Paul A., et al.,  “The Terrain Common Data Model (TCDM): A Joint Effort of JSIMS, STOW, and JWARS”, Proceedings of the 8th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation, May 1999.Miller, Dale, et al., “JSIMS Terrain Common Data Model, Revision 1.2a”, 27 July 1999, LMIS Advanced Simulation Center, Bellevue, WA.Military Survey, UK, “Digital Geographic Information Exchange Standard (DIGEST) Ed. 2.0a, published for the Digital Geographic Information Working Group, February 1998.  See http://www.digest.org.PAGE \# "'Page: '#''"  Page: 1 I know that Farid likes to draw this philosophical distinction, but I think this term should be dropped.PAGE \# "'Page: '#''"  Page: 3This isn’t true, right? There just exists a mapping from each FACC to some ECC.  But two FACC codes could map to the same ECC.PAGE \# "'Page: '#''"  Page: 5 It’s not just any-old-coefficient, but very specific ones.  Please clarify with wording, or a table.PAGE \# "'Page: '#''"  Page: 7 “mechanism for characterizing environmental phenomena”?PAGE \# "'Page: '#''"  Page: 7 I am not sure how to interpret this statement.  Recommend rewording.PAGE \# "'Page: '#''"  Page: 8 The EDCS doesn’t represent stuff; it names stuff.  Please reword.Table 1.  Codes Applicable to Each EnumerantEnumerantValueDefinition1Not applicable; this attribute is not associated with the given object2Missing; the function cannot determine the value3Value withheld; the function can determine the value, but due to policy considerations chooses not to return it.4Multiple: more than one value could be returned.5Undesignated: the function cannot return a value but not because it is missing, not applicable, multiple or withheld.Table 2.   International System of Units (SI) Base QuantitiesBase QuantityNameSymbolDimensionalSymbolLengthMeter (metre)mLMassKilogramkgMTimeSecondSTElectric currentAmpereAIThermodynamic temperatureKelvinKAmount of substanceMolemolNLuminous intensitycandelacdjTable 3.  Example EUC as found in the EDCSUnit LabelSymbolFormulaDefinitionAMPERE_PER_METREA/mIL-1magnetic field strengthASTRONOMICAL_UNITuaL1 ua = 1.495 98 x 10-11 mNEWTONNLMT-2force; 1 N = 1 kg * m / s 2Table 4.  The EDCS Organizational SchemeCategoryDefinitionECC ExamplesEAC ExamplesAbstract ConceptOf or relating to concepts, ideas, properties or other notional descriptionsNullType Of FontAbstractionA simplified description of  a system containing only significant informationProperties TableIndexAcoustic PhenomenaOf or related to the production, propagation, or effects of soundAcoustic Level – BandAgriculturalOf or related to the art, science, and industry of plant and animal productionVineyard, Farming Type CategoryAirborne Particulates & AerosolsFine or very fine particles of solid or liquid materials that are suspended in airFog, SmogAerosol Base AltitudeAir TransportationOf or related to the use of air vehicles for movement of people, goods, or other materials AirspaceFlight Level, Ancillary ArtifactSmall-scale or principally subordinate man-man objectsFence, PostWall Type,AnimateOf or related to animal life as defined by members of the taxonomic Kingdom AnimaliaFish School, Whale PodWhale CatchAtmosphereOf or related to taking place in the Earth’s atmosphere, the envelope of gases surrounding the Earth and held to it by gravity and extending through the thermosphere (approximately 300 miles above the Earth’s surface).Rain, Snow, Cold FrontAir Density, Pressure AltitudeBathymetryOf or related the science of measuring depth of the ocean and other large bodies of water, including information gathered from such measurementsDepth Curve, SoundingDepth Of WaterCadastralOf or related to surveys or maps that determine location of specific areas on the Earth surfaceGeodetic Point, BenchmarkLabel, EditionColorationOf or related to color or color measurement or specificationColor Of Text,DemarcationOf or related to the marking, delineation, or ascertainment of boundariesArmistice Line, CoastlineBoundary TypeDimensionalOf or related to size, capacity, or dimensional measuresWidth, TonnageElectromagnetic PhenomenaOf or related to interaction of electric or magnetic fields Magnetic PoleElectron DensityHydrographic ArtifactOf or related to man made objects that are normally found and or used on or near areas of waterOil Barrier, Tide GaugePond Partition CategoryHydrographic IndustryOf or related to commercial production and sale of goods and services that is found on or near areas of waterDiffuser,Fishing Facility ClassificationHydrographic TransportationOf or related to the use of water vehicles for movement of people, goods, or other materialsFerry Crossing, LighthouseBuoy Type, Track NumberHydrologyOf or related to the areas or bodies of water found on or below the Earth’s surfaceForeshore, RiverBank Gradient,IceOf or related to formations of frozen waterPack IceIce FactorInfrastructureOf or related to basic supporting utilities, equipment, and or facilities Nuclear Reactor, CableElectric TensionTable 4.  The EDCS Organizational Scheme (Continued)Land IndustryOf or related to commercial production and sale of goods and services that are found on or near areas of land surfaceWellhead, mineProduct CategoryLand TransportationOf or related to the use of terrestrial vehicles for movement of people, goods, or other materialsRoad, BridgeBridge Type, Road TypeLittoral ZoneOf or related to a shoreline where a normal cycle of exposure and submersion by occursSand Line, BeachBeach TypeMilitaryOf or related to the organizations, operations, constructions, installations, equipment, or material of national armed forcesTrench, CheckpointManeuver Damage, Mine TypeOcean & Littoral Surface PhenomenaObservable or measurable facts, properties, or conditions that occur at or near the surface of bodies of waterEddies, BreakersBreaker Height,  Current TypeOcean FloorOf or related to the bottom surface of an ocean basinReef, Bottom Feature, WreckHulk Type, Sediment ThicknessOceanographic ConditionsObservable or measurable facts, properties, or conditions that occur in association with bodies of waterSound Speed, TemperatureSea Salinity, Mixing Layer DepthPhysiographyOf or related to physical geography, the natural features and inanimate phenomena of the Earth’s surfaceRidgeline, IslandBog Category, Elevation Of SurfacePlantOf or related to any member of the taxonomic Kingdom Plantae; living organisms capable of producing their own foods but not capable of movementTrees, Forest, GrasslandTree Spacing, Stem DiameterPorts - HarborsOf or related to natural or man-made shelters for ships (harbors) and the commercial areas within them (ports)Port Facility, Berth, Harbor Facility ClassificationPositionalOf or related to measurement or specification of location or relative positionHeight RangeRateMeasurement expressed as a ratioWater Velocity, Feature DensityRecreationalOf or related to human activity apart from work and designed to amuse or refreshPark, Golf CoursePopulated Place CategoryShelter - StorageOf or related to facilities and or locations with the principle purpose of housing people, animals, or goods  and materialsCamp, Cabin, DepotSpaceOf or related to the area outside of the Earth’s atmosphereSpace, The Sun, IonosphereSolar WindSurface MaterialOf or related to the substances or composition of the Earth surfaceExposed Bedrock, Sand DuneSoil Type, Soil MoistureTemperatureOf or related to temperature measuresSpecific HeatTemporalOf or related to measures or specifications of time or periodDay Of Year, PermanencyUse AreaOf or related to a regional demarcation or specification wherein all revolves around a single purpose,  function, or characterizationGraveyard, Built-Up AreaUsageVehicleSelf propelled machines capable of transporting passengers or goods Tank, AutomobileVehicle Type, Landing Gear Position