Modeling the Cost of Alternative Spacecraft Launch TechnologiesMartin R. Stytz, Ph.D.Sheila B. Banks, Ph.D.Air Force Research LaboratoryCalculated InsightWright-Patterson AFB, OHOrlando, Fl  32828(937) 255-2811 x4380(407) 353-0566mstytz@worldnet.att.net, mstytz@acm.orgsbanks@calculated-insight.comKeywords:spacecraft launch simulation, payload cost modeling, orbital express, launch cost modeling, dual launch strategyAbstract:  The high cost of placing manned and unmanned systems into space has generally curtailed space exploration and hampered the development of space technologies.  The need to exploit space coupled with the high cost of launch has recently resulted in initiatives to develop launch technologies and techniques that lower the cost of placing high value items in orbit without compromising the ability to accomplish a mission or set of missions in space.  The evaluation of the cost and probability of success for any of the alternative launch approaches and technologies is hindered by a lack of models.  Additionally, the funds needed to explore the alternative approaches using real-world launches to amass a data set for analysis are not available.  As a result, a methodology is needed that can be used to develop models that provide reasonably accurate assessments and can identify launch approaches with high reliability.  One promising alternative to the current process of placing high-value payloads into orbit is the dual launch technique, in which the payload is split into a high-value/high-cost payload and a consumables/low-cost payload.  In the dual launch technique, there are two launches: a minimum-weight launch of the human/high-value payload that has a very high probability of success coupled with a higher launch cost and a second launch of consumables with a higher probability of failure but with a substantially lower launch cost.  Dual launch can theoretically reduce the overall cost of placing people and high-value payloads into orbit by minimizing the launch weight, and hence cost, for the high-value/human launch because the fuel and other low-value/large mass consumables are in a separate launch vehicle that is substantially cheaper to launch.  Intuitively, this approach should also yield a lower total cost for a given level of space launch activity.  However, there is no model available for evaluating the dual-launch approach or any other strategy for placing payloads into orbit.  Therefore, we undertook three tasks:  1) designing a methodology that can be used to develop a model of any proposed space launch strategy, 2) use the methodology to develop a model of the dual launch strategy using our methodology, and 3) using the model to assess the viability of the dual launch approach.  This paper presents the methodology that we developed.1.  IntroductionFor a variety of reasons such as communications, information superiority, photographs, land use, air quality monitoring, weather forecasting, mineral and natural resources exploration, reconnaissance, and transportation, the United States is moving ever more vigorously into space and is increasingly exploiting its dominance as the world’s leading spacefaring nation.  In light of the strategic, operational, tactical, and commercial advantages that come from space dominance, other nations will pose a continuing and growing challenge to the United States’ dominant position in space.  To maintain its position as a spacefaring nation, the United States must continue to expand its presence in space and develop new technologies to enable ever more affordable and more routine access to space.  The most serious impediment to increased exploitation of the potential of space is the high cost of placing a payload into orbit and, therefore, technologies for lowering the cost of placing objects into orbit is an important near-term objective.  Today’s high costs for launching both manned and unmanned systems into space has led to an increasing demand for the development of launch technologies/techniques that can lower the cost of placing high value payloads into obit without compromising the ability to accomplish a mission or set of missions in space.  The evaluation of these alternative launch approaches/technologies is hampered by a lack of models that provide an indication of both the potential savings and probability of success per launch for the techniques.Because we require dramatic cost reductions, new approaches to placing payloads into orbit are needed.  In general, the desired techniques should be enable fast, flexible launch at lower cost with the same or better reliability as is currently available.  Given the variety of missions and payloads, it is highly unlikely that we will find a “silver bullet” solution to the problem of reducing launch costs.  Instead, we believe it is much more likely that we will develop/discover a family of techniques.  For each payload, then, each technique’s strengths and weaknesses would be compared to the characteristics of the payload and launch requirements and the technique with the closest match would be employed.1.1	Motivation for ProjectAn evaluation of the cost and probability of success for any of the alternative launch approaches and technologies is stymied by a lack of models.  Unfortunately, the funds needed to explore the alternative approaches by using real-world launches to amass a data set for analysis are also lacking.  As a result, a methodology is needed that can produce space launch models that provide reasonably accurate cost assessments and can identify launch approaches with a high probability of failure and those with an acceptable failure rate and minimal cost.An example of a potentially viable alternative launch approach is to split the payload into a high-value payload and a consumables payload; which we call a dual-launch approach.  This approach would reduce the overall cost of placing people and high-value payloads into orbit by minimizing the launch weight for the high-value/human payload by placing the fuel and other consumables into a separate launch vehicle that is substantially cheaper to launch.  As the name implies, there would be two (or possibly more) launches per payload.  One launch would be a minimum weight launch consisting of the human/high-value cargo that has a very high probability of success along with a higher launch cost.  There would also be a second launch of consumables with a higher probability of failure but with also a substantially lower cost.  Intuitively, this approach should yield lower total cost for placing a given payload into orbit, lower total cost for a given level of space launch activity, and possibly lower total cost for maintaining a payload in orbit. Dual launch can theoretically reduce the overall cost of placing people and high-value payloads into orbit by minimizing the launch weight, and hence cost, for the high-value/human launch because the fuel and other low-value/large mass consumables are in a separate launch vehicle that is substantially cheaper to launch.  Intuitively, this approach should result in a lower total cost for a given level of space launch activity.  However, there is no model available for evaluating the dual-launch approach to placing payloads into orbit.In fact, in the current state of affairs there are a number of proposed launch strategies but there is no method or model available for evaluating these alternatives.  Therefore, we undertook three tasks:  1) designing a methodology that can be used to develop a model of any proposed space launch strategy, 2) developing a model of the dual launch strategy using our methodology, and 3) using the model to assess the viability of the dual launch approach.  In this paper we report on the methodology for constructing space launch models that we developed.In the next section we describe our modeling objectives and strategy for developing the methodology.  In Section Three we describe the methodology we developed and discuss its use in formulating our model for the dual-launch approach.  The paper closes in Section Four with a short presentation of our conclusions concerning the methodology we developed and some recommendations for further research.2.	Satellite Launch Modeling Objectives and Design StrategyThe objective for our project was to develop a model to indicate how the probability of failure for a launch varies with the cost of the launch vehicle and if there is a cost point or cost range that makes dual launch a viable alternative to current launch practices.  We also had to be able to determine whether meaningful cost savings can be achieved if most (if not all) of the redundancies, inspections, and other operations activities performed to increase the probability of success for a launch are foregone for the low-cost launch.  Meaningful savings are achieved if the cost of launch for the consumables (booster plus payload) is low enough so that, when coupled with the probability of failure for the launch, the cost per mission is lower than if the high value payload and the consumables payload were inserted into orbit using a single launcher.The foundational hypothesis for our investigation is that a dual-launch strategy can significantly reduce launch and total cost of placing payloads into orbit.  We assume that there will be some on-pad failures and some in-flight failures, but that these failures will not seriously impact launch vehicle processing for other launches.  We also assume that the lower cost launch may have a lower reliability associated with it and that this lower reliability is acceptable.Our objective for the analysis was to develop a model based on historical data for the cost of inserting different types of spacecraft into low Earth orbits, data on the cost for space-flight certified parts, and data on the probability of failure for different major systems in launch vehicles.  There are a number of other factors that should be considered in the analysis.  We believe that the cost of the dual-launch approach should be assessed over several launches, maybe even a complete year, so that the true cost of the current method for placing payloads into orbit can be compared with the cost of the dual launch approach.  Therefore, we tried to determine the cost/year and the failures/year for the current approach for both NASA and DOD operations and estimate a cost/year and failures/year for the dual launch approach.As a starting point for our investigation, we attempted to determine if any similar analysis had been performed.  Prior analysis would serve several important purposes for our project.  Prior analysis would serve as a foundation for our analysis, it would provide us with a guidance as to which approaches to analysis should be used, it could serve to help validate some of the data points generated by our analysis, it would help us to identify the major cost components, and it would provide an indication concerning major cost drivers for space launch.  Unfortunately, an extensive literature search supplemented by personal contacts with fellow researchers failed to produce any relevant prior efforts [1-5].  This disappointing result served one purpose in that the lack of prior work underscores the need for a throrough analysis and methodology to determine the cost and associated reliability for the dual launch strategy.To date, we have not discovered any data directly related to the dual-launch approach and there have not been any tests or results that can be used to develop the reuired model.  Because of this lack of data, and prior experience, we were led to the conclusion that we should develop a methodology for developing space launch models as well as develop the dual launch model.  Our basic approach is to uncover data for some of the major launch vehicle components that relates to cost.  In addition, we require data that relates cost between the different components.  If we assume that the cost–reliability function is nearly equivalent for the major launch vehicle components, we can then determine cost for all major components and compute an estimate of the reliability for the total vehicle as well.  These relationships also permit us to vary cost and estimate the resultant vehicle reliability.  The key, then, is the development of a cost model.By using our methodology to produce a model, we can assemble a model that provides a usable estimate of a space launch strategy’s cost for a given set of data and time constraints.  The key to the methodology was devising a way to enable progress across all components of the model in spite of the weakness and scarcity of data concerning costs and reliability.3.	Launch Model Development MethodologyAs we began the development of the dual launch model, we encountered a serious obstacle that prevented us from proceeding as we had planned.  The problem was caused by the procedures that the United States government has historically used to contract for launch services.  The government procedures place the government in the position of having limited insight into the true costs of launch.  This limited insight is due, we believe, to the fact that the government has made the decision to let the contractor completely execute and manage the launch process with only government oversight.  Therefore, bids for launch services provide only the most general data concerning costs and the sources of these costs.  As a result of these historical decisions, the approach we had planned to use to develop the dual launch model proved to be infeasible.  Not only was the required data lacking from either the government and the contractors but it was also impossible to acquire the data.  Simply put, because the government had never asked for any data concerning sources of costs and contractors had never taken steps to acquire or organize the cost data.  As a result, we were forced to develop a launch modeling methodology that had less of a foundation in contractual data, but was achievable and had basis in fact.  However, as a result, we must acknowledge that any analysis that results from models developed using our methodology is not as rigorous as we desired and can realistically only provide insight into relative costs and into the rough order of magnitude of the costs.Since we could not immediately move to modeling the costs based upon data acquired for previous launches, we decided to follow a two step process to develop a useful model, these two steps form the core of the methodology that we propose.  The first step is the development of a conceptual model of the complete system.  The second step is the identification and definition of individual component models that are integrated to form the conceptual model.3.1	Conceptual Model DevelopmentBecause of the lack of data that can explicitly support the development of a model, the conceptual model was designed to exploit the data that was available or could be accurately estimated and then to extrapolate the limited data to provide an estimate of cost.  Therefore, our cost model is based upon the following components:  1) engine development costs, 2) personnel costs, 3) testing cost, and 4) failure cost.The next task we faced was the selection of a framework (or model) for the methodology itself.  Conventionally, there are four common frameworks for model development that are employed:  1) waterfall model, 2) evolutionary model development, 3) rapid prototyping, and 4) spiral model development [6].  Upon consideration, each of these approaches did not meet our particular needs for the development of a space launch model.  We will briefly review the salient aspects of each approach and discuss why it did not suit our purposes.  The waterfall model development approach is an approach wherein there are distinct phases in the development of the model.  The waterfall approach is appropriate when the requirements are well understood, the underlying program and environment to be modeled is stable, and there is expertise in the development of similar models.  In our opinion, the model development environment that we faced did not satisfy these criteria.  The requirements were and are not well known, in fact they are fuzzily defined if at all, the underlying program is not stable, and there is no expertise available that arose from the development of similar models.The evolutionary model development approach seeks breadth in the development of the model and does not provide for selective developmental focus on a few areas that are considered to be the most crucial to the model’s development and success.  In this approach, a complete model is available at every point in the model’s development.  This approach works especially well if the model development process has clearly defined components, a rather complete set of data upon which to base the model, and if different portions of the model can be developed independently but concurrently.  Based on our analysis, our model development environment satisfied only the last of these three requirements.The rapid prototyping model development approach is also not appropriate to our environment.  A rapid prototyping methodology is based upon another model development methodology and simplifies and streamlines that baseline process by omitting some steps of the process and simplifying others.  A rapid prototyping approach to model development is most appropriate when there is a normal model development process that is highly efficient, when the circumstances of a situation indicate that certain steps of the standard process can be curtailed or omitted.  Rapid prototyping is also appropriate when a complete solution is not required but instead an illustrative model is all that is desired as a prelude to a full-scale model development effort.  Our model development circumstances do not satisfy these criteria.  We did not have a model development process for space launch cost modeling, ours was the first attempt.  Since we did not have a standard process, we clearly could not determine which steps, if any, of a model development procedure could be safely omitted or curtailed.  And, finally, the desired product was a full-scale model and not a partial model.  While a rapid prototype might have served to help us scope the problem before initiating the project, it clearly could not serve as the model development paradigm that we used for the current and future modeling efforts.  However, this approach should be kept in mind if, and when, other models space launch cost models are needed and if an initial low-cost assessment is all that is desired.The spiral model development approach to building a model is a process wherein the model developer moves through successive stages of model development, as in the waterfall approach.  However, in spiral model development at each stage the model developer concentrates on only a few components of the model to the exclusion of all other components of the model.  Generally, the high risk components of the modeling process are deferred to as late as possible in the modeling process while the lowest risk and most stable components are addressed first.  Often, the resulting model is very robust in a few selected subsystems but lacks breadth (and possibility believability and accuracy) across the entire range of the process/environment that was modeled.  We eventually rejected this approach to model development because the lack of experience in modeling in our area coupled with the need for as much depth as possible in all areas indicated that a traditional spiral approach to model development was inappropriate.  Given that none of the conventional approaches to model development were suited to our environment, we decided to develop a hybrid model development methodology that was suited to our needs instead of attempting to force a single modeling process to accommodate our rather particular circumstances.3.2	Space Launch Modeling Characteristics and RequirementsAn examination of our model development circumstances revealed several distinctive characteristics.  First, there are no requirements for the end-product model other than it be computable and able to roughly predict the cost of a launch technique.  Second, there is no parallel or exploitable experience that can be drawn upon to develop the models.  As a result, there is no guidance to determine those aspects of a model that are the most crucial and those that are of minor importance.  Third, the raw data needed for building a given model is sparse and difficult to acquire.  A sizeable fraction of the crucial data is the private property of contractors or is simply unavailable.  Fourth, the data that is available usually stands in isolation.  Typically, there is no obvious relationship between the data that is available and the total cost of a type of launch or the other cost data that is unavailable.  Fifth, increased time spent on the development of a given launch model will result in the discovery of additional applicable data and the discovery of relationships; however, there is currently no capability for determining when a particular model has converged and hence, there is no capability to determine much time should be devoted to developing a model.  While it is intuitively appealing to conclude that increased time will result in an improved model, our point here is that we have no means for determining when the modeling process should be terminated because further effort would not yield corresponding improvements in the model.  Sixth, because of the weakness and thinness of the data, the model must be as accurate and robust as possible in all of its aspects.  Because of these six considerations, we developed a set of requirements for the methodology.In our view, the launch model development methodology had to satisfy two requirements.  First, the methodology must enable continued development and improvement of a particular model until the model development process concludes.  Therefore, the modeling process must permit each component of the model to be developed independently and yet be integrated into the complete model at any time.  Second, the process must insure that a model is developed early in the process and that a model with a degree of usefulness/usability is available throughout the modeling process.  This requirement insures that we are able to test the model early in the modeling process and thereby identify errors before they become intractably embedded or obscured in the model.  With these two requirements in mind and in light of the characteristics of the modeling environment, we developed a hybrid modeling approach that is based upon spiral development and evolutionary development.3.3	The Hybrid Space Launch Model Development ProcessThe hybrid modeling process is based upon the evolutionary model with some of the properties of the spiral model added to it.  The modeling process attempts to make a virtue of the limitations in the data.  The concept for the model is driven by the lack of data for the entire breadth of the type of launch to be modeled.  The process simultaneously addresses the four main areas where data is usually available, thereby maintaining breadth in model development and insuring that a model with a degree of accuracy is produced as soon as possible.  As in spiral development, the most risky aspects of the modeling process are delayed as long as possible, but in this case the risk is due to lack of data and the delay is imposed to increase the probability that suitable data or relationships are developed or discovered as the process proceeds.The modeling process begins by acquiring data on engine cost, vehicle cost, personnel/operations cost, and failure cost.  The costs associated with assembly, testing, and inspection are generally not available, as a result the development of these aspects of the cost model for a particular launch option are delayed.  In addition, to provide the ability to develop a model as soon as possible, costs are assumed to be simply additive.  If more complex relationships are uncovered later in the process they can be inserted at that time, but we do not delay the initial assembly of the model to search for or verify cost relationships.  Each of the four components of cost are developed independently in their own refinement spiral.  As data is obtained for a cost factor, for example engine development cost, the cost data is first verified in isolation and then integrated into the existing cost model for that component.  After completing integration, the model for the component is verified by using it to generate the cost of an equivalent component for a different launch technique whose cost is known (or has been previously estimated).  Any differences in the components are assumed to have only a linear affect on cost unless and until data is acquired that indicates a different relationship exists.  If the newly integrated cost model is sufficiently accurate, then the model is integrated into the entire cost model for the launch approach.  Once again, the newly integrated cost model is employed to generate the cost of an equivalent component whose cost is known using the same linear assumptions as were used for the component models.  Differences between predicted and actual costs are fed back to the data acquisition process to focus us in the search for data and relationships.  This approach has the advantage that the data acquisition process can proceed independently of the modeling and integration processes.  Data can be fed forward from data acquisition to any cost component at any time, integration results can be fed back to data acquisition to highlight areas where additional data (or even authoritative estimates) are needed.  In our conception, as shown in Figure 1, each of the four major sources of data proceed independently in their own model development spiral, with the capability for sub-spirals within a particular modeling effort to accommodate new data or additional, uncovered requirements for a particular model.  At all times, the four cost component spirals are combined through the use of a linear relationship function, thereby allowing the developing model under construction to produce a cost estimate early in the development cycle.  If during the course of developing the model the assembly, testing, and inspection costs are determined, then they are introduced into the model as additive factors.4.	Conclusions and Suggestions for Further WorkIn this paper we presented a methodology for the development of models of cost models for alternative spacelaunch techniques.  We summarized our objectives for the project, the main characteristics of the problem space, the possible baseline modeling methods and their shortfalls, and our requirements for the methodology.  We then presented a description of our methodology, which is a hybrid combination of evolutionary and spiral model development.We expect that each time a model is developed for a particular launch strategy, some components from previous modeling efforts can be re-used.  For example, baseline personnel costs, engine development cost, and launch pad repair cost can be reused from model to model, with improvements in modeling achieved in one project able to be reflected back into all other launch modeling projects.  If this hypothesis is true, then the methodology permits the cost of developing one aspect of a cost model to be amortized across several models.  Our future modeling efforts will test this hypothesis and we hope to report on our findings.Our next efforts with the methodology will be to use it to develop and refine a cost model for the dual launch strategy and for other alternative space launch techniques.  We also plan to use the methodology we developed as a baseline for the development of a methodology for developing models of space launch reliability under different cost and assembly inspection assumptions for a given technique.  One final modeling area is to be addressed is environmental impact.  Because our objective is to significantly increase the number of launches per year, we should determine the environmental impact of the different fuels that could be used.ReferencesBrand, A.M.; Kennedy, J.D.; and Hall, T. (1999) “Space:  Where SEDRIS has not Gone Before,” The Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 14-19 March, pp. 671-680.Ginet, G.P.; Groves, K.M.; Hilmer, R.V.; and Smitham, M. (1999) “Space Environment Models for Acquisition, Operations and M&S,” The Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 14-19 March, pp. 55-564.Haddix, F.; Sheehan, J.; Loesekann, M.; and Scrudder, R. (1999) “Semantics and Syntax of Mission Space Models,” The Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 12-17 Sep., pp. 918-923.Michel, D. and Claude, D. (1998) “Distributed Space Systems Validation,” The Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 13-18 Sep., pp. 211-218.Rogers, G.D.; Hunt, J.W.; and Goldfinger, A.D. (1999) “An HLA-Compliant Reusable Class Structure for the Simulation of Space Systems,” The Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 14-19 March, pp. 18-24.Tucker, W.  (1998) “Defining the Need for Models and Simulations,” in Applied Modeling and Simulation:  An Integrated Approach to Development and Operation, Cloud, D.J. & Rainey L.B (eds), McGraw-Hill: New York, New Yorl.Author BiographiesMartin R. Stytz is a Chief Principal Research Scientist and Engineer in the Air Force Research Laboratory and is a retired Lieutenant Colonel in the U.S. Air Force.  He received a Bachelor of Science degree from the U.S. Air Force Academy in 1975, a Master of Arts degree from Central Missouri State University in 1979, a Master of Science degree from the University of Michigan in 1983.  Stytz received his Ph.D. in Computer Science and Engineering from the University of Michigan in 1989.  He is a member of the ACM, SIGGRAPH, SIGCHI, the IEEE, the IEEE Computer Society, AAAI, and the Society for Computer Simulation.  His research interests include virtual environments, distributed interactive simulation, modeling and simulation, software architecture, intelligent agents, cyberwarfare, and computer-generated forces. Sheila B. Banks is the president of Calculated Insight.  Dr. Banks received her Bachelor of Science from the University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL in 1984 and a Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering from North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC in 1986.  Also from North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, she received a Master of Science in Electrical and Computer Engineering in 1987 and her Doctor of Philosophy in Computer Engineering (Artificial Intelligence) from Clemson University, Clemson, SC in 1995.  Her research interests include artificial intelligence, intelligent computer generated forces, associate and collaborative systems, distributed virtual environments, intelligent human computer interaction, and man-machine interfaces.Figure 1:  Conceptual Diagram of the Combined Space Launch Evolutionary + Spiral Model Development Process.PAGE  