 Improving the Bottom Line:  Refining Airline Training with Military SimulationMichael R. OakesMichael B. KitchenBMH Associates, Inc.(757) 857-5670, ext 249 HYPERLINK "mailto:moakes@bmh.com" moakes@bmh.com,  HYPERLINK "mailto:kitchen@bmh.com" kitchen@bmh.com Keywords:HLA, Distributed Mission Training, DIS, Modeling and Simulation, DMT, JointSAF, Airline Training, NASA, Instrument Approaches, Accident Prevention, Aircraft Safety, TCAS  ABSTRACT:	To Wall Street, the Bottom Line is a profit margin, however many if not all of the U.S. Major Airlines will tout that Safety is their number one priority and maintaining that priority keeps the bottom line in the black.  Nothing creates more bad publicity and affects an airline’s bottom line than an aircraft accident.  To avoid these calamities, a tremendous amount of time and effort is expended towards aircrew training to ensure the pilots and flight attendants can handle any one of a thousand situations that demand the full breadth of their knowledge and capitalize on their experience.  Airline aircrews may complete a 30+ year career without ever having a real emergency, so the majority of their emergency “experience” comes from their recurrent training.While Modeling and Simulation (M&S) has dramatically advanced with affordable computer processing and visualization techniques that the military is now taking advantage, there are many areas in the airline industry which remain as status quo.  The airline status quo stems from investments in mainframe simulators capable of FAA landing certification and the need to eliminate live aircraft training flights reducing revenue opportunities transporting passengers and/or cargo.  But while airline training provides an excellent environment for instrument and emergency procedures training, it lacks the capability to accurately portray or interface with the numerous other ground vehicles and aircraft associated with actual line operations.  In fact, according to the FAA, very rarely do airline simulator evaluations portray the environment associated with daily operations.  TCAS alerts, extensive ground traffic, crowded traffic patterns and skies are not normally included in any airline simulator training curriculum or evaluations.  Macro and micro events cam be used in “what-if” applications to provide solutions for emergency contingencies and future operational passenger throughput.  Current U.S. military model and simulation technologies can be migrated to the airlines to further aircrew awareness.  This migration will provide valuable experience to handle future traffic volumes in addition to the various emergency procedures and unusual occurrences in the training environment.This paper describes the efforts to not only transfer technology from the military to the civil aviation industry, but also leverage these same applications into military training for safer skies as air traffic continues to increase in the 21st century.  It will also discuss how the methods for infusing advanced M&S technologies for the airlines can be applied to the military’s airlift fleet as well.  Specifically, the developed technology will not only enhance airline aircrew training but also allow ground and air traffic controllers at all levels to benefit.  These training improvements provide added experience in an environment where the average flying time behind the aircraft controls is decreasing.  Transferring affordable robust military simulation technology to civil aviation will not only increase the safety margin, it will provide lower operating costs for simulations centers.1.	IntroductionToday's combat environment is extremely complex with the many sensors, communication links and multi-mode fire control systems to master in order to detect, identify, intercept and destroy targets on the ground and in the air.  Mastering one's weapon system is only one part of the equation for survival in battle.  Mastering the combat environment requires a great deal of attention and practice using all available training aids and visualization tools, whether virtual cockpits, constructive simulation or live flight events.This military environment while it places the military aviator in harms way, the physics of flight and aerodynamics still apply to a civilian aviator.  Safe aircraft separation, communications, dealing with weather, and carefully executing the choreography involved in a large operation does not know the boundaries between military and civil aviation.  The military (specifically the USAF) has charted a course improving flight training with enhanced simulation seamless across the constructive, virtual and even live arenas.  It is robust and realistic simulation training capable of plunging the military in a dangerous situation without the risk of actually placing the pilot(s) in physical harm.  The training is intense whether it is trying to vanquish a foe or combat the weather down to approach minimums.  Business investments are made based on perceived returns and reduced risks.  Training costs absorb a great deal of capital in the commercial airline industry.  In today’s financial environment, companies that can capitalize and reuse existing robust technologies without having to expend resources will provide significant improvement in training and the “bottom line.” Today the Airlines can capitalize on military simulation technology areas spanning command and control as well as synthetic environment, visualization and sensor integration.For the military transport or civil aviation pilot, the job at hand is no less tasking especially when the lives of the entire crew and passengers rest with the pilots.  There is many a pilot who has marveled at his ability (and sometimes luck) to recover a disabled aircraft or get through adverse weather.  How he got into the adverse situation is never planned and the moment of truth comes without warning.  How each aviator handles the problems depend upon his training, experience and how well he works with other crew members, air traffic control and rescue or command and control agencies.  Aggressive live flight training events and sophisticated trainers augment the combat aviator’s training. .  The commercial aviation pilot also has sophisticated simulators certified as instrument and landing trainers but live flying events are left to carrying revenue passengers. For both, they handle emergencies as calm mature individuals who leave nothing to chance.  The calm is a reflection of their training.  This paper will discuss the many areas where commercial aviation training can benefit from the various improvements in simulation fidelity and distributed interactions available today with military simulation technologies.  USAF training has entered an exciting phase where virtual and live can be combined with constructive simulation. Distributive Mission Training (DMT) is simply the newest simulation capability adopted by the Air Force and is already under review by the Navy.  DMT's wide applications for U.S. Armed Services and nationalities cover areas from unit to theater level mission team training.  All quarters will benefit from the added flexibility and realism DMT will provide.  It is the interaction among numerous participants that makes this an exciting training prospect for commercial aviation.  Networking manned cockpits with ground Radar Training facilities can provide a greater realism for training aircrews as well as Air Traffic Control (ATC) and airline operations personnel.  Safety is the airlines’ number one priority for continued operations.  Very few passengers will regularly fly on airliners with poor safety records.  Safety during flight operations is gained through training, experience and education.  Education comes from a variety of areas including formalized training.  The formal training and day-to-day flying proficiency makes up the bulk of experience.  Certainly, each of these areas overlap, but it is easy to see that they cannot be mutually exclusive.  In fact they all drive the goal to provide multitudes of situational experiences to develop flight skills.  Experience develops maturity through constant testing and evaluation.  But how is experience gained?  With the advances in computer technology the answer should lead us to Modeling and Simulation (M&S) and its ability to provide multiple events in a given time period to reinforce skill training and added experience.  2.	Current Simulation Systems and Environments2.1	Airline SimulatorsMost major airlines use mainframe simulation technology to train their pilots.  The mainframe technology requires more maintenance than current PC-based simulation systems used by the military.  Major airlines use their simulators for pilot initial and recurrent training.  The simulators are in continual use with a fairly high reliability rate even with full motion capability.  Airline simulation training highlights emergency procedures, instrument approaches and aircraft maneuvers and is primarily virtual cockpits with little constructive modeling.  The out-the window visuals are realistic if night and weather conditions are applied, though the visuals are usually limited to approximately 120 degrees or less depending on the aircraft type.  With the full motion capability and instrument conditions, airline simulators are certified by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to qualify aircrews for landings.  The airline simulators have several limitations since they do not represent the ground environment aircraft operate with the numerous vehicles and other aircraft operating around an airport.  There are no significant terrain features as in the mountainous regions airliners operate.  Airline simulators do not represent many of the airports airlines frequently operate or their primary divert fields.  2.2	Military SimulationMilitary simulation invests in both virtual and constructive simulation in order to possess the capability to interact with real-world command and control systems such as radars and identification devices.  Simulation validity and entity resolution is extremely important to military combat training.  Military virtual simulator cockpits are now providing 360-degree views and networking with other simulators to present a more realistic operating environment.  Constructive simulation used for war-gaming and instructional training has migrated to a new High Level Architecture (HLA) protocol standard.  HLA provides a specification for common architecture and structural basis for simulation interoperability.  The HLA environment allows common communication supporting reuse and simulation inter-operation across the Department of Defense.  HLA was developed on the premise that no one simulation can meet the diverse demands or requirements for all Service and Joint Components.  However, having a common architecture where all users can tie-in allows for a greater interaction among federates and provides the common environment for reuse.  These users can develop specific simulation federates to meet their needs as the rules established in the HLA baseline definitions for both time management and data distribution management are followed.  This same HLA standard used in military simulation provides an excellent architecture for civilian aviation.2.2.1	Military Constructive SimulationThe Joint Semi-Autonomous Forces (JSAF) simulation technology is still the only demonstrated large-scale HLA simulation using both large aggregates (for visualization) and entity resolution (for interaction arbitration).  JSAF’s distributive entity-level simulation using HLA compliant Runtime Infrastructure (RTI) exceeds 40,000+ entities.  These entities represent vehicles in all the domains of air, space, sea and land and interact with each other.JSAF was the first exercise to use routing spaces and Data Distribution Management (DDM).  The HLA DDM is used to specify which federates receive messages for each update and interaction.  The RTI uses information provided in publish/subscribe calls to set up filters that direct data among federates that need them (Dahmann).  The RTI used in the JSAF ACTD provides the mutual communications link used by all of the JSAF players and runs quite smoothly.  Subscription to the amount of information needed to do the job reduces traffic over the lines and allows for more players to be present in the battlespace without impacting resolution.  A key result of DDM is the ability to employ PC-class workstations with no decrease in interaction validity. (Oakes)2.2.2	Weather Simulation The Total Atmospheric and Ocean Server (TAOS) Meteorology and Oceanography (METOC) data allows both Staff weather officers and constructive agents to use real weather inputs over the battlespace to affect mission execution.  The inclusion of the TAOS modeling provides STOW with a spectrum of weather phenomenology (smoke, haze, dust, and day/night) that is further affected by the Synthetic Forces (SF) with weapons release.  SF agents are also affected by weather since aircraft are grounded due to low ceilings and ground troop movements are impeded by dust storms.  The fidelity of the synthetic environment and the interaction of this environment with the synthetic forces represent a significant improvement over current simulation capabilities.  (Budge, 1998)Weather effects allow warriors to assess real-time target ID and targeting constraints.  The STOW Synthetic Environment demonstrates an unprecedented 3-dimensional representation of the world with winds, weather, terrain, and bathymetrics.  It is a portable, high fidelity synthetic environment technology that supports a wide range of Advanced Distributive Simulations (ADS) or stand-alone simulation systems.  The current ability to link the STOW synthetic environment to a native interface and a DIS gateway exists.  However, the problem lies in the inability of the DIS to import the STOW synthetic environment and dynamic terrain.  Native interfaces import the data freely and the need for terrain data correlation is eliminated.  Fidelity levels need to be determined in order for DIS compliant simulators the ability to enhance their pictures.  The trade-off is acceptability that comes from realistic representation of the environment and interactions with other constructive entities.  Realism demands proper dynamic terrain modeling and a representative environment to include at least varying winds, clouds layering, sun and moon illumination, temperature and volumetric smoke effects.2.2.3	Dynamic Terrain Data BaseJSAF uses the same technology demonstrated and perfected during the 1997 Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) Advanced Concept Technology Demonstration (ACTD).  JSAF uses a large-scale dynamic synthetic natural environment with a pre-distributed terrain database (TDB). JSAF provides a real-time distribution of battlefield environmental effects and dynamic changes to the terrain and cultural features.  Digital features included 3-D representation of cities and other manmade objects such as bridges, pipelines, and roads based on comprehensive mapping and analysis of the urban areas to intermingle with cultural features of military significance.  Source data for the TDB is the National Imagery and Mapping Agency and includes digital elevation models for terrain surface and ocean bathymetrics, 10-meter resolution satellite imagery, numerous digital feature data sets, digitized maps, and paper maps with scales as large as 1:12,500.  (Miller)Behavior consistent with the real world must include the elements of the environmental space in which the behavior would be exhibited.  The environment needs to be modeled in as much detail as the sensors and visuals would have.  JSAF is capable of networking real-world sensors and have their capabilities affected by the weather, tidal and diurnal variables.  This environment sets the stage for building interactive surroundings to support USAF DMT team training as well as commercial aviation applications.2.2.4	Intelligent ForcesJSAF, through the TacAir Soar program, uses Artificial Intelligence (AI) in constructive agents. These SOAR agents, using approximately 6000 rule-based architecture, fly formation, engaged targets and fly home at appropriate times for mission execution while responding to the battlefield dynamics.  The rule sets in SOAR follow current tactics and service doctrine.  SOAR agents fly their missions without any intervention from operators behind the scenes greatly reducing the number of operators needed for exercise execution.  A key application for both military and airline simulation with JSAF and SOAR technology is the ability to control the SOAR agents with Human Computer Interfaces and voice communications.JSAF has two basic methods to dynamically control constructive agents.  One uses a GUI based approach with the Artificial Intelligent (AI) SOAR agents.  The other approach and more applicable to training Weapons Directors (WDs) and Forward Air Controllers (FACs) is SoarSpeak.  SoarSpeak uses natural voice recognition and speech generation to direct and interact with synthetic entities controlled by the SOAR air behavior system. This allows such synthetic entities to maintain autonomy, flexibility and realism. Rather than requiring a system operator to manually intervene to change an entity's behavior, SoarSpeak allows relatively untrained users to re-task aircraft through voice directives. SoarSpeak provides zero latency, interactive voice communication with SOAR entities over computer data networks. It uses commercial off-the-shelf technology with advanced state-of-the-art continuous speech recognition and generation and runs on minimal hardware configurations under Windows 95, 98, and NT. It has been tailored to understand military aviation communications.  SoarSpeak can control any SOAR controlled aircraft on any mission. It allows these synthetic entities to respond to commands through voice directives. It also allows these synthetic entities to reply to orders with speech. As with conventional radios, a single user can talk with multiple SOAR entities and hear the responses from these entities in understandable English tailored to the military aviation domain. SoarSpeak has an extensible grammar that can be tailored to specific applications and changed dynamically. For example, new call signs can be added on the fly. SoarSpeak provides a natural facility for training weapons directors to manage the behavior of synthetic forces.   It has been used as the interface to allow a remote AWACS to control aircraft in large, theater-wide exercises. It also has been used to allow a pilot to speak with a synthetic wingman during air-to-air combat missions. Work is on going with the Navy Battle Force Team Trainer (BFTT) program to allow trainees to direct aircraft on carrier launch, marshalling, and approach for both fixed and rotary wing aircraft. SoarSpeak features a simple user interface for grammar setup and speech connection.  Messages may be sent over simulated radios to any entity in the simulation including other human participants. Encoding exists for both English and Command and Control Simulation Interface Language (CCSIL) forms of the messages. The bottom line is to exercise control that is a natural part of the training process.  Rather than relying on trained operators to manage synthetic entities, the entities are re-tasked with the same radio directives used to control a human participant.  SoarSpeak provides realistic training with constructive simulation and reduces operations costs by eliminating requirements for specialized manpower and equipment to conduct ‘positive control’ training.2.2.5	InterfacesJSAF has been networked with command and control systems as well as legacy simulators.  The interfaces provide a valuable capability to network legacy systems without the need to rebuild entire simulator architectures.  There are two approaches for the interfaces based on simulator capabilities and user needs.  First a “native” interface (interface connecting directly to the HLA network) converts objects and attribute information into the data formats suitable for processing by the virtual simulator host CPU.  The “native” interface allows simulator image generators to “see” the JSAF synthetic environment in out-the-window visuals.  The second approach is converting older standard Distributive Interactive Simulation (DIS) protocols into HLA.  The DIS-HLA gateway to network individual DIS-compliant virtual simulators on the JSAF network is a primary method to network legacy simulators.  A “native” interface (no DIS layers) is required for a virtual simulator to take advantage of the synthetic environment information (terrain and weather) on the HLA network.  DIS does not currently support synthetic environment interactions.  Finally, JSAF interfaces to real-world command and control radars and identification devices providing a dynamic capability to increase training opportunities for air traffic controllers (ATC).  This capability is in its initial stages for the military and the FAA and airline industry should be able to leverage on the efforts.With each new technological advance it seems to take a long time to overcome the inertia set up due to habit patterns and the methodologies of “old” systems.  This inertia must be overcome before new strategies and methods are embraced and employed.  This adage applies to platforms and it certainly applies to simulation training.  The acceptance in M&S centers about realism in both the visual displays and of course the environment.  2.2.6	Visual System ImprovementsReducing costs in visual systems has been a major priority for military simulation in order to provide high fidelity visuals for warfighters. Several ‘main-frame’ based visualization/simulation companies, Evans and Sutherland, Quantum 3D, CAE and BAE are developing PC based solutions for military training.  One company SDS International has built the photo realistic AAcutiy system.  The AAcuity SB PC-IG System is critical to the creation of low cost, high resolution, high brightness multi-channel visual display systems.  The Shadow Buffer integrates end-to-end control of the entire real-time visual pipeline; from image generator to display device output including advanced multiple channel support (e.g., tiling displays, edge matching, edge blending, color matching, geometry correction, screen space adjustments and warp features).  The AAcuityTM SB PC-IG supports Out-The-Window and Stealth options for current and legacy simulations and supports single and multi-channel visuals of 1 to 16 channels and Helmet Mounted Display (HMD) configurations. Resolution and update rates with load management & support processing of photo-realistic, geo-specific databases.  The LiteFlite Shadow Buffer Products supports USAF and Navy (8 channel and (4 channel) Display systems.The SBCM monitors and controls the PC-Based Image Generator, Real-Time Scene Manager, LCD Projectors, and Screen Space Attributes.   In addition to the high resolution tiling features the SBCM is designed for replacing and upgrading visual systems for domes; enhancing Image Generator workload management; enhanced per pixel spatial, color and temporal real-time manipulation; digital to digital Interface; and further automation of visual systems from a human factors basis.  The module is optimized and integrated into a digitally controlled high fidelity C++ application with planned upgrades jointly funded by USAF and US Navy Through 2002. The monetary significance to the airline industry is providing low cost upgrades to legacy simulations adding vastly superior visualizations of fully interactive entities and airports. Figure 1:  PC Image-Generators and JSAF Interaction3.	Airline Simulator Training EnhancementsWhile airline training is very robust, there are areas where the training can use advances in military simulation to increase pilot exposure and experience.  The airlines can capitalize on these efforts to improve reliability as well as reduce overhead in mainframe simulator repairs with low-cost PC use for photo realistic visuals and simulation.  The following areas are selected to highlight areas where airline training can use either constructive simulation or interfaces to improve training.3.1	Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance System (TCAS)TCAS is an aircraft proximity warning system that identifies nearby Mode C, transponder equipped aircraft and provides vertical guidance to ensure aircraft altitude separation.  The system can display up to 30 aircraft and simultaneously coordinate a resolution advisory for up to three (3) threat aircraft.  This independent means of ensuring safe aircraft separation is intended to supplement the ground based ATC system and the see and avoid concept.The purpose of TCAS is to prevent mid-air collisions and is used to increase and to assist in establishing visual contact with other aircraft.  TCAS has two basic types of alert.  The Traffic Advisory (TA) provides aural and visual information that identifies intruder traffic.  A Resolution Advisory (RA) is a combination of aural and visual cues provided by the TCAS advising the flight crew that a particular maneuver should or should not be performed to maintain safe separation from a threat aircraft.  Red and Green arcs are displayed on the TA/VSI’s to indicate the vertical maneuver to be flown.  Normally a TA is issued (displayed) prior to an RA, however in situations where aircraft are turning or initiating climbs or descents, the first alert may be an RA.  Figure 2 shows a Vertical Situation Indicator (VSI) display with RA warning.  Figure 3 displays the weather radar and TCAS threat advisory information. Figure 2:  TCAS VSI Resolution Alert (RA) INCLUDEPICTURE "C:\\quaker\\Research Papers\\Fall 00 SIW\\TCAS Radar and Wx.jpg" \* MERGEFORMATINET Figure 3:  Weather Radar and TCAS InformationEven toady’s most advanced Boeing 777 training only has one TCAS “target” per attempt in training.  It never displays the reality of traveling into the most dense airport traffic areas where pilots must visually sort aircraft in the traffic pattern from 20 or more TCAS target displays.  Integrating JSAF synthetic entities to airline simulators, through a native or gateway interface, can provide a PC-based cost-effective upgrade for ‘true to life’ TCAS pilot training.3.2	Integrated Ramp OperationsAirlines make on-time departures by pushing from the gate on time.  In order for that to happen, the ground ramp controller has to contend with the various aircraft and ground vehicles cluttering up the ramp.  Aircraft taxi in and out of these congested ramp areas in a choreography at times known only to the ramp controller.  Delays on the ramp mean lost time and increased fuel costs for the airlines.  JSAF and its interactions with all vehicles can provide a robust inexpensive training aid to train ramp controllers prior to them ever picking up a radio microphone.  The scalability of JSAF can provide airline management the ability to look at future traffic flow.  Using numerous variables, traffic flow can be measured based on gate and route acquisition, new hubs and FAA ATC routing including ‘Free Flight.’3.3	Safety and Accident Investigation/PreventionSafety has long been defined as risk management.  Every flight, crewmembers practice risk management to help move traffic smoother and quicker.  It comes down to whether the reward of executing maneuvers exceeds the risk.  At no time does placing an aircraft in a dangerous situation ever provide an acceptable risk.  JSAF would be extremely useful in ground operations to prevent accidents by training ATC and ramp personnel on potential conflicts and safety hazards.  The ability to tie into a photo realistic environment gives the necessary visual training stimuli to enhance learning outcomes.4.	Current and Future ATC Implementations Requiring Advanced Simulation4.1	Land and Hold Short Operations (LAHSO)In April 2000, the FAA issued its "final" order on LAHSO, with an effective date of May 27th. After careful review, ALPA found the final order to be deficient in key areas. Landing distances were reduced significantly and inadequately trained general aviation and foreign pilots were added to the permissible traffic mix. The final order further stated that rejected landing procedures (RLPs) must be developed and validated through modeling, with FAA requirements, using guidelines demonstrating an acceptable level of safety. However, this modeling and validation have not been completed to ALPA's satisfaction. The testing that was begun leads to the inescapable conclusion that much more needs to be done before RLPs can be validated.  Although ALPA understands that the FAA may rescind the final order, which would return the landing distances to previous agreements and eliminates general aviation and foreign pilots from the traffic mix, the FAA has not satisfied the testing of RLPs, to date, and clearly demonstrates the need for more rigorous testing and validation procedures.  Simply stated, passenger safety cannot be compromised in areas where even the FAA has acknowledged there are inadequate safety margins.  As an addendum, an ALPA 26 July “LAHSO Critical Juncture” press release reports the FAA has now agreed to ALPA’s safety concerns regarding LAHSO and RLPs.  In fact, the FAA agreed to all of the criteria outlined by ALPA including the union insistence that no LAHSO on runways requiring RLPs until those procedures have been scientifically modeled and verified.  In addition, the FAA has agreed that participation in LAHSO will only be by pilots who have been adequately trained in the maneuvers (including general aviation and foreign pilots).4.2	Advanced Runway Safety RadarA new radar system designed to prevent runway collisions will be installed at 25 midsize airports.  Near-collisions on runways (runway incursions) are considered one of the gravest safety problems in aviation.  There were 321 near-collisions on runways in 1999, which is a 72% increase since 1988.  (Levin)  The FAA has already installed radars that monitor traffic on runways and taxiways at 34 large airports, however these systems do not issue warnings to ATC when there is any danger of a runway incursion.  GPS capability on vehicles will allow drivers to know their exact position and broadcast positions to ATC.4.3	FAA Free Flight and Increased Air Traffic VolumeThe FAA has issued a controversial recommendation on when ATC should send aircraft onto a runway before giving final approval for takeoff to increase speed for departures and increasing aircraft flow/density.  With the advent of increased airline travel, the FAA has embarked on evaluating methods to overcome gridlock in the current national airspace system and appears to embrace the free flight concept allowing airliners to “proceed direct” to destinations.  TCAS will become even more important as flow control will be less predictable.  Free Flight must also consider the various terrain features as aircraft venture off the beaten path developed over the years.  The JSAF synthetic environment and entities can provide the stimulation/simulation for pilot and controller training in the future airspace.  ‘What ifs’ for traffic flow, emergencies, and weather contingencies can be developed and implemented.4.4	Precision Radar Monitored (PRM) ApproachesPRM Approaches are designed to reduce separation between runway centerlines to fly independent Instrument Landing System (ILS) approaches.  A separate approach monitor controller sits between the two runway controllers to watch for conflicts.  The system is designed to alert the monitor if an aircraft flies toward the Non Transgression Zone (NTZ).  If a NTZ infringement occurs, then the controller issues breakout instruction (climbing or descending) for the aircraft.  These breakouts have to occur without radio interference, which has no guarantee.ILS PRM operations require immediate response to controller instructions; precise tracking of the localizer course (all approaches must be flown with the autopilot on) and increased situational awareness, though pilots must switch their TCAS past the TA position to STBY.   INCLUDEPICTURE "C:\\quaker\\Research Papers\\Fall 00 SIW\\paper-siw-insert.jpg" \* MERGEFORMATINET Figure 4:  PRM Approach Depiction5.	Ground/Air Traffic and Airport Operation Applications5.1	USAF ATC and NASA Tower ProgramsBoth the USAF and NASA have begun seeking comments for the USAF Air Traffic Control (ATC) Tower Simulation System (TSS) and the NASA Future Flight Central (FFC).The Air Force operates approximately 95 control towers globally, not including the 18 facilities presently operated by the Air Force Reserve (AFRES) and Air National Guard (ANG), in support of both civilian and military air operations.  The towers are located where mission requirements dictate.  These military ATC facilities support training and maintenance of a cadre of proficient tower controllers for worldwide deployment in support of national interests.  There are no automated training capabilities available for individual control tower facility training programs to provide initial and proficiency training, therefore, controller training depends strictly upon live air traffic.  The Air Force Flight Standards Agency is designated the lead USAF agency for this program.  As providers of ATC tower services to both military and civilian aviation at USAF locations worldwide, the USAF is required to meet national standards for air traffic services established by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).  USAF currently provides these services to a variety of aircraft in varying airspace complexities depending on location and USAF mission requirements.  The evolving Air Force mission and the advent of composite wings have placed additional stress on the ATC training environment.  To ensure USAF ATC towers safely and expeditiously move aircraft to, from, and through their designated airspace, they must have the capability to provide realistic air traffic simulation.  Simulation will provide tower controllers the tools to improve situational awareness, decision-making, effective communication, and workload management that encompass the core curriculum of the Air Force crew resource management program.  Simulation exercises will ensure all tower controllers have the means to meet new training requirements and remain at a competent level of proficiency that cannot be attained with live traffic.  NASA Future Flight Central (FFC), at NASA Ames Research Center, is a full-scale, full-mission, R&D air traffic control (ATC) tower simulation environment where safety, efficiency and environmental compatibility can be researched and validated under various airport conditions and configurations.  The FCC will have a 360° out-the-window field-of- view of designated airport(s) and the airport's surrounding environment displayed on a high-resolution projection system.  The airport scenes include static models of the airfield, airport facilities, surrounding terrain and moving models of the aircraft and ground vehicles. The level of complexity of each airport database can be low, medium or high.  FFC may also require modifications of zero to ten existing airport models to update or add new features. NASA will provide the contractor with source materials consisting of digital terrain data, AutoCAD drawings of the airport, obstruction chart, aerial photos, and reference photo materials. NASA shall obtain ownership rights to airport databases including the right to use, modify, and transfer the airport database to FFC customers. 7.	ConclusionsRealism is still the driving goal for any training environment.  Efficiency in setting up the simulation and how to best “work behind the curtain” for the training audience is required to ensure the most training possible without losing realism.  As with the development of any new technology, what will come along in the future is anybody's guess.  The only consistent factor will be the need to test whatever it is before it can be used.  If a system is developed in which full up testing is not practical until the system is constructed, what does that mean in terms of money invested, and the safety of passengers?  How do we assure ourselves that making decisions based on minimal understanding of complex interrelationships will not injure someone?  There are numerous areas where the FAA and the demand for air travel are pushing the national airspace system to its limits.  In response the FAA is attempting to find new ways to increase traffic into existing airports without adding runways.  The synergies available to apply JSAF technologies for FAA and airline training and certification for controllers and pilots are immeasurable.  While there may not be a need for 40,000+ entities for the airlines, certainly the interaction of hundreds of ground and air vehicles coupled with ground collision avoidance devices will improve safety in air travel.The general approach is to use the best knowledge we have and then over-engineer the result.  This always adds additional cost, but never guarantees that the result will be acceptable.  Or, perhaps we want to know how well a person might be expected to perform under very unusual circumstances.  If the scenario envisioned is truly unusual, we might never get a chance to perform the tests for real.  JSAF provides the USAF DMT program a robust threat environment to build and execute team-training events.  The same environment is available for training airline, air traffic, and airport personnel.  JSAF "ground" training events can increase the level of knowledge prior to mixing of live controllers and pilots.  A mix of virtual and live--enhanced with constructive simulation is a must in order to improve airline pilot and airport personnel experience.  The increasing motivation for USAF DMT is derived from the characteristics of contemporary warfare where the battlefield is extremely lethal and complex and the need to interact among the many players is critical to the overall mission success.  On-board and off-board sensor management requires greater coordination among platforms to foster mission execution teamwork.  These same military motivations for improving military training follow along with commercial aviation; leveraging on military specified simulation provides increased training and safety without a huge investment for the airlines or airport management.  The motivation for added simulation capabilities in the commercial airline industry stems from improving training for safety as well as the ability to provide a robust training to other airline customers.  Whether it’s for TCAS training improvements over current--one aircraft--simulation available today. Ground control and ramp training to reduce fuel costs, the airline which embraces this technology first has the best opportunity to set standards exceeding FAA mandates to improve passenger safety.To date two airlines have begun investigating the JSAF simulation technology applications for their training plans.  JSAF Military simulation technology provides the airlines an unprecedented opportunity to use simulation that is affordable, reliable and has the capacity to save them money in training and reduce operating costs by having more proficient pilots and controllers operating and directing their aircraft.  Not only does incorporating military simulation technology save money but also this adaptation will continue to improve safety and make an impact on investors by improving the bottom line.ReferencesAronson, Jesse, Radgowski, Tom, (1997), Lessons Learned in Developing the STOW AAR System.Ball, George Dr., Zeigler, Bernard, Dr. (1999) University of Arizona.  Synthetic Environments as Dynamic, Interactive, Multi-resolution Simulations.  Budge, Larry D. MG (Ret) (1997), Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) 97 Overview.Ceranowicz, Andy, PhD  (1997), STOW 97-99.  Dahmann, J.S. (1997), The Department of Defense High Level Architecture.  Proceedings of the 1997 Winter Simulation Conference, 142-149.Frazier, Gerald T., Blenberg, Paul J. (1999).  99S-SIW-194.  Intelligence Cells in Large Scale Exercises.Hopkins, George E. (1982).  Flying the Line.  Air Lin Pilots AssociationHQ ACC/DOOS, Langley AFB (1998),  Distributed Mission Training - Background Concepts (Draft).  Laird, John. E., PhD, Coulter, Karen J., Jones, Randolph M., Kenny, Patrick G., Koss, Frank, Nielsen, Paul E. (1997), Integrating Intelligent Computer Generated Forces in Distributive Simulations:  TacAir Soar in STOW-97.  Levin, Alan (June 27, 2000).  25 Airports to Get New Runway Safety Radar, USA Today.Miller, D., Miller, T., Cornish, C., Rourke J., and Cauble, K.  (1998), STOW Southwest Asia Terrain Data Base, 98-SIW-165.Oakes, Michael R.  (1998), Augmenting Air and Space Dominance: The Future of Combat Training, 98F-SIW-128.Authors’ BiographyMICHAEL OAKES is a senior systems engineer with BMH Associates, Inc.  He holds a B.S. in Aeronautical Engineering, M.S. in Aeronautical Sciences, and an M.A. in National Security and Strategic Studies.  He was responsible for the evolution, bed-down, and deployment of high priority classified special access required programs.  He is a retired USAF fighter pilot with over 20 years of experience in the Pacific, European, and Southwest Asia theaters of operations and is a USAF F-15 Fighter Weapons School Graduate.  Mr. Oakes was the WISSARD Lab Test Director for the STOW-97 ACTD.  He maintains domain expertise as a commercial airline pilot and continues to provide modeling and military domain expertise for Air Synthetic Force development used in JSAF technologies.MICHAEL KITCHEN is a systems engineer with BMH Associates, Inc.  He holds a B.A. degree in liberal arts from the University of New York.  He was a United States Naval Flight Officer serving as a Combat Information Officer in the E2-C Hawkeye in the Central America and Southwest Asia theaters.  Prior to commissioning he served as a submarine-qualified electronics technician on USS Cincinnati (SSN-693).  Mr. Kitchen is currently supporting U.S. Joint Forces Command (USJFCOM/J9), "Attack Operations 00" at the JSAF Federation WISSARD Laboratory.  He provides domain experience in conceptual modeling, V&V and continued synthetic air forces development for JSAF..