Warfighting Concepts to Future Weapon Systems Design (WARCON)Benjamin P. RileyLCDR Dylan Schmorrow, USNOffice Of Naval Research800 N. Quincy StreetArlington, VA 22217-1212 HYPERLINK "mailto:rileyb@onr.navy.mil" rileyb@onr.navy.mil,  HYPERLINK "mailto:schmord@onr.navy.mil" schmord@onr.navy.milEdward P. Harvey, Jr.Gary S. KollmorgenBMH Associates, Inc.5425 Robin Hood Road, Suite 201Norfolk, VA 23513-2441757-857-5670, 757-857-6781 HYPERLINK "mailto:eharvey@bmh.com" eharvey@bmh.com,  HYPERLINK "mailto:kollmorg@bmh.com" kollmorg@bmh.comKeywords:SBA, HLA, Distributed Simulation, Computer Generated Forces, Discrete Event SimulationAbstract:  The primary objective for the WARCON program is to develop an Integrated Acquisition Environment (IAE) using simulation based acquisition techniques to allow warfighters who define operational requirements for complex weapon systems to more effectively interact with the engineers who design and develop the weapon systems. Potential returns from the development of an IAE include a reduction in the time to field a weapon system and cost savings realized from making informed trades in operational capability based on an accurate assessment of how the weapon system will be employed operationally once it is fielded.This paper will describe the WARCON program including the process and components of the prototype IAE; how simulation models of differing resolution and type are being integrated using the High Level Architecture (HLA); the manner in which the prototype IAE is being employed to analyze alternative designs for the weapons handling system of a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier; and how verification, validation, and accreditation (VV&A) of the joint synthetic battlespace simulation component of WARCON is being accomplished. OverviewThe WARCON system integrates high resolution, engineering design physical and behavioral models with lower resolution performance models to represent complex warfighting platforms such as naval combatants, armored vehicles, or aircraft within a joint synthetic battlespace (JSB) with a level of validity suitable for determining operational effectiveness versus cost.  In addition, The WARCON Integrated Acquisition Environment (IAE) couples not only the engineering and operational models and simulations but also the “cost” (or trade space) models with the resultant data generated by the engineering and operational performance simulations to produce analytical results necessary to support operational effectiveness versus cost.[1]WARCON provides a simulation-based mechanism for assessing relative capability of various platform physical and behavioral system configurations to meet current and postulated operational requirements.  This capability will allow warfighters and platform designers to collaboratively develop a design that will “satisfy” a wide region of operational capabilities within an acceptable range of costs.  The WARCON system will consist of local area networks (LANs) connected via the Defense Research and Engineering (DREN) wide area network (WAN).  Simulation applications including high resolution engineering design models, computer generated synthetic forces, synthetic natural environment representations, cost models, 2-D and 3-D visualization, and data collection and analyses will be integrated and employed over this WAN.  Phase I will investigate the carrier weapons handling system (CWHS) of a nuclear aircraft carrier.  The detailed representation of the CWHS shall be capable of impacting the operational effectiveness of the aircraft carrier representation in the Joint Synthetic Battlespace (JSB).  Existing engineering design, personnel, and life cycle cost models will be reused or enhanced for determining the “cost” of different weapon handling system configurations.  The WARCON model and simulation system will be based on maximum reuse of engineering design applications and modeling techniques employed by Newport News Shipyard (NNS) and NAWC-AD Lakehurst (e.g., Advanced Carrier Launch System (ACLS) simulation); on reuse of JSAF Federation (a product of the DARPA Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) ACTD) simulation, visualization, and data collection and analyses technologies; and on use of other selected simulation, collaborative engineering, visualization, and analysis technologies based on their respective capabilities and costs.WARCON ProcessThe WARCON Integrated Acquisition Environment (IAE) will have several key elements necessary to perform its overall goals.  These elements are shown in Figure 1 an IDEF0 node tree.  WARCON is using the IDEF0 process modeling technique to better understand the component processes and their interactions.  Each modeling or simulation component is being developed using a tailored version of the FEDEP[6] process.  The Collaborative Engineering Environment (CEE), Carrier Integrated Data Environment (CIDE), Joint Synthetic Battlespace (JSB), and Trade Spaces are all components necessary to allow runtime performance of the WARCON system.  The IAE also includes management, analysis, and a feedback process labeled Process Improvement/QA.Project ManagementProject management is essentially self-explanatory.  This process will initialize the system, provide for tasking and retasking and present results and final documentation.  Figure 2 shows the basic IDEF0 process model.  As a short tutorial, IDEF0[2] activity boxes have the potential for four sets of arrows: those from the left going into the box are inputs that are used by the activity box, those coming out of the right side of the activity box are outputs or results, those coming into the top of the box are controls (or constraints) on the activity, and those coming into the bottom of the box are mechanisms (or sometimes thought of as consumables or resources).The key component to the management activity is the management execution sub-activity.  This is where the day-to-day reporting, results, and recommendations are processed and allows management retasking of all other activities.Collaborative Engineering Environment (CEE)The CEE is the simplest to understand and the hardest component to execute faithfully in the WARCON IAE.  The CEE activity (see Figure 3) plans the necessary tools and connectivity requirements, designs and builds a collaborative environment, deploys the environment for WARCON use, and provides reporting to the management activity.The CEE will have to provide people and application collaboration in both an unclassified and classified environment.  It will build network connectivity between all WARCON participants based on the component activities providing their requirements.  The CEE will also have to address firewall and security policy issues at each site to establish initial connectivity among the WARCON activities.  For WARCON, an ongoing network initiative, East Coast Communications Network (ECCN) will be leveraged to gain insight on lessons learned, collaboration tools, and knowledge management. Critical to interfacing disparate simulations and models, the CEE will have to provide management collaboration tools and connectivity as well as the WAN/LAN connectivity to support simulation interactions and data sharing.Carrier Integrated Data Environment (CIDE)The CIDE (see Figure 4) activity includes planning to determine the data sets that need to be included in the overall architecture, designing and building the architecture to support analysis, deploying that environment to produce trade data and/or models to be used in the trade spaces activity, and reporting to management status of overall activity.The Planning sub-activity looks at the numerous models and databases that are available to the producer (in this case Newport News Shipyard – NNS) of the weapon system.  Based on the hypothesis and resultant scenario/experiment, a basis for CIDE design is determined.The Design & Build sub-activity builds the shared data environment that will allow trade data and/or models to be used by the trade spaces activity.  This shared data environment may be through existing interfaces or the CIDE activity may have to develop interfaces in order to share data appropriately.The Deploy sub-activity is when the CIDE is built and ready for use.  The resultant environment is used by the trade space activity and ultimately by the analysis activity in order to obtain data for trade studies and to develop the business case.The Reporting sub-activity will provide status to management as well as a historical log of performance and improvements within the overall activity.  It will provide the basis for the process improvement/QA activity.Joint Synthetic Battle Space (JSB)The JSB activity plans the necessary pieces and level of fidelity given the intended use (in this case, the data required for analysis to support trade studies), designs and builds that “battlespace”, provides for runtime services, and reports as required to management.  The significant output of the JSB activity is the necessary JSB Experimentation Data that is provide to the analysis activity (discussed below).  See Figure 5.The JSB is the operational Modeling and Simulation (M&S) environment that consists of:High-resolution physical and behavioral models integrated to represent an aircraft carrier weapons handling system and other carrier  “peer” sub-systems,The representation of an aircraft carrier that “hosts” the high resolution physical and behavioral models of the carrier’s weapons handling system and other “peer” sub-systems,Synthetic natural environment, and scenario,Mission planning for operational platforms including ships, aircraft, and ground entities,Experiment control to configure, initiate, execute, freeze, resume, checkpoint, and terminate the simulation;Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I) interfaces as appropriate for accessing mission planning information,Friendly and threat synthetic force simulations,Data collection and after action system including record, rewind, and playback functions,Network systems and interfaces, andComputational systems and peripherals.The Design & Build sub-activity involves a detailed knowledge acquisition/engineering process and determines in a collaborative environment the interactions with the CIDE and Analysis components (see appropriate sections).  Verification, Validation, and Accreditation are closely integrated into the entire plan/build/run sub-activities to provide the necessary credibility to management and ultimately to the warfighter.The Deploy JSB sub-activity will be the runtime execution of the JSB environment.  It allows for the necessary hardware, software, and operators to support the collection of experiment data that will be used for analysis.The Reporting sub-activity will provide on-going status to management and a history of process use and improvements.  It will also be provided as an input to the Process Improvement/QA activity for overall process assessment and improvement recommendations.Trade SpacesThe Trade Spaces activity, see Figure 6, plans the necessary attributes that will be require model or simulation support, designs and builds a trade space architecture that will be capable of providing trade space data to the analysis activity, and perform necessary reporting activities to management.  The output of the Planning sub-activity will provide the system with early insight into the availability of “cost” models necessary to provide trade space data for analysis.  Planning will include identification and definition of metrics for analysis (e.g. cost, performance) and specification of the nature and volume of trade data required for study.Design & Build of the trade space will identify and assess potential tools and techniques that will result in an environment which can be used both for the sample problem being addressed by WARCON Phase I and as a basis for future analyses of carrier design, systems, and operations.The Deploy sub-activity will execute the Trade Space models and provide the necessary trade space data to the Analysis activity.The Reporting sub-activity will provide status reports and presentations throughout the Trade Space IPT activities, and to provide summary reports at the completion of the WARCON test case.  This information will result in the creation of a program development and execution history that will be used to improve the processes utilized by WARCON analyses.AnalysisThe heart of the WARCON process is the Analysis activity (see Figure 7).  The analysis activity plans (with management input) the hypothesis of the WARCON analysis/experiment, designs the scenario/experiment to support this hypothesis, executes a trade study on the resulting data from the scenario/experiment, and provides management reporting.  The goal to a system like WARCON is to be able to provide to decision makers the necessary data that will enhance their capability to make sound acquisition decisions.The Planning sub-activity gets input from management, who in turn has received input from operational organizations (i.e., Navy Warfare Development Command, PEO Carriers, Fleet Commanders, etc.).  This input is then developed into an hypothesis that will be measurable.The Design Scenario & Experiment sub-activity takes the hypothesis and fleshes it out into a scenario that can be described by measures of performance (MOPs) and measures of effectiveness (MOEs).  The resultant experiment/scenario plan will feed the other M&S activities so they can be built to a level of detail necessary to support the analysis desired.The Execute Trade Study sub-activity knows what the measures are for analysis and receives data from the Trade Spaces activity and the JSB activity that allows it to perform analytical studies on the data.  The results are reports that show the trade study analysis and a business case report that answers the hypothesisThe Reporting sub-activity keeps management informed on status of the overall activity progress and provides a history of performance.  This reporting is also used by the Process Improvement/QA activity to analyze the overall WARCON process to develop recommendations for improvements.Process Improvement/QAThe Process Improvement/QA activity (see Figure 8) will establish an overall method for documenting and improving WARCON processes.  Sub-activities will include planning that will look at possible analytical methodologies to apply to the WARCON process, monitoring that will be provided via status reports and independent observations, analysis of the process through synthesis of reports and observations which will result in improvement recommendations, and status reporting on the process improvement/QA activity itself.  The result will be continuous improvements to the process during execution of WARCON.The Planning sub-activity shall look at defining processes and identifying customer requirements; defining measures; assessing conformance to customer requirements; and investigating processes to identify improvement opportunities.  Models applicable to a variety of industries with which to assess and improve WARCON processes and software development practices will be assessed.  The Monitoring sub-activity will examine vehicles for evaluating the effectiveness of the Carrier Integrated Data Environment (CIDE) for meeting the product modeling requirements of WARCON.  Industry reports, articles, and academic materials shall be scanned to determine ways to gauge Product Data Model (PDM) tool selection criteria, documenting pitfalls associated with PDM implementation, and evaluating the results of business operations after implementation.  It will also examine vehicles for evaluating the effectiveness of the synthetic environment for its ability to meet customer requirements.For those functional areas developing software, the QA IPT shall focus on the functional areas’ approach to software development through implementation of a quality management system of their design, evaluated against a recognized industry standard such as ISO 9001 or a set of practices like the Capability Maturity Model (CMM) selected as an A71 output.  Any standard selected will be appropriately tailored for the specific WARCON functional area, but sample elements include:FunctionISO ElementExample CMM Practice(s)Management Cognizance4.1 Management ResponsibilityCommitment to performSoftware project planningMeeting specification requirements4.4 Design ControlSoftware product engineeringControlling processes4.9 Process ControlSoftware quality assuranceContinuous improvement4.14 Corrective and Preventive ActionSoftware configuration managementThe Analyze Process sub-activity shall describe and document the WARCON process as implemented during execution, and compare that implementation to the ideal process portrayed in the initial WARCON IDEF0 model.  Deviations and lessons learned will be studied/ documented and process improvement recommendations made for future WARCON product analyses.  Statistical methods, qualitative judgments, and other means as appropriate will be used to accomplish the overall process analysis.The Reporting sub-activity will provide feedback in a more near real time method to management and to the other activities in order to maximize the efficiency to the WARCON process as early as possible.Current StatusWARCON has begun to execute the process described here.  It is too early to have generated significant feedback; however, the entire process went through two iterations before the “ideal” that is presented here.  Some progress is noted below.ProcessThe Management activity has developed a draft System Requirements Document (SRD) and a draft System/Subsystem Specification (SSS).  As the process has gone through some iterative changes, new (and more complete) documents will be coming out in July ’00.  The CEE activity has leveraged the existing TECNET/TECWEB system (run by DoD for the Test and Evaluation Community) as the web-based storage/search/retrieval system for the WARCON team.  The initial planning stages for the CIDE activities are just beginning.  The JSB activity has built some prototype simulations to test interfacing capabilities and data flow (see below).  In addition a draft VV&A plan has been written and some initial KA/E efforts have commenced.The more difficult activities of trade spaces and analysis have only begun their efforts.  An initial hypothesis and scenario recommendations have been made.  Significant accomplishments are expected in the June – July ’00 time frame for these activities.Finally, the Process Improvement/QA activity has begun an analysis of potential candidates for process improvement models.  The following are being considered: AT&T’s Process Quality Management & Improvement Guidelines; Part 3: Guidelines for the application of ISO 9001: 1994 to the development, supply installation and maintenance of computer software; Systems of Logic; and the Software Engineering Institute’s Capability Maturity Model for Software.PrototypeThe JSB activity has performed a prototype of the expected models that will be integrated in the joint synthetic battlespace.  These models are expected to be reused for the actual WARCON process.  They include two PROMODEL based simulations developed by Newport News Shipyard (NNS): a Flight Deck Operations model and a Carrier Weapons Handling System model.  These models, which are discrete event and non-High Level Architecture (HLA), were interfaced with JointSAF 5.0.  The basic analysis of data flow (see Figure 9) was completed for this prototype and surrogate ProModel models (used in place of the actual NNS models as they were not initially available for this prototype) successfully integrated and demonstrated in May ‘00.  See Figure 10.  The prototype effort is described in detail in reference [4].SummaryWARCON can be considered a test of the Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) goals.  However, of particular interest to the WARCON effort is the production of a final report describing a process for executing WARCON trade studies and business cases, that is, a means to conduct SBA not actually SBA itself.  This report will provide insight into how future analyses should be performed based on the results and lessons learned from the WARCON test case.  The report will include such information as the environment to be used, guidance on how tools from different acquisition and modeling disciplines should be integrated to provide more complete analyses, how rapid prototyping should be used to give insight into systems to be developed, and the methodology for performing trade studies and cost/benefit analysis.References[1]	“Warfighting Concepts to Future Weapon Systems Design (WARCON) System Requirements Document” Draft, September 1999[2]	“Integration Definition for Function Modeling (IDEF0)”, Processing Standards Publication 183, December 1993[3]	“A Roadmap for Simulation Based Acquisition”, Report of the Joint Simulation Based Acquisition Task Force, December 1998[4]	Roberts, Edward, Newton, Roy: “The WARCON JSB Testbed: A Case Study For Interoperability Of Disparate Simulation Architectures”, Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 00F-SIW-075, September 2000[5]	PROMODEL Web Site,  HYPERLINK "http://www.promodel.com/products/" http://www.promodel.com/products/, June 2000[6]	“High Level Architecture Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) Model”, DMSO, version 1.5, December 1999Author BiographiesBENJAMIN RILEY is a Senior Research Associate with Georgia Tech Research Institute and Program Director for WARCON.  He is assigned to the Office of Naval Research and is the Program Director for WARCON.  He is a retired active duty naval officer and P-3 anti-submarine aircraft tactical Coordinator, squadron commander, and wing commander.  Navy staff assignments included tours on the staffs of the Office of the Secretary of Defense and Chief of Naval Operations.  He has a Bachelor of Arts from the University of Virginia and Master of Arts from the Naval War College and Salve Regina University.LCDR DYLAN SCHMORROW, USN is serving at the Naval Research Laboratory as the Military Scientist for Modeling and Simulation Science and Technology and at the Office of Naval Research as the Program Officer and Deputy Director of WARCON in the Human Systems Department.  He manages and coordinates biomedical, cognitive and neural science, and modeling and simulation programs including development and implementation of R&D programs that result in rapid transition of NRL, ONR and DARPA science and technology to the Fleet.  He has a Ph.D. in Experimental Psychology from Western Michigan University and a M.S. in Modeling, Virtual Environments, and Simulation from the Naval Post Graduate School.EDWARD HARVEY is the President of BMH Associates, Inc., a Norfolk, VA simulation systems engineering and software development company.  He is the Systems Engineer for WARCON.  Mr. Harvey was a F-14A Radar Intercept Officer (RIO) in the active Navy and is a retired Navy Reserve officer.  He has a Bachelor of Chemical Engineering degree from Georgia Institute of Technology.GARY S. KOLLMORGEN is the Director of Operations with BMH Associates, Inc and assistant Systems Engineer and KA/E and VV&A IPT lead for WARCON.  He holds an MSEE and a B.S. in Operational Analysis.  He is a retired US Navy Helicopter Pilot with over 10 years program management experience and over 10 years collectively in the development and application of campaign level simulation.  He has an extensive background in U.S. Navy Operations which includes tours as a carrier Weapons Officer, amphibious assault ship Air Officer, and several helicopter detachment Officer-in-Charge.  Mr. Kollmorgen was the project manager responsible for establishing an authoritative representation of the Navy for Modeling and Simulation (M&S) applications through the Knowledge acquisition/Engineering (KA/E) process for the Joint Simulation System - Maritime.   “cost” is used as a catch-all term for all costs associated with a weapons platform (e.g. equipment costs, support/logistic costs, training costs, manpower cost, etc.). Trade Space Data is that data generated by “cost” models to support analysis.  An example would be the JSB component requires an increase in 10% manpower to handle a new weapon.  The Trade Spaces activity would have a model that would be capable of taking that increase in manpower and provide a “cost” figure (e.g. dollars/year) that would then be passed to the Analysis activity to support a particular business case/trade study.  PROMODEL is a discrete event modeling system.  Using PROMODEL tools, you can create a software replica, or ‘model’ of an existing or proposed system. This model gives you the ability to test different ‘what-if’ scenarios to quickly assess how process changes will impact your business. These models allow you to examine even the most complex systems with high levels of randomness and interdependence between the individual components of the system.[5] SBA Goals[3]: The goals of Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) are to:substantially reduce the time, resources, and risk associated with the entire acquisition processincrease the quality, military worth, and supportability of fielded systems while reducing total ownership costs throughout the total life cycleenable Integrated Product and Process Development (IPPD) across the entire acquisition life cycle.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2 WARCON Project Management ActivitiesFigure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 10 WARCON Prototype ArchitectureFigure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 9 Prototype data flow in WARCON JSB EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8   EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1 The WARCON IAE ComponentsFigure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3 WARCON CEE ActivitiesFigure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 4 WARCON CIDE ActivitiesFigure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 5 WARCON JSB ActivitiesFigure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 6 WARCON Trades Spaces ActivitiesFigure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 7 WARCON Analysis ActivitiesFigure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 8 WARCON Analysis Activities