Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements: Missions, Operations, and Tasks for JSEADMr. Jack GlasgowEditor, Marine Corps GazetteBox 1775Quantico, VA 22134800-336-0291 ext 307j.glasgow@mca-marines.orgMr. Bruce HarrisDynamics Research Corporation60 Frontage RoadAndover, MA 01810978-475-9090 ext. 1878 HYPERLINK "mailto:bharris@drc.com" bharris@drc.comKeywords:Conceptual Modeling, CMMS, Knowledge Acquisition, Mission RequirementsABSTRACT:  This is the first paper in a linked series of individual papers which detail how knowledge acquisition products are conceived, produced, and employed in the development of models and simulations. This paper describes the creation and employment of Universal Joint task List style tasks with associated conditions, measures and standards for a Joint Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses mission. Task list principles, formal doctrine, and operational planning considerations are presented. A detailed example is presented using the Mission requirements Phase within the Joint Training Information.See also:00F-SIW-137 “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements:  Task Organization and Equipment for JSEAD." by Mike Hopkins (CoTs), Mike Burke (DRC), Juan Paron (DRC), and Jim Murphy (DRC).00F-SIW-138 “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements:  Integration of Task and Forces into a JSEAD Mission using FDP-KAT." by Michael Loesekann (SAIC), Cynthia Tuttle (DRC), Lee Lacy (DRC), Wayne Randolph (DRC), and Mike Burke (DRC). 00F-SIW-139 “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements:  Integration of Tasks and Forces into a JSEAD Mission using DoD-Capture.” by Michael Loesekann (SAIC), Mike Hopkins (CoTs), James Plimpton (Vi-Tech), and Fran Dougherty (IMC).00F-SIW-140 “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements:  Cognitive Task Analysis for JSEAD Command and Control.” by LtCol Marvin (NAWC-TSD), Dr. Fowlkes (NAWC-TSD), Dr. Willis (DMSO), and Michael Loesekann (SAIC).00F-SIW-141 “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements:  Integration and Analysis of JSEAD Conceptual Models using the CMMS Model Library.” by Fran Dougherty (IMC), and Jack Sheehan (DMSO). 00F-SIW-142 “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements:  Exchange of Mission Space Models using the CMMS Data Interchange Format (DIF).” by Dr. Furman Haddix (ARL:UT), Corey Balon (IMC), Scott Lear (IMC), Cynthia Tuttle (DRC), and James Plimpton (Vi-Tech).00F-SIW-025 "Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements: Resolving Ambiguity the CMMS-DD Way." by Ron Smits (DRC) and Bruce Harris (DRC)1. IntroductionAs military training dollars shrink, the challenge becomes one of creating meaningful simulations to complement live exercises. The Joint and Service training communities have recently moved to task-based training as the standard way to train their forces. The logical way to gain the savings associated with simulations is to take the same front-end analysis used by the live training world, and to incorporate that analysis into the simulations themselves. An ideal example to illustrate this process is the Joint Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses (JSEAD). This mission is one that demonstrates the task analysis that is part and parcel of strategic and operational levels of warfighting, and provides an excellent beginning for entry into the Modeling &Simulation (M&S) arena. 2. BackgroundIn 1960 battalion commanders would take their battalions to the field for a month and train. While there, they could conduct individual, Military Occupational Specialty, and unit training. They could accomplish several levels of training simultaneously, to include the tactical exercising of his battle staff while integrating the training with higher level and adjacent unit staffs.The end of the Cold War and of large defense budgets necessarily placed constraints on commanders determining requirements for, and executing, their own unit’s training. Over the past 40 years op tempo of operating units increased as the total force shrank in size by 40%; key training areas (Okinawa, Vieques, Europe) have been eliminated or severely curtailed); and budgets for unit training and live fire exercises have been reduced. The result of all these factors has been a reliance on event-based training i.e., defense two days, offense three days, etc.3. The Emergence Of Formalized M&S ProgramsThe natural consequence of the CINCs' and Services' constrained live exercises, especially at the strategic and operational levels of war, is the explosion of modeling and simulation as a positive way to compensate for shrinking training resources.In 1991, the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) was formed by then Defense Secretary, Dick Cheney, to fill a significant training void. In 2000, DMSO is hard at work sponsoring research; supporting the creation of a series of models (Joint Simulation System - JSIMS, Warrior Simulation 2000-WARSIM, National Air and Space Model); creating software toolsets that connect the various simulations and, working with the J-7, Joint Staff, to connect the DMSO tools to the Joint Training Management Information System (JTIMS).Progress in M&S areas has provided a solution to one-half of the training imbalance. The other consisted of switching the entire DoD culture from event-based training to requirements-based training under the auspices of then Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Shalikashvili. In event-based training, there was no objective way to capture training effectiveness for an organization. Translating event-based training to “readiness,” a commander subjectively deemed his unit “ready” simply because they “participated” in “X” events over a “Y” period of time. It became exceedingly difficult to justify requests for increased training dollars when the status quo could not be effectively measured.Since the publication of the Universal Joint Task List (UJTL) 3.0 in September 1996, requirements-based training has been a growth industry in both the live training and simulation arenas. The keyFigure 1. Conceptual Model Development Workflowin this paradigm is isolating the “What”, or those missions that must be accomplished by an organization. The missions are comprised of operations, and the operations are comprised of tasks. The tasks are performed under a set of conditions to a particular standard set by the commander. When the tasks are performed, the effectiveness of the training can be measured objectively.In the balance of the paper, the authors address a combination of newly-developed, front-end analysis tools that facilitate the accurate determination of the “What,” on-going initiatives in the M&S arena that will greatly improve the KA process. The example "operation" used throughout will be the Joint Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses (JSEAD) mission. Figure 1 represents the M&S simulation development process. This paper concentrates on defining mission tasks to simulate e.g., the “What” of Step 1 in Figure 1.4. Universal Joint Task List  (UJTL)To determine the “What,” there must be a common language that is used by Joint and Service organizations so that all parties perform requirements analysis in the same manner. The UJTL and Service Tactical Task Lists (TTLs) provide that common language. The current version of the UJTL is CJCSM 3500.04B (UJTL 4.0), published 1 October 1999 (Figure 2). Levels of war, from strategic to tactical, delineate tasks.The Universal Naval Task List (UNTL), version 1.0 encompassing tasks for the Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard, is being updated with Version 2.0 projected for publication in the Fall of 2000. The Army Universal Task List (AUTL) is in draft form as of the summer of 2000, and the Air Force Task List, Version 1.1, is currently in use, and the Air Force has plans to update the AFTL sometime in CY 2000.All current task lists exist in the JTIMS database. Each of the task lists provides a complete definition of the tasks to be performed to include doctrinal references. In addition, the UJTL contains a list of 290 conditions and over 5500 measures of performance that allows the commander to do complete mission analysis and then evaluate his unit’s performance on a particular task.Figure 2. Universal Joint Task List (UJTL)5. Missions, Operations, Tasks ParadigmThe existence of a tasks/conditions/measures of performance database alone means little if there is no organized means of operating with the data. Within the Joint Training System, organizations determine the “What” by using the Missions, Operations, and Tasks paradigm (Figure 3).Figure 3. Mission Analysis ParadigmEach organization has a series of missions it must perform. These can be further decomposed into operations and tasks. Importantly, missions are contextual, and one organization’s mission could very well be a second organization’s operation, and a third organization’s task.6. JSEAD Operations TemplateThere are different ways to display the information gathered in the task analysis of a mission. A common way is to display the information in a template (graphic) view. Common template views are "temporal" (the time sequencing of tasks relative to one another), "informational" (by information requirements being displayed in an IDEF 0 depiction), "spatial" (depicting distance and space relationships in a mission, e.g., airspace in relation to ground in a mission, or geographical dispersion of units), and "causal" (the completions of tasks 1-N create the requirement for task N+1).Figure 4. JSEAD Temporal ViewThe temporal view for the JSEAD mission shows the emphasis on the strategic (ST) and operational (OP) levels of war (Figure 4).The development of operations templates generally follows three steps: (1) Conduct mission analysis, (2) Conduct doctrine analysis, and (3) Identify joint tasks. The mission analysis follows the standard prescribed process and format outlined in Joint Publication 3.0, Doctrine for Joint Operations, familiar to all military subject matter experts (SMEs). The doctrine analysis is essentially composed of a review of applicable doctrine -- in this case JP 3-01.4, JTTP for Joint Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses, JP 5-00.2, Joint Task Force Planning Guidance and Procedures, JP 3.0, Doctrine for Joint Operations, and identification of complementary operations at the ST and OP levels of war (i.e., Joint Interdiction).  As this paper focuses on "tasks" the discussion that follows will be of step 3, Identify joint tasks.The first sub-step in identifying joint tasks is to conduct a doctrine to task analysis. This is accomplished by reviewing joint doctrine for the selected operation type and identifying the tasks (from the UJTL) that must be performed.  One method for documenting the selection of tasks to be included in a template is a doctrine to task worksheet, in this case for JSEAD.  An example is shown in Figure 5.  Basically, the worksheet documents an analysis of the description of a type of military operation as found in joint doctrine. Doctrine citations are then cross-referenced to tasks in the Universal Joint Task List.The next sub-step is to divide the operations template into a "plans" phase and an "execution" phase and then group major tasks in each phase. This makes the next sub-step, preliminary sequencing, more manageable as the number of tasks that could be represented can be large. The next two sub-steps are the refinement of the tasks and sequences and the production of the generic template ST and OP level tasks are sequenced to reflect the normal occurrence of events (i.e., Evaluate and Interpret Theater Information precedes Conduct Joint Force Targeting.)The last sub-step is to adjust the operations template to meet special requirements.  For example, if one focuses on the role of special operations forces in JSEAD, tasks that emphasize special operations activities (raids, etc.) would be displayed in the template.Figure 5. All of the doctrine-based tasks combine to provide the “What” for JSEAD. These are the things that must be accomplished in every case in order for an organization to complete successfully the JSEAD mission. At this point, JSEAD is portrayed as a process, not directly tied to any organization. A JTF commander can plug and play the JSEAD mission and evaluate his organization on any or all of the tasks by incorporating the mission into a Joint Exercise Plans Phase of the Joint Training System (JTS), and evaluating the performance during the conduct of the exercise (Execution Phase of the JTS).Since tasks exist independently of organizations, the very same front-end analysis or requirements analysis that keys the JTS process in the live training world can be used in the M&S arena to achieve the same desired results when units may not be able to participate physically in major joint exercises.The challenge to the commander and trainer becomes one of time and resource management. If a commander is not able to plan and execute the training in a timely fashion, then the JTS becomes a burden and the likely result is regression back to event-based training. The answer clearly lays in the automation of the KA process in front end analysis, and overall automation of the entire JTS.7. The Evolution Of JTIMSThe Joint Training Information Management System is the newly named conversion of the old Joint Exercise Management Package (JEMP) III. JTIMS has one clear function and that is to automate all aspects of the JTS (Figure 6).As the predecessor of the current JTIMS, JEMP evolved from a DOS-based system (JEMP I), to a Windows-based system (JEMP II), to a CD-based system (JEMP III), which worked extremely well on stand-alone PCs and laptops. JEMP III, version 3.2 was distributed in October 1998. It was a sophisticated program that automated the Requirements and Plans phases of the JTS. The Mission Requirements Module (MRM) quickly became the premiere mission analysis tool. Figure 6. JTIMS Automates the JTSJEMP III MRM allowed complete mission analysis to include the assignment of conditions and standards to tasks, the inclusion of supporting and command-linked tasks, as well as the development of a Command’s Joint Mission Essential Task List (JMETL). As part of the mission analysis tool, the MRM contained a drawing tool that enabled the user to create temporal view, operations templates, such as that illustrated in Figure 4.The JEMP III Mission Plans Module (MPM) took the Command JMETL from the Requirements Phase and facilitated the building of a Joint Training Plan (JTP), the development of an exercise schedule and individual exercises, and contained a rudimentary deconfliction capability that enabled commanders to identify resource conflicts over time.The JEMP III CD proved to be extremely valuable to individual commands for performing mission analysis, creating METLs, and developing and deconflicting exercises. Its major drawback was that it was self-contained and had limited distributive capability. While the MRM was capable of importing and exporting files, the process was very cumbersome, and there was no way to do real-time planning with the tool linking superior and subordinate commands. In addition, there was no real way to link other automated tools to the JEMP CD.7.1 From JEMP III to JTIMSThe ultimate success and popularity of the JEMP III program led to its demise. The combination of technology advances and sheer demand for real-time distributed information led to the conversion of the JEMP III program to a web-based, client-server system.Figure 7. JTIMS Integrated DatabaseThe key to the new system is the integrated database (Figure 7). The value of the integrated database is that it is continually responsive to the automation in all four phases of the JTS. The Master Librarian can change it on the spot as new elements come on line, such as a new UJTL or updated Service TTL. The central location for the database is the Joint Digital Library at Joint Forces Command (JFCOM) in Norfolk, VA. Users can access published documents, such as a CINC’s Joint Training Plan (JTP). More importantly, for Major Commanders and their subordinates, the commands will have real time access to missions, METLs, etc., which will greatly facilitate the processes within the JTS. Figure 8. JTIMS Data Entry/EditAs of June 2000, the JTIMS is up and running, accessible from the SIPRNET. Initial Operational Capability was March 31, 2000 and both the Requirements and Plans Phases are operational. The Mission Execution and the Mission Assessment are under development with Full Operational Capability scheduled for the late fall of 2000.8. JSEAD on JTIMSJTIMS is organized by a series of different functionalities that can be accessed from the JTIMS Home Page. The primary function for mission analysis, JMETL development, and JTP and exercise development is the "Data Entry/Edit" function (Figure 8).Within the Data Entry/Edit function, the user can select “Missions” and now has the ability to build JSEAD as a mission, or select it as an operation within a mission, calling up an “Operations Template” from the JTIMS database (Figure 9).Figure 9. JTIMS JSEAD MissionIn the JSEAD mission, there are 19 tasks. By highlighting one of the tasks (ST 1.3.3, Synchronize Forcible Entry in Theater), JTIMS allows the assignment of conditions (Coalition Members) (Figure 10) and standards to a task (Percent of the joint operations area infrastructure supports introduction of follow-on forces) (Figure 11).By completing the mission analysis in the Data Entry/Edit functionality of JTIMS, the user can accurately portray the “What” or those key tasks that must be accomplished; the conditions under which each task must be accomplished; and to the standard the commander sets for the completion of each task.Figure 10. JSEAD Task ConditionsFigure 11. JSEAD Task StandardsThe JSEAD mission is now incorporated into the JTIMS and available for M&S purposes. The SME has completed Step 1 of Figure 1 and is ready for Step 2, identifying the forces that perform the tasks. An explanation of this step and the tools available to assist the simulation developer are addressed in the next paper in the series on "Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements." 9. SummaryIn the foregoing discussion, emphasis was placed on the development of the UJTL, the evolution of JTIMS, and the use of the Mission Requirements component of the system to identify the tasks, conditions, measures and standards for a Joint Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses mission. The existence of the integrated database makes that system the prime vehicle in linking to the simulation development process. The subject matter expert is able to complete the defining of mission tasks to be simulated with confidence that his work is grounded in formal doctrine, adheres to UJTL principles and is fully compatible with the JTIMS.10. ReferencesCJCS 3401A. CJCS Guide to the Chairman’s Readiness system, 31 July 1997CJCSM 3500.03, Joint Training Manual (Coordinating Draft), July 1999CJCSM 3500.04B. Universal Joint Task List, 1 October 1999CJCSI 3137.01A, The Joint Warfighting Capabilities Assessment Process, 22 January 1999CJCSI 3150.25, Joint After Action Reporting System. 25 August 1997CJCSI 3170.01, The Requirements Generation System, 13 June 1997CJCSI 3401.02, Global Status of Resources and Training System, 20 October 1997CJCSI 3500.01A, Joint Training Policy for the Armed Forces of the United States, 1 July 1997CJCSI 3500.02B, Joint Training Master Plan 2000 for the Armed Forces of the United States, 1 May 1998OPNAVINST 3500.38/MCO 3500.26/ USCG COMDTINST M3500.1, Universal Naval Task List, 30 September 1996AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIESMR. JACK GLASGOW is currently the Editor of the Marine Corps Gazette in Quantico, Virginia. Prior to that he was the Program Manager for Joint and Service Programs for Dynamics Research Corporation in Andover, MA. He has an extensive background in operations, planning, and training and education based on a career in the Marine Corps; and has provided the operator’s view in design and development of the JTIMS software. MR. BRUCE HARRIS is the Director of the Training and Performance Analysis Department for Dynamics Research Corporation. He is also the Program Manager for Data Engineering projects with the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO). He has an extensive background in operations, planning, training and education, based on a career in the Army; and provides an operator’s perspective in the management of numerous modeling and simulation projects with DMSO. PAGE  PAGE  11