Improved Situation Awareness and Combat Training For USAF C2 UnitsMichael R. OakesMark ChecchioDerek BryanJerry BogedainAndy BaldwinBMH Associates, Inc.(757) 857-5670, ext 249 HYPERLINK "mailto:moakes@bmh.com" moakes@bmh.com,  HYPERLINK "mailto:checchio@bmh.com" checchio@bmh.com,  HYPERLINK "mailto:dbryan@bmh.com" dbryan@bmh.com,  HYPERLINK "mailto:jbog@bmh.com" jbog@bmh.com,  HYPERLINK "mailto:baldwin@bmh.com" baldwin@bmh.com Keywords:HLA, Distributed Mission Training, DIS, Modeling and Simulation, DMT, JSAF, Modular Control Element, GTACS, Command and Control, C2, MCE, Weapons Director (WD)ABSTRACT:	Pilot and aircrew training enhancements within the Air Combat Command (ACC) Distributed Mission Training (DMT) Program have made great advances in distributed learning opportunities.  These aircrew-training improvements still need refining to go beyond basic unit-level training events especially to include the command and control (C2) arena.  C2 was not part of the original baseline due to competing funds and an inability to interface with systems which were not DIS, or HLA compliant.  Technology is changing and methods to deliver simulation to the many facets of the C2 architecture are available, affordable and robust.  It is these considerations which has driven the USAF, USN and the US Joint Forces Command (USJFCOM) to invest in the simulation drivers capable of providing the necessary stimulus to enhance combat training for the command and control components whether at the unit level or in a theater-level mission rehearsal.  Joint Semi-Automated Forces (JSAF) Simulation as a government-owned simulation system based on the DARPA Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) development provides the necessary backbone to a scalable, entity-level simulation to meet the diverse C2 needs.  JSAF’s open architecture object-based models is adaptable to each and every facet of the C2 Weapon System.  JSAF can populate the Common Operational Picture (COP) for enhancing the coup d’oeil for the Operational Art of Warfare or be used for the X versus X entry-level mission-ready intercept training for weapons directors in an AWACS or a MCE.  JSAF is written with Linux and is capable of interfacing with other open source software (OSS) and multiple OS file-sharing tools to enhance performance in after-action review and training analysis.There are many changes in Modeling and Simulation (M&S) these days however, none are more innovative than taking simulation to the customer in the field.  Fleet Battle Experiments (FBE) does just that in an affordable manner and now the military is taking advantage of M&S advances in affordable computer processing and visualization techniques.  Currently, the Navy Warfare Development Center (NWDC) FBE program is in full gear, working directly with the numbered fleet commanders to test current and future warfighting concepts, technology, and doctrine for the navy in the field.  The USAF has furthered its training simulation for aircrew training in DMT and has now embarked on prototyping and bedding down various solutions to C2 training using JSAF in order to improving C2 Weapon Systems Situation Awareness with advanced distributed simulation training.This paper describes the undergoing and proposed methods to enhance training for the various areas of the C2 Weapon System.  It will discuss the current C2 architecture and areas where training and experimentation is being enhanced using JSAF simulation for the USAF, USN and JFCOM.  Whether it’s a Weapons Controller or a duty officer in an Air Operation Center, training is available.  JSAF is one of the available training aids adapting and growing.  It is certainly an important development continuing to gain mainstream acceptance and these developments deserve attention as they continue to grow in importance and impact.  1.	IntroductionGeorge Orwell said "We sleep safely in our beds because rough men stand ready in the night to visit violence on those who would harm us."  The Command and Control (C2) System is what directs that violence.  Command and Control is not a new concept to warfighters.  In fact, an easy argument would be that command and control has been the one constant since the wars of antiquity through present day combat.  What has changed in the C2 arena is the technology that supports C2 concepts.  In fact, it is this very technological explosion that is helping to drive today’s emphasis on C2.  For all intents and purposes, command and control goes beyond directing fielded forces, it includes the sensors and processing necessary to prosecute warfare.  C2 has evolved into a more widespread terminology of C2ISR and includes many disciplines: command and control, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance.  While all of these disciplines fall under the broad C2 umbrella, this paper will attempt to show where simulation is able to enhance training applications at the unit and theater levels to increase experience levels for individual combatants, staffs, and commanders as they employ this newest weapon system to its fullest potential.  It will still be important to mention the ISR potentials and relationships since they are integral to C2 decision cycles.1.1	Revolution in Military AffairsThe U.S. Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA) was designed to seek out new technology to transform the way military units can wage war – did it miss simulation technology?  The commercial information technology explosion is transforming how businesses work.  It is this same explosion that provides the military the ability to evaluate (and define) the mission, discover what the “enemy” is doing and most importantly use the information technology is the ISR arena to mask your intentions and discover your and his vulnerabilities.  Coupled with real-time direction and accurate information, soldiers, sailors and airmen can prosecute warfare with precision and increased lethality.From the beginnings of warfare until communications were improved (horseback and stirrups, telescope, semaphore flags, heliograph, telegraph, radios, etc.) a commander could only influence a battle based on what he could see and what he knew of the enemy disposition.  While simplistic typically, armies bumped into each other and fought.  The advent of improved communications and sensors greatly expands the horizons for a commander and his forces.  Today’s commander can truly be omniscient if he can train his operators to provide accurate and timely information while avoiding giving information to the enemy.  The warfighting environment demands Joint Operations due to a reduced military force and the demand to increase efficiencies in all domains.  But are we Joint or not?  Have we progressed beyond the limitations identified during the Grenada Invasion?  The authors do not intend to be revisionists and leave that chore to the historians; however, many could argue that DESERT STORM was a Joint Operation in name, not interactions.  Airspace and geography was divided into areas of responsibility.  Shorelines help delineate division between USAF and USN engagement areas.  If it is true, then why?  Most likely the divisions were based on the same lessons learned in Grenada and the inability to have a common C2 infrastructure as well as the physical distance needed to cover some target areas.  Computer and information technology provides the military with the opportunity to transform operations from service protective to truly Joint; that is the beauty of the REVOLUTION.  It is an RMA covering integrated areas focused on battlespace awareness, C2ISR, and precision attack.  1.2	Command and ControlThe mystery of command and control seems to stem from an understanding and perspective from individual commanders and the capabilities (and yes, Virginia the limitations too) of the entire C2 process.  The best recipe to produce superior military leaders, staffs and unit combatants still has three basic ingredients: training, experience and education.  Education comes from a variety of areas including formalized training.  The formal training and day-to-day proficiency makes up the bulk of non-combat experience.  Certainly, each of these areas overlaps and it is easy to see that they cannot be mutually exclusive.  In fact they all drive the goal to provide multitudes of situational experiences to develop warfighting skills.  Experience develops maturity through constant testing and evaluation.  With the advances in computer technology, modeling and simulation (M&S) and its ability to provide multiple events in a given time period to reinforce skill training can improve experience.  Mastering one's weapon system is only one part of the equation for survival in battle.  Warriors today must counter a sophisticated threat also capable of processing enormous amounts of information for targeting them.  USAF training has entered an exciting phase where virtual and live can be combined with constructive simulation.  Distributive Mission Training (DMT) is simply the newest simulation capability adopted by the Air Force and is already under review by the Navy.  DMT's wide applications for U.S. Armed Services and nationalities cover areas from unit to theater level mission team training.  Though the USAF beddown focuses initially on fighter and C2 platforms, its applications touch all warfare disciplines including service component combat planners, intelligence specialists, and those responsible for operational level warfare execution.  All quarters will benefit from the added flexibility and realism DMT will provide.  It is the interaction among numerous participants worldwide which makes this an exciting training prospect.  Networking manned cockpits worldwide and providing the necessary connectivity for reporting up and down the chain of command takes training to a new level.  No longer is it just the excitement of putting manned simulators in “life-threatening” situations, but networking with the individuals who put them in these situations and extend the playing field to theater mission rehearsals is a great benefit.  Users (i.e. commanders) do not tend to be good students.  However, when pressed to the task they do rise to the occasion based on their experience and grasp of the assets available to them.  The rise to the occasion does not necessarily come from reviewing mounds of textbooks describing each sensor or communication device, nor does it occur from the volumes of after-action reviews, it comes from battlefield experience.  The additional study materials provide information on what to expect and pitfalls, it does not replace “doing”.  It is during unit training, exercises and even experimentation events that today’s warfighters as well as current and future commanders really learn about C2ISR and how to use it effectively.  It is precisely the cross cut of various disciplines and organizations that make the task for difficult.  The DMT networking provides the forum to build better understanding and team training among the varying combat disciplines.  This paper describes the various technology applications in use now and under development to provide the C2 community the necessary training devices to increase synergy and efficiency while prosecuting warfare.  These advances in simulation technology provide the necessary means for the military to complete the RMA not only in the weapons delivery, but also in the day in and day out training environments needed to hone warfighter skills.2.	The C2 Weapon SystemDEMAND FOR INFORMATION WILL ALWAYS EXCEED CAPACITY in the C2 Arena.  C2 involves the complex collection of functions and systems a commander draws on to make decisions and evaluate how they are executed.  So where is the line drawn as to providing training and experience?  Is it with the individual commander and his thought processes?  How about the sensor array and fusion capabilities from the intelligence community? Or better yet the computer processing and communication devices to send up-to-date data to the field to execute the commander’s intentions.  Most likely it is ALL or these components.  Training must include every aspect individually and collectively in a careful building block approach.  DMT does provide the framework for this very type of training.It is the insatiable demand for information that can delay decision-makers issuing orders.  Controlling the battlespace from the rear demands up to the minute information.  The Vietnam experience had some commanders fly over the battlefields in a helicopter and provide “vision” to the troops who were countering fire, avoiding booby-traps and hunting snipers to proceed along a charted course from above.  The commander overhead was unable to “see” the entire problem.  For the air war, targets and the subsequent BDA was conducted from the White House and was incapable of responding to a changing battlespace proving an ineffective way to apply airpower.  For DESERT STORM, a more consolidated C2 structure was used with the theater commanders designating target lists and executing the air and ground campaign.  Still, visualization of the battlespace prior to executing and Air Tasking Order (ATO) was not possible.  Tactical C2 was still reactive and was highlighted during the SCUD Hunting missions.  Providing sensor-to-shooter information on Time Critical Targets was only an idea.The Kosovo experience in Operation ALLIED FORCE provided the US Military (primarily the USAF) a new exposure to coalition operations and a need to beef up the C2 warfighters arm.  Many of the problems during the initial phases centered about security classifications with NATO members and determining airspace control means to safely maneuver hundreds of aircraft in a small airspace.  Maintaining fighters on-station for extended periods to attack mobile targets with little ground C2 involvement to locate targets relied on JSTARS and other assets to alert and vector aircraft.  On the outside seems as if these procedures would have been perfected since DESERT STORM, but in actuality, no integrated C2 and fighter/attack training exists unless in a large theater exercise or RED FLAG event.Still one of the best examples of superior C2 and new technology was Air Marshal Hugh Dowding’s use of Radar and C2 during the Battle of Britain.  Out gunned in numbers and technology, the careful integration of these new British Radar “eyes” enabled the RAF to concentrate forces at the right time and place to overcome the odds.  Had Hitler and Goerring spent more time trying to put these “eyes” out rather than attack London, the outcome would have been quite different.  These examples serve a basic point that the C2 Weapon System is only as good as its weakest link.  In fact the technology can be counterproductive if the imperfect nature of the humans using it are not taken into account.  The imperfections can be reduced through team training.  In fact the USAF Distributed Mission Training (DMT) Program stresses team training in all of their supporting documentation.  However, despite its importance, C2 traditionally has been slighted by Defense planners more concerned with individual weapons platforms than the means to orchestrate them.  This slighting includes training.  Though Gen Hawley’s vision and challenge for DMT was to have a “ . . .fair fight with sweaty, smiling pilots emerging from the simulator cockpits. . .” he failed to consider the C2 aspect of team training.  Perhaps C2 was viewed as a side show compared to the complexity of pilot/aircrew training.  C2 is a term that is both a verb and a noun.  It is what a commander does and it is a process that supports his orders/actions.  The command function is strategic and big picture of coup d’oeil.  The control is the relationship with the instruments of war, the weapons and their related platforms associated with the operational or tactical level.  To really practice the art of war in team training demands it connectivity to C2 and its related cousin, ISR.  C2ISR is all about a decision cycle.  If a commander can disrupt his enemies cycle and force him to react instead of act, then his C2 weapon is more capable.  With my apologies to Gen Nathaniel Bedford Forrest, . . . . who ever gets there with the mostest (C2ISR) the fastest (Correctly processes and distributes within the decision cycle) will win.  Stated more simply, whoever has the faster decision cycle and can implement changes first will have a more decisive advantage.  Doesn’t necessarily mean the best or sexiest widget, just ask Gen Custer or even Goliath.  It is not always just the technological side of the game though that appears to be the American way of warfare.  It still boils down to know how and when to use the technology mixed with solid teamwork.Only recently has the USAF elected to pursue a course to include C2 in the DMT architecture.  Though the DMT-C2 is in its earliest stages, it is scheduled to demonstrate its prototype where training courseware and constructive simulation interact with the same program allowing for a greater capability to train the many elements within the C2 System.  Since the DoD directive that any simulations that have not achieved, or are in the process of achieving compliance with the High Level Architecture (HLA) by the first day of fiscal year 1999 shall cease further development or modification.  In addition, any non-compliant simulations by the first day of fiscal year 2001 shall be retired.  The simulation driver for the DMT-C2 Program is the Joint Semi-Autonomous Forces (JSAF) Technologies that grew from the Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) Program.  The JSAF battlespace provides an HLA environment for networking the DMT virtual cockpits, constructive simulation and live C2ISR fielded equipment.  JSAF is currently the only demonstrated large-scale HLA simulation using both large aggregates (for visualization) and entity resolution (for interaction arbitration).  JSAF’s distributive entity-level simulation using HLA compliant Runtime Infrastructure (RTI) exceeds 40,000+ entities.  New JSAF models have been to the inventory to include C2 entities for GTACS Radars, AOC facilities, as well as capabilities to expand to cover the various positions in the C2 System.  The JSAF HLA environment provides a common “boiler-plate” to support reuse and simulation inter-operation.  The common JSAF architecture allows all users to tie-in for a greater interaction among federates that meet the rules established in the HLA baseline definitions for both time management and data distribution management.  This requirement is not impossible, but it can be time consuming.  However, for the DMT-C2 integration, more time is spent on integrating courseware and intelligent tutors.JSAF has connected to numerous DIS Compliant systems including the Pentagon's Theater Battle Arena (TBA) simulators and live C2 play during the Fleet Battle Experiment (FBE) ECHO, FOXTROT, GOLF and HOTEL.  The TBA simulator network was connected in an hour and provided STOW HLA constructive simulation to their various fighter and C2 simulators.Simulations range in capabilities from honing individual and team tactical skills to conducting warfare at the operational level.  It is the resolution of these simulations that provide the benefit to reinforce learning outcomes.  There is little use to conduct an exercise that is not quantifiable in meeting objectives.  Some simulations leave the outcomes to the chance by rolling dice.  However, scaleable battles with entity-on-entity resolution coupled with high-fidelity battlespace provide the best methodology for positive learning reinforcement and is a prerequisite for C2 training at all levels.The scalability debate drives discussions revolving around a modeling and simulation systems ability to meet the users requirements.  JSAF was built with entity level resolution as its foundation.  Its ability to scale up to large theater scenarios and still maintain entity level resolution is a major advantage over current (and even future) M&S systems.  JSAF is the perfect entity-level joint battlespace for DMT and a perfect augmentation to supplement the JSIMS and NASM aggregate only resolution capability.3.	JSAF C2 Applications3.1	AWACS, GTACS and ATC ElementsThe primary focus area for the C2 arena would be the Weapons Director, Surveillance, and Mission Commander Personnel with the AWACS and GTACS personnel.  These individual have the most interaction with the fighter and bomber crews and will gain the most payback from integrated team training.  C2 JSAF interactions are based upon live voice control with constructive entities for training weapons directors (WDs) as well as the ability to train other C2 platforms such as the E-8 JSTARS, ABCCC and EC-135 Rivet Joint.  The initial DMT-C2 program focuses on the WDs for GTACS.  A very basic decision is whether to take the simulation directly to the real-world radar scopes of build a separate training system for WD training.  The DMT mandate has always been to provide simulation to real-world equipment in order to train like you’ll fight.  Preliminary discussions to interface JSAF with the GTACS Modular Control Elements (MCEs) were completed and produced the early plans for this type of integration.  At this time, DMT-C2 efforts have been focused on the prototype system to use JSAF simulation with training courseware on a separate PC workstation.  For an environment to be successful in a combat training arena such as DMT, it must be interactive with the sensors, combatants and the weapons as they affect the battlespace.  Battlestaffs and tactical units training for combat need real-time interactions.  The C2 decision cycle that interacts with the "sensors and shooters" drives the need for live interactions with real-world C2ISR systems.  Eventually, these different approaches will merge again.  The interface to the real-world equipment can be accomplished at any point into the design without an impact to training.3.2	Battle Force Tactical TrainerRapid Prototyping and the use of Human Computer Interfaces (HCI) with JSAF were accomplished during the Battle Force Tactical Trainer (BFTT) Air Management Node (AMN) Program.  BFTT-AMN was designed to use JSAF as the simulation driver and use GUIs to provide on-board training for LHD carrier Air Traffic and Air Intercept Controllers.  The AMN allows ATC personnel to maintain proficiency by practicing departure and recovery procedures to launch, land and control aircraft operating from a ship.  AMN reduces manpower and travel requirements for controllers to remain on-board ship to conduct training using their real-world equipment pier-side or while underway.  AMN also allows junior controllers to practice procedures without placing aircraft or the ship at risk.  (Petersen)  The BFTT AMN program included the end-user throughout the development to provide insight for training requirements as well as the validation for JSAF simulation changes.  It is now an integral part of the BFTT system providing fielded operational ATC and limited AIC training for CV and LHA/LHD ships.  3.3	Communication with Constructive AgentsThe JSAF program has two basic methods to dynamically control constructive agents.  One uses a GUI based approach with the Artificial Intelligent (AI) Soar agents.  The other approach and more applicable to training Weapons Directors (WDs) and Forward Air Controllers (FACs) is SoarSpeak.  SoarSpeak uses natural voice recognition and speech generation to direct and interact with synthetic entities controlled by the TacAir-Soar behavior system. This allows such synthetic entities to maintain autonomy, flexibility and realism. Rather than requiring a system operator to manually intervene to change an entity's behavior, SoarSpeak allows relatively untrained users to re-task aircraft through voice directives. SoarSpeak provides zero latency, interactive voice communication with TacAir-Soar entities over computer data networks. It uses commercial off-the-shelf technology with advanced state-of-the-art continuous speech recognition and generation and runs on minimal hardware configurations under Windows 95, 98, and NT. It has been tailored to understand military aviation communications.  SoarSpeak can control any TacAir-Soar controlled aircraft on any mission. It allows these synthetic entities to respond to commands through voice directives. It also allows these synthetic entities to respond with speech. As with conventional radios, a single user can talk with multiple TacAir-Soar entities and hear the responses from these entities in understandable English tailored to the military aviation domain. SoarSpeak has an extensible grammar that can be tailored to specific applications and changed dynamically. For example, new call signs can be added on the fly. SoarSpeak provides a natural facility for training weapons directors to manage the behavior of synthetic forces.   It has been used as the interface to allow a remote AWACS to control aircraft in large, theater-wide exercises. It also has been used to allow a pilot to speak with a synthetic wingman during air-to-air combat missions. Work is on going with the Navy to allow trainees to direct aircraft on carrier launch, marshalling, and approach for both fixed and rotary wing aircraft. SoarSpeak features a simple user interface for grammar setup and speech connection.  SoarSpeak connects to any existing TacAir-Soar entity. From there messages may be sent over simulated radios to any entity in the simulation including other human participants. Encoding exists for both English and Command and Control Simulation Interface Language (CCSIL) forms of the messages. The bottom line is to exercise control that is a natural part of the training process. Rather than relying on trained operators to manage synthetic entities, the entities are retasked with the same radio directives used to control a human participant.  SoarSpeak provides realistic training with constructive simulation and reduces operations costs by eliminating requirements for added manpower and equipment to conduct intercept training.Behavior consistent with the real world must include the elements of the environmental space in which the behavior would be exhibited.  The environment needs to be modeled in as much detail as the sensors we want to use is.  STOW is capable of networking real-world sensors and have their capabilities affected by the weather, tidal and diurnal variables.  This environment sets the stage for building interactive threat surroundings to support DMT team training.3.4	Constructive Weapons ControllersA further application for C2 Simulation and DMT integration is the potential use of constructive WDs.  The jump from constructive AI agents executing missions to controlling them does introduce additional technical challenges.  The Synthetic AWACS Weapons Director (SAWD) demonstrated during COYOTE98 provided a first look at this particular technology.  JSAF was the simulation driver and allowed SAWD to interact with the constructive agents during simulation execution.  SAWD receives battle information through it radar model that processes the network representations of Blue and OPFOR entities.  From this representation, SAWD creates its perceived world and provides anticipated pairing information for the Blue forces.  (Kwak)While it does not help team training in the DMT program, the SAWD concept opens up a few new possibilities for both reducing manpower and providing a system to assist test and evaluation for C2 processes.  4.	Open Source Software UseIntegrating multiple systems sometimes requires you to take a step back to find the most efficient method to allow systems to interact.  In simulation, it becomes more pronounced as live and virtual systems are included.  The modular nature of JSAF allows for a seamless integration for constructive virtual and live C2 assets.  Even with that being said, sharing databases in the DMT-C2 program required a look at robust open source software capable of integrating multiple applications and databases regardless of operating systems.For twenty years it has been building momentum in the technical cultures that built the Internet and the World Wide Web.  Now it's breaking out into the commercial world, and that's changing all the rules.  Open Source Software (OSS) is a development process which promotes rapid creation and deployment of incremental features and bug fixes in an existing code / knowledge base. In recent years, corresponding to the growth of Internet, OSS projects have acquired the depth & complexity traditionally associated with commercial projects such as Operating Systems and mission critical servers.Developers to meet requirements of several current and potential JSAF users ranging from military, NASA, and civilian industry leaders have pursued the use of Open Source Software.  Open Source Software provides a robust capability and open public-domain architecture that can be modified in a separate development tree for configuration management or reapplied back to the public domain.  There have been a few areas JSAF has pursued in order to answer user question/concerns revolving around multi-platform and Operating Systems to either display the JSAF running in an experiment for display or for collecting and processing after-action review data.4.1	VNC VNC stands for Virtual Network Computing. It is, in essence, a remote display system which allows you to view a computing 'desktop' environment not only on the machine where it is running, but from anywhere on the Internet and from a wide variety of machine architectures.  VNC consists of two types of component: 1) A server, which generates a display, and  2) A viewer, which actually draws the display on your screen.  There are two important features of VNC: The server and the viewer may be on different machines and on different architectures.  The most common use to be the display of a Unix X desktop on a PC, for example.  The protocol that connects the server and viewer is simple, open, and platform-independent. No state is stored at the viewer. Breaking the viewer's connection to the server and then reconnecting will not result in any loss of data.  Because the connection can be remade from somewhere else, there is easy mobility. To get started with VNC you need to run a server, and then connect to it with a viewer.  The current VNC software requires a TCP/IP connection between the server and the viewer, though there is no reason why the software couldn't be modified to use, for example, RS232 or Firewire.  4.2	SAMBA Samba is an open source software suite that provides seamless file and print services to SMB/CIFS clients.  SAMBA allows JSAF to feed after-action review (AAR) data to windows applications or in-reverse post windows data on LINUX platforms.  4.3	MOTIF For GUI development, MOTIF provides the standard user interface toolkit on UNIX systems. Enterprises worldwide have invested billions of dollars in custom developed, mission critical applications that use Motif to present their user interface. The cost of changing is not only the cost of reprogramming to a different user interface tool kit; it is also the cost of re-training thousands of employees and customers because the user-interface toolkits vary in many subtle ways. In short, if an Enterprise is going to switch platforms and user interfaces, it will consider the costs of all options, including porting to NT too. Just because their applications are UNIX based, and Linux shares the UNIX APIs, there is no reason to assume that these applications are going naturally flow to LINUX if there is any significant reprogramming required.With each new technological advance it seems to take a long time to overcome the lethargy set up due to habit patterns and the methodologies of “old” systems.  This inertia must be overcome before new methods are embraced and employed.  This adage applies to new software applications in simulation training.  OSS is robust since numerous developers have the opportunity to accomplish intense peer review (and adapt) the programs.  Its biggest advantage is the source code availability to track, analyze and troubleshoot software execution during integration.  The acceptance in M&S centers will occur with the anticipated and currently demonstrated performance.5.	C2 Operational and Theater Level TrainingToday’s military spends more time deployed in contingency operations with fewer units at reduced manning levels.  To plus up deployed units to cover all of the contingencies continue to drain in-garrison upgrade and proficiency training.  The advent of distributed training allows C2 personnel an avenue for significant training without more time away from home and reduced manpower requirements.Embracing the DMT program allows C2 personnel to use technology to gain leadership skills and experience.  WDs, Ground FACs, and leaders can plan missions, make decisions and lead or participate in post-mission analyses to improve their weapon system proficiency while gaining insight to other weapons platforms during team training.  The C2 Ground Theater Air Control System (GTACS) is a subset of the TACS, conducting battlefield management at the tactical level.  Recent contingency operations have highlighted deficiencies in training TACS personnel.  Despite current training programs and operational training exercises (Blue/Red Flag, Roving Sands, etc.), there is no single training system solution that addresses a uniform approach for training C2 warriors “top to bottom.”  The DMT program attempts to address this issue by providing aircrew (DMT-A) and C2 systems (DMT-C2) a simulated environment to conduct individual, team and inter-team skill training.  To date, program milestones, technical solutions or requirements for interoperability between these two programs have not been merged.  The DMT-C2 Program is initially focused on the GTACS Air Control Squadron (ACS), Air Support Operations Center (ASOC), and Tactical Air Control Party (TACP).  AF/XOC is the agency responsible for the AF DMT program and has established an Implementation and Technology Strategy (ITS) document with inputs from each user domain.  AF/XOC’s goal is to provide a simulated environment or AF Synthetic Battlespace (AFSB) to meet operator requirements of mission rehearsal across all domains.  The Air Control Squadrons (ACS) modernization plans are to reduce the number and size of ACSs.  Work is in progress to allow units to train from home station at the individual, team and inter-team level on a standardized training system with interactive and dynamic simulation capabilities.  The key to this training system is voice recognition computer generated forces so that real world forces and their platforms are not required.  The ASOC and TACP are elements within the GTACS that primarily provide the Army commander with air power expertise.  The TACP also conducts terminal air control and provides bomb damage assessment (BDA) where possible.  The key technology for their training system is also voice recognition and visual representation of the resultant battlefield showing mission effects.  JSAF provides both the methods for voice recognition with constructive agents and BDA.  Still in these early years of distributed simulation, people are jumping on the bandwagon to create intelligent machines and methods to reduce live training and replace it with computer training.  So is Clausewitz Out and computers IN?  Not hardly.  It is always important to note that simulation training augments live training and provides methods to increase proficiency.JSAF modeling efforts are still directed using programming skills to characterize behaviors in a representative wartime environment with a solid understanding on the conduct and art of warfare beginning with the initial stages of the Knowledge Acquisition Engineering (KAE) process.5.1 JSAF Behavioral FidelityJSAF cognitive models perform autonomously and conform to their particular tactical doctrine.  The need for cognitive models for DMT-C2 and developed along side DMT-A aircraft simulation provides the necessary link for voice recognition capabilities in both programs.  Cognitive threat models and adaptable defenses are used to counter not only manned cockpits, but provide an array of capabilities to C2ISR units/nodes and other training centers.  These cognitive agents allow training to be stepped-up once proficiency is established and become reactive and NOT predictive.  The “thinking” models reduce manpower levels required for executing exercise simulations, but some capability should exist to allow for man-in-the-loop threats.  With intelligent agents running on the PCs, it is still beneficial to have manned cockpits available as “smart” bandits.  Knowledge acquisition engineering (KAE) for combat tactics is not at the point where it can replace a manned cockpit and the experience that comes with it.  M&S systems using cognitive agents that adapt to battlefield dynamics is a great laboratory to gain experience in combat operations and the synergy of using wartime sensors in a synthetic battlespace adds to the experience levels.  One of the greatest values of artificial intelligence (AI) cognitive models to intelligence staffs is their "adaptability to the battles.  This cognition combined with voice recognition gives the DMT program a great leg up over any previous C2 training capability.  Understanding the battlespace and enemy reactions increases knowledge and the ability to assess risks in combat environments.  Sometimes, it is the unpredictability of an enemy that creates the fog of war and complexity changes with scale.  Careful analysis from intelligence staffs using real-world sensors interfaced with the M&S battlespace provides an environment to observe, learn and gain experience from repeated exercises and attacks.  5.2	Out-the-Window VisualsDemonstrated technology at the Air Force Research Lab (AFRL) in Mesa, AZ for PC-Based visuals may provide a unique capability for TACP training for DMT-C2.  Combining the ability for a controller to “talk” to a synthetic flight operating on a CAS mission and “see” the aircraft he is controlling far exceeds any capability currently available.  AFRL is utilizing SDS International’s Shadow Buffer PC-IG to reduce visual system costs by 90% for an A-10 Unit Training Device PC-IG Risk Reduction Project being built for the Combat Air Forces. This cooperative project is also being supported by the Naval Air Warfare Center—Training Systems Division and PMA205 through 2002. The Shadow Buffer has been successfully demonstrated on AFRL’s Mobile Modular Display for Research and Training (M2DART) and A-10 Display for Research and Training (DART) systems.   5.3	After Action ReviewTraining systems need methods to capture data and provide feedback in order to enhance learning outcomes.  The DMT-C2 Program is no different.  Based on the requirement for interactions with intelligent tutors and training courseware, the initial DMT-C2 prototype needs a dynamic method for after-action review (AAR).  The AAR System must be automated and be presented in a readable, intuitive format and have the capability for data warehousing (archiving).  The DMT-C2 AAR System should be available within 1 hour of termination of exercise (training) and the data must be supplied by the procedural, mission rehearsal, and AI processes.  In addition, these processes must display the ability to communicate and correlate their AAR data for the purpose of training results and recommendations.  STOW Network News (SNN) records and displays raw JSAF simulation events for real time analysis of the simulation execution.  SNN provides an excellent capability to up to the second weapons impact and result information for initial analysis events like a "hot wash" or BDA tabulations.  SNN applies to all weapons impacts.  This web-based technology can be networked with other sites in order to extract the data during on-going exercises and evaluations.  SNN can be presented in text-files, 2-D or 3-D imported representations with other applications or GUIs.  In addition, weapons effects are currently portrayed, however other variables such as sensor detection, vehicle angle or dynamic movements, and logistics information can be easily viewed.  Numerous improvements to SNN are being adapted for DMT-C2 to include new variables to track intercept geometry, proper communications phraseology, identifying targets, etc.  SNN provides a much more robust and adaptable capability than other AAR Systems used in JSAF.  6.	Future C2 Training / Simulation Applications 6.1 Unmanned Air VehiclesSDS International’s LiteFliteTM is a complete simulation and training system.  The Reconfigurable Flight Simulator enables aircrews to train and practice in individual and team training environments. One monitor displays the Out-The-Window (OTW) view, including Heads-Up Display (HUD) data, other aircraft and weapons effects visuals, and photo-realistic, geo-specific visual databases.  The second monitor displays cockpit instrumentation, supporting various aircraft types, crew positions, and radar functions. Multi-channel visuals for tabletop trainers of 1 to 16 channels and Helmet Mounted Display (HMD) configurations provide greater flexibility to the OTW view. The system includes fully capable Instructor Operator Station (IOS) and generic or aircraft-specific aero models. The LiteFlite™ Visualization System supports OTW and stealth options for current and legacy simulations in addition to supporting single and multi-channel visuals and HMDs.  Resolution and update rates support processing of photo-realistic, geo-specific databases.  The LiteFlite™ Instructor Operator Station supports instructor, operator and student operation of networked LiteFlite™ simulators including selection of missions/exercises, control of targets and friendlies, real-time and logged performance data collection and monitoring via plan-view displays.  Planned capabilities include simulation management functions such as defining each networked PC simulator’s aircraft type, position, orientation, and state information and multiple image generators for different crew positions for multiple-crewed aircraft.  LiteFlite™ supports High Level Architecture, DIS and Direct Play for team training and DMT interoperability.6.2	Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR) Sensor Integration Understanding what information is the most critical in this sensor-to-shooter environment rests with intelligence within the C2 staffs.  The intelligence staff training must begin at the unit level to gain understanding and experience. Once achieved, that experience will pay great dividends at the component and joint levels of operation for any C2 structure.  The intelligence staff as an integral part of combat planning informs the commander of his opponent’s likely point of view, including his probable courses of action.  The increase in speed and volume of information collection has not changed that role, but they have changed the focus of the intelligence officer from an intuitive tactician, to a technical manager of data. The ability to attack numbers of widely dispersed, fixed and mobile targets, has assigned a new role to intelligence to apply ISR assets to sites where friendly elements have applied force and attacked, then measure and assess the effectiveness of those attacks.  The DMT-C2 need for Bomb Damage Assessment (BDA) is achieved in JSAF.  And it not only assesses a target's destruction level, but also determines whether (and when and by whom) applied ordnance against the target.  DMT mission rehearsals networked on a supporting battlespace provide an excellent forum for a complete lash-up of real-world C2ISR assets with their virtual and live cockpits/training devices.  Appropriate battlespace population with accredited constructive threat models truly creates endless possibilities for instruction in the art of war.  Collaborative sensor integration should not be limited to a single operating system while still providing C2ISR products in the form of text, imagery, audio, and electronic signals.  The increasing motivation for DMT is derived from the characteristics of contemporary warfare where the battlefield is extremely lethal and complex and the need to interact among the many players is critical to the overall mission success.  On-board and off-board sensor management requires greater coordination among platforms to foster mission execution teamwork.  Cueing long-range sensors to effectively identify and target threats is a difficult task considering the unknowns of a target’s behavior and overcoming their associated defenses.  The synergy needed to overcome these odds demands better training systems to prepare our warriors both in mission planning and execution.  Traditionally, ISR input to simulations and battle command trainers has been fragmented coming from many different sources without players’ inputs.  The combat commanders have made little input to and had even less control over the ISR elements.  The intelligence commanders received was without benefit of their direction, intent or judgement. Thus, commanders could never determine the impact of decisions they made and directions they gave to the ISR assets available.  Figure 1 provides an example of JSAF using photo intelligence and adding synthetic entities for a UAV ISR input to the commander or engaged units.  Figure 1: UAVSim Pre-Strike ImageryThe USN Fleet Battle Experiment (FBE) has used this JSAF and ISR technology integration with great success.  This FBE capability can be leveraged to meet many of the DMT-C2 requirements.  Once the "targets" are attacked in the joint synthetic battlespace and threat environment, then the appropriate response can be portrayed for analysis as in Figure 2.Figure 2: UAVSim Post Strike Imagery6.3.	Networking Virtual, Constructive and LiveCombining live, virtual, and constructive entities on one network will assist the development and use of the Common Operational Picture (COP).  The COP is merely taking the concept of sensor integration for the fighter pilot or tank driver and incorporating those functions for presentation to the battlestaffs.  The question becomes how to get this data to the right person and how to convert the data into information that allows a person (or persons) to make decisions.  M&S must provide the same adaptable COP as warfighters use in battle.  Information must flow across the network and be up to date information for all consumers.  For the COP to work and increase battlespace situation awareness, it must be instantaneous.  (Oakes)Since the human is still in the control loop and must correlate, fuse and understand information for decision-making, it must be presentable and compatible to the cognitive processing.  It becomes broken down into three basic categories: sensory processing, pattern recognition, and decision/response selection.  The ability for human information processing depends on one's knowledge state or mental model of a task.  Perception (or pattern recognition) is a dynamic, cyclic process and underlies the dynamic nature of human information processing.  6.4	Dominant Battlespace Knowledge (DBK)Of course, every commander wants to know everything to fight battles.  How much he comprehends may be based on how information is presented to him.  DBK is an overall comprehension of friendly forces, the enemy, the battlespace environment, and even events or actions to keep the enemy from knowing anything about friendly forces.  DBK is a goal to provide information and fuse it in such a manner that a commander can make real-time decisions based on factors that may affect his battle plans.  It is important to reiterate that without fusion, information can turn into too much data and no analysis.  Training in wartime environments to perfect DBK require the ability to stimulate sensors and populate the common operational picture for the technicians and operators to use the data provided in a timely and accurate analysis in order to act on enemy movements, not react.6.5	USAF ATC and NASA Tower ProgramsBoth the USAF and NASA have begun seeking comments for the USAF Air Traffic Control (ATC) Tower Simulation System (TSS) and the NASA FutureFlight Central (FFC).The Air Force operates approximately 95 control towers globally, not including the 18 facilities presently operated by the Air Force Reserve (AFRES) and Air National Guard (ANG), in support of both civilian and military air operations.  The towers are located where mission requirements dictate.  These military ATC facilities support training and maintenance of a cadre of proficient tower controllers for worldwide deployment in support of national interests.  There are no automated training capabilities available for individual control tower facility training programs to provide initial and proficiency training, therefore, controller training depends strictly upon live air traffic.  The Air Force Flight Standards Agency is designated the lead USAF agency for this program.  As providers of ATC tower services to both military and civilian aviation at USAF locations worldwide, the USAF is required to meet national standards for air traffic services established by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).  USAF currently provides these services to a variety of aircraft in varying airspace complexities depending on location and USAF mission requirements.  The evolving Air Force mission and the advent of composite wings have placed additional stress on the ATC training environment.  To ensure USAF ATC towers safely and expeditiously move aircraft to, from, and through their designated airspace, they must have the capability to provide realistic air traffic simulation.  This simulation will provide tower controllers the tools to improve situational awareness, decision-making, effective communication, and workload management that encompass the core curriculum of the Air Force crew resource management program.  Simulation exercises will ensure all tower controllers have the means to meet new training requirements and remain at a competent level of proficiency that cannot be attained with live traffic.  NASA Future Flight Central (FFC), at NASA Ames Research Center, is a full-scale, full-mission, R&D air traffic control (ATC) tower simulation environment where safety, efficiency and environmental compatibility can be researched and validated under various airport conditions and configurations.  The FCC will have a 360° out-the-window field-of- view of designated airport(s) and the airport's surrounding environment displayed on a high-resolution projection system.  The airport scenes include static models of the airfield, airport facilities, surrounding terrain and moving models of the aircraft and ground vehicles. The level of complexity of each airport database can be low, medium or high, as defined below. FFC may also require modifications of zero to ten existing airport models to update or add new features. Modifications are defined in section 3 below. NASA will provide the contractor with source materials consisting of digital terrain data, AutoCAD drawings of the airport, obstruction chart, aerial photos, and reference photo materials. NASA shall obtain ownership rights to airport databases purchased from the contractor, including the right to use, modify, and transfer the airport database to FFC customers. 7.	ConclusionsU.S Military History leads us to believe that technological advantage alone will wins wars.  Though potentially a false stand-alone statement, many still believe it will achieve victory.  Probably an overstatement for DMT-C2, though JSAF technology and applications for human-computer voice control interfaces exceed current training requirements but fulfills a long-standing void.  DMT-C2 has many areas where training can be enhanced with modeling and simulation.  Some may say that this technology infusion cuts across too many program lines.  However in order to break down the numerous hoary traditions and create a real RMA in the training arena, DMT-C2 will have to cross many barriers.  To achieve DBK, it is an absolute imperative!The close relationship of C2 battle management and air breathing platforms for inter-team skills training will continue to work towards a merger.  The common simulation drivers and innovations demonstrated for FBE and at AFRL will accelerate the integration.  Shared technologies and lessons learned from each DMT program that affect this inter-team training will immensely aid in interoperability of simulations, increased fidelity or portrayal of the real world through simulation and cost and time savings to achieve a quicker training solution.  The key to increasing combat readiness across the CAF through DMT depends on well-defined training systems supported with technologies that meet a common reliability, maintainability and usability standard. New sensors will require a battlespace in which to operate and evaluate its effect in the overall outcome.  Use in live training may be limited by its current ISR mission or security classification.  The proper balance for virtual simulation in combat training will be driven by the training needs and the level technology can meet those needs.  Realism is still the driving goal for any training environment.  A mix of virtual and live enhanced with constructive simulation is a must in order to increase C2 warfighter experience.  DMT-C2 has the advantage to leverage experience and capabilities from the USN BFTT Program and its use of voice control for constructive agents.H.G. Wells once said, “The past is but the beginning of a beginning, and all that is and has been is but the twilight of dawn.”  The RMA is also just a beginning and with the USAF has started an aggressive program to improve the C2 warrior experience levels with the DMT-C2.  The better the experience, the better the warfighter.  The more one knows about combat before entering actual warfare will only enhance their chances for survival and success in the battlespace.  DMT's future is destined to be the training linchpin for the USAF and other services for increasing combat survivability.  The DMT-C2 Program is off to a fast start and the first demonstration is slated for early October.  This Prototype will be key to improved combat capabilities and use of distributed simulation for C2 warriors.ReferencesAlbert, David S., John J. Garstka, and Frederick P. Stein, (1999).  Network Centric Warfare, Developing and Leveraging Information Superiority.Budge, Larry D. MG (Ret) (1997), Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) 97 Overview.Cavitt, David B. and M. Alan Gibson, Boris Dobrydnev, Derek S. Bryan and Joseph J. Berkeley,  (1999). Integrating STOW and the Navy’s Battle Force Tactical Training (BFTT) System, 99F-SIW.Coakley, Thomas P., Command and Control for War and Peace (1991).  Frazier, Gerald T., Blenberg, Paul J. (1999).  99S-SIW-194.  Intelligence Cells in Large Scale Exercises.HQ ACC/DOOS, Langley AFB (1998),  Distributed Mission Training - Background Concepts (Draft).  Kwak, S. David, Ph.D., (1999) Synthetic AWACS Weapons Director, 99F-SIW.Oakes, Michael R.  (1998), Augmenting Air and Space Dominance: The Future of Combat Training, 98F-SIW-128.Petersen, Craig A. and David B. Cavitt (2000).  User-Oriented Systems Engineering for the Navy’s Battle Force Tactical Training (BFTT) Air Management Node (AMN), 00S-SIW-145.Authors’ BiographyMICHAEL OAKES is a senior systems engineer with BMH Associates, Inc.  He holds a B.S. in Aeronautical Engineering, M.S. in Aeronautical Sciences, and an M.A. in National Security and Strategic Studies.  He was responsible for the evolution, bed-down, and deployment of high priority classified special access required programs.  He is a retired USAF fighter pilot with over 20 years of experience in the Pacific, European, and Southwest Asia theaters of operations and is a USAF F-15 Fighter Weapons School Graduate.  Mr. Oakes was the WISSARD Lab Test Director for the STOW-97 ACTD.  He maintains domain expertise as a commercial airline pilot and continues to provide modeling and military domain expertise for Air Synthetic Force development used in STOW and current JSAF simulation technologies.DEREK S. BRYAN is a software engineer for BMH Associates, Inc.  He holds a B.S. degree in computer science from James Madison University in May 1998.  He has been involved with the BFTT AMN project as a software engineer and is currently the technical lead for the BMH Associates effort on the DMT-C2 Program and is responsible for all integration efforts.