Experiences with linking existing Simulation Facilitiesfor Joint OperationsJeroen BeckersJeroen VoogdHans JenseTNO Physics and Electronics LaboratoryP.O.Box 968642509 JG The Hague, The Netherlands{j.j.beckers| voogd | jense}@fel.tno.nlKeywords:joint, interoperability, legacy simulationsABSTRACT: Modern military operations often have a clear joint character, e.g. UN peacekeeping operations. The procedures that make joint operations possible need to be formulated, evaluated and trained. This can be facilitated by using simulation. Traditional simulation facilities however have not been designed for joint use. At TNO-FEL three major simulation based training facilities are operational: the Electronic Battlespace Facility (EBF) provides a basic framework for rapid development of mainly army oriented simulators, the Command Information Center for the 21st century (CIC XXI) aids in evaluating Command and Control (C2) concepts for future frigates, and the C2-lab provides a testing ground for training army C2 operations.This paper describes experiments carried out to evaluate possibilities for linking these three facilities for joint training. A scenario combining the features of all three facilities is in development to demonstrate the capabilities of the joint facility. The scenario is designed such that simulation components can be added or left out depending on the availability of personnel and the specific training or demonstration needs. The underlying software architecture connecting the various facilities must be flexible and versatile, and must cope with legacy simulation code. Using a middleware software layer that abstracts applications from the underlying communication protocol solves the problem of linking simulators with different design. During the integration phase it was examined how the current DIS interoperability of the simulation facilities can be migrated to HLA. This migration will apply the TNO RCI middleware that extends the federate interoperability concepts of HLA to the Component level. 1. IntroductionThe importance of simulation in military training and research is evident. At TNO-FEL facilities have been developed for various applications such as flight simulators, tactical training simulators for tank commanders and a naval electronic warfare simulator.Joint operations are an important issue in modern defense. In joint operations the military services co-operate in a single mission to realize military goals via synergetic effects. The joint concept is most notable during the planning phases on strategic and operational level. Synergetic effects involve support from one military service to the other to allow it to perform its task more efficiently on the one hand, and to acquire a military merit on the other hand by tuning the activities of the services to one another.A commander in charge of a joint operation needs to think in terms of operational capacities and the interaction between these capacities, that, depending on the situation, can be supplied by one or another service. The joint concept therefore mainly takes place in the planning phase.The joint concept needs to be studied thoroughly and at a point the need for joint training, and thus specialized training facilities, will rise from these studies.At TNO-FEL an effort is being made to connect simulation facilities which were designed for single service use, to allow more elaborate simulation scenarios and joint operations research and training. In order to demonstrate the possibility of such a combination of existing simulation facilities within a short timeframe, we use the currently implemented interoperability method. In this case a middleware layer capable of interoperability via DIS is used. However, while working on the connections we kept in mind that we wish to implement a new middleware layer capable of switching between interoperability standards, specifically DIS and HLA. The use of a middleware layer makes it possible to make a transition without large-scale changes in the simulators.Besides the computer network we also use audio and video connections between the various facilities and the presentation center. For the audio connection Voice IP telephones are used. The voice IP telephones are prototypes under development at TNO-FEL.The linking of the simulation facilities is demonstrated by a joint scenario, which is especially created for the purpose of demonstrating the technical and substantial interoperability. Technical interoperability is the mere ability of simulators to communicate. This means that the computers are linked via communication hardware and compatible communication protocols are used. This, however, is no guarantee that a logically consistent simulation results. For a useful combination of simulators, also substantial interoperability is needed. Substantial interoperability means that the messages communicated between the simulators are interpreted correctly and proper behavior results.Our approach to quickly connect the simulators by using the interoperability standard currently in use did not ensure a straightforward realization of the joint simulation facility without any problems. The problems, solutions and other experiences with linking simulation facilities at TNO-FEL are described in this paper.In the remainder of this paper we will first introduce the simulation facilities used in this work (chapter 2) and the joint scenario (chapter 3). Then the interoperability issues are discussed in Chapter 4, and finally the conclusions are given.2. The simulation facilitiesIn this section we discuss the TNO-FEL simulation facilities that are linked during the project. All used simulators are designed for or can be used at the tactical level. This means for instance that simulation pace will be equal to wall clock time. The echelon level of the simulators can be as high as brigade level or as low as a crewmember in a single vehicle.The facilities that are linked are the Electronic Battlespace Facility (EBF) which concentrates on land based simulation, the Command Information Center for the 21st Century (CIC XXI) which is a naval simulation facility and finally the Command and Control laboratory (C2-lab) designed for research on the field of Command and Control.2.1 The Electronic Battlespace FacilityThe Electronic Battlespace Facility (EBF) is designed to support applications such as training, education, design, and decision support through the use of simulation and visualization technology. The EBF offers a simulation infrastructure to link all the simulators in a shared Virtual Environment (VE) such that these can be used in a common exercise.Amongst others the EBF comprises simulators with manned mock-ups, Computer Generated Forces (CGF) software, various visualization tools and an instructor console.An example of a simulator with manned mock-ups is the Leopard 2A tank simulator. The simulator consists of three mock-ups; one for the commander, driver and gunner each. Several of these Leopard 2A simulators can practice team procedures in a VE.Another manned simulator is the Forward Air Controller (FAC) trainer. The FAC trainer is used to teach specialized FAC soldiers in the field the procedures to guide fighter planes to their targets. In the trainer the FAC-trainee wears a Head Mounted Display (HMD) and an F16 simulator, controlled by an assistant of the instructor, performs the air support.The main CGF tools in the EBF are ModSAF [3] and ITEMS [4]. These are used in order to construct scenarios with large numbers of entities without the need for a large staff. The ModSAF and ITEMS tanks, frigates and other entities are also often used as targets in training situations and as simple targets for demonstration purposes.Training sessions are co-ordinated from the Instructor Console. The instructors can interact with the exercise and the actions of simulator operators can be monitored and logged for analysis at a later stage. Several scenario management tools are available. Examples of these tools are the Orbat (Order of Battle) browser to monitor the hierarchy of entities and their status, and visualization tools to acquire situational awareness.An experimental visualization tool that can be used in Scenario Management is the Virtual Workbench (VWB). This 3D-visualisation tool displays the VE as a 3D (scale) model on its tabletop, which is the display surface. With the proper User Interface (UI) the application of a VWB can provide some unique insights in a scenario and increase situational awareness for the instructors because of the combination of the possibility of virtual presence in the simulation situations combined with the ability to present a more abstract overview. A tailored UI for future Scenario Management and Command and Control is currently under development at TNO-FEL.Currently most simulators in the EBF are still DIS oriented although much effort is being put into research on the HLA standard. The transition from DIS to HLA will be implemented by using a middleware layer, which is discussed more extensively in a later section on interoperability standards.2.2 The Command Information Center XXIThe Command Information Center for the 21st century (CIC XXI) simulates a naval CIC. At TNO-FEL this facility is used to develop an integral view on and approach to the maritime Command and Control (C2) process. Within the CIC XXI all maritime C3I (Command, Control, Communication and Intelligence) aspects (situational awareness, threat assessment, decision support, control, interactive visualization, and man-machine interaction) are integrated in a coherent combat management system. This facility is used for research into the possibilities for reduced crew, faster reaction times, the ability to handle more complex situations, and a better interoperability within taskforces.In the joint scenario an ADCF (Air Defense and Command Frigate) is included. The C2 aspects such as thread assessment and weapons control of the simulated frigate are controlled by the manned CIC XXI facility. Six workstations with modern communication facilities are situated in a room with five data projectors showing data that are of common interest to all operators.Currently an NBCD-training simulator is under development in the Maritime Command & Control group at TNO-FEL. This trainer for Nuclear, Biological, Chemical and Damage Control procedures for the ADCF is also situated within the CIC XXI facility and incorporated in the Joint Scenario.2.3 The C2-labThe C2-lab is an accommodation especially designed to facilitate Command and Control (C2) research. The interior of the room is decorated with a reinforced concrete look where the bunker walls are cut-away such that spectators can monitor the C2-process and the use of the C2-tools.This facility is used to design, test and demonstrate C2-systems and applications. The development and integration of various C2-systems and applications leads to well tuned tools and offer the possibility for high quality of C2-studies in the lab. The developed tools will have a high operational value during field service due to this type of development.The C2-lab does not offer simulators itself. However, the output of simulators such as those present in the EBF and CIC XXI are used as input for Battlefield Management Systems (BMS) and other C3I tools which are used by the (joint) commander.3. The scenarioIn this chapter we discuss the joint scenario. This scenario is used for demonstration of the linked simulation facilities. The demonstration is partly held in the EBF, partly in the CIC XXI and the interoperability is shown by use of the data, audio and video connections between each of the facilities. During the demonstration the actions of the joint commander, located in the C2-lab, are followed by the public via video connections. The scenario has a time span of about twenty minutes and is set up in a way that events or entities can be omitted without hugely disrupting the possibility of demonstration. The scenario is constructed such that, if available, many persons can take part. For example: the available tank mock-ups in the EBF allow up to 15 people operating 5 tanks. The whole scenario, however, is also suited for execution with a skeleton crew of about 5 persons, where some of the elements in the scenario are left out and some of the entities are replaced by CGFs.The friendly and hostile entities involved in the full scenario include: T73, T80 and Leopard tank platoons, an infantry platoon, one MLRS (Multi Launch Rocket System), one FAC assigned to a JSF (Joint Strike Fighter), a formation of three JSFs, Guided Missile Cruisers, and two ADC frigates. The terrain database is enhanced with structures like the bunker for the joint commander, an airbase and a harbor.The terrain database that has been in use in the EBF for some time is adopted as the basis for the joint scenario. This database contains a bay area of a piece Wales, Great Britain. It depicts an actual bay area at approximately 51º16’ latitude and 3º15’ longitude. This database is chosen because of its quality and usability in the terrain features. It contains land, water and air, needed for a demonstration of a joint operation. The levels of detail and the use of repeating textures are however mainly appropriate for ground based simulations. Because of its various formats in which it is available (e.g. also as infra red data set) all simulators can use the terrain.The scenario depicts a crisis situation between two (fictitious) countries. A totalitarian country Alpha has occupied frontier areas of neighboring country Beta, which has requested international help. The occupied country has been granted aid from a not further specified UN force under command of a joint commander.Initially two enemy T72 tank platoons, a T80 tank platoon and an infantry/tank platoon have occupied the frontier areas. Refugees from the occupied areas have fled to neighboring cities. The multitude of refugees has been forced to take shelter into the mountainous areas land inwards. Several refugee camps have been set up and Leopard tank platoons have been deployed to defend the two neighboring cities and the refugee camps where the natives take their shelter. A harbor is also under threat from approaching enemy forces.A military airbase has been set up at an airport in land Beta and the joint command center has been set up in a bunker in the mountainous area near one of the main refugee camps, just outside one of the neighboring cities near the occupied areas.On the water enemy guided missile cruisers lay near the frontiers between land Alpha and land Beta. The UN force is patrolling the bay with two ADCFs. These frigate’s sensors have a reach of about 400 km so the entire bay and airspace of the theatre is monitored under command of the naval component commander at one of the ADCFs.The simulation scenario starts with detection of enemy troop movement by the FAC. An infantry platoon enforced with T80 tanks advances towards the harbor. Two T72 tank platoons also advance from the north towards the harbor. After report from the FAC the land component commander, in consult with the joint commander, orders the Leopard tanks to stop this approach because the harbor is vital to the defense of land Beta.The FAC near the expected battlefield gets assigned a JSF that takes off from the airbase. The tanks engage in battle and the JSF offers close air support, guided by the directions from the FAC.The Alpha tanks get support from MLRS attacks on defending Leopard platoons. Another JSF is deployed instantly in consult with the Air Force Component Commander to search and destroy the enemy rocket launcher.After some losses at both sides the ADCFs detect enemy reinforcements advancing near the coast. These T80 tanks need to be stopped to prevent too much friendly losses at the harbor. The ADC frigates had already taken course to the harbor for close range support from the water and one of these frigates is ordered to stop these reinforcements with a land attack.In answer to this movement two enemy carriers fire at both ADCFs. The on-board jamming systems try to divert these surface to surface missiles but some direct hits are suffered. One of the ADCFs is destroyed and at the other, where the naval component commander is situated, damage control is necessary. Immediately a formation of three JSFs is assigned a retaliation mission. These JSFs destroy the two enemy cruisers.While this mission is completed, the tank battle ends with retreat of the surviving enemy troops. The UN forces remain stationed near the harbor.4. Interoperability IssuesIn this section we discuss the interoperability issues. The DIS architecture was uphold since not all facilities are HLA compliant yet. The amount of time available for setting up the joint facility was not sufficient to allow adaptation of the interoperability standard towards HLA.4.1 The CGF toolsThe CGF tool ModSAF was planned for simulation of the land vehicles. ITEMS was added in the technical realization of the joint scenario to simulate part of the naval component. The air strikes are also simulated by ITEMS. While implementing the different events in the scenario, we found that the ITEMS version used does not support selecting DIS entities that are not generated by ITEMS itself as prime opponent for attack. Therefore the T80 tank reinforcements that are attacked by the Navy had to be deleted from the ModSAF scenario, and added to the ITEMS scenario. ModSAF was kept as one of the CGF tools so the workload for development could be easily divided between different TNO staff members with different levels of experience with either ITEMS or ModSAF. Also the functions of Air Force Component Commander and Army Component Commander can be separated between two staff members at the two different CGF applications during demonstration.During the test phase it appeared that use of the ITEMS version installed in the EBF in a large scale joint simulation may not be the optimum use of this tool. The rule based calculations take up too much of the processing power of the hardware used for ITEMS in the EBF while high level artificial intelligence is not required for the demonstration of the joint scenario. The load on ITEMS is kept at a minimum by setting a filter in the Remote Player Interface such that ITEMS itself does not unnecessarily process DIS packets from outside the tool itself.4.2 The simulatorsAlong with the CGF entities some manned simulators are deployed in the joint scenario. In the terrain somewhat concealed on a hilltop a FAC is present. For the moment, however, it is chosen not to assign a manned flight simulator to the FAC for reasons of staff availability and hardware capacity. Therefore a CGF fighter is assigned to the FAC, so the person with the HMD is currently without real influence on the scenario. However the function of reconnaissance by a FAC is emphasized by giving the FAC the function of initiating the scenario when enemy troop movement is noticed.In the CIC XXI facility a manned Command Information Center of an ADC frigate is simulated. The purpose of the ADCF simulator however is to demonstrate electronic warfare and damage control. Here focus is aimed at the sensor and jamming systems and at the specific NBCD trainer. Operability in terms of travelling a course and firing missiles is not supported.Since no demo version of the software was available at the time the joint scenario was constructed, a lot of work had to be done to be able to use an ADCF in the scenario.The radar and other sensors now had many more entities to keep track of than it was ever before tested with. This uncovered some bugs in the software which had to be fixed, at the same time the ADCF software had to be adjusted so it would be able to handle more easily the large amount of entities. The simulators within the EBF are constructed such that interoperability is guaranteed, so adding a manned Leopard simulator and the FAC simulator to the CGF tools was a relatively easy step. The most difficult step in the EBF was construction of the scenario and implementing it in the terrain database for the various simulators. Terrain features such as height differences are very hard to take into account when planning the scenario and while implementing on the 2D displays of the CGF tools.The experimental BenchStealth application on the VWB, one of the 3D visualization tools in the EBF, is used to obtain situational awareness while positioning the entities. The software is an experimental prototype but as an extra aid in visualizing the 3D terrain it proved to be very helpful. Namely the positioning of the tanks in the mountainous areas could be done more realistically by using the BenchStealth application.Initial plans included the TNO-FEL Air Force air traffic control simulator ICARUS, but we found that for the chosen scenario the scale of the total theatre was not wide enough to include large scale air strike missions, dog fights and so on. Therefore, for the first tryouts with the joint scenario somewhat simpler events, with only some small scale Air Force actions, were incorporated, simulated by a CGF machine in the EBF (ITEMS). Future adaptations and extensions of the joint scenario, however, will include an Air Force Component Commander and more substantial aerial activity.4.3 Interoperability standardsCurrently most of the simulators in the joint simulation facility either use DIS directly or through the use of an in-house developed middleware layer. The use of a middleware layer abstracts the simulator developer from the interoperability standard details. By offering the simulator developer an interface that has sufficient functionality, all the communication details can be hidden in the middleware layer. There the interoperability standard used (DIS, HLA) can be specified.The middleware layer currently in use, however, is mainly based on the DIS standard, although it is capable of joining an HLA federation by switching to the HLA compliant mode. Many of the new possibilities offered by HLA are not present in the application interface offered to the simulation developer. In order to allow the use of the full HLA functionality major changes have to be implemented.For example the problems encountered due to the large amount of entities, namely network traffic and the necessary computational power to process the information, could be controlled by using data distribution management such as offered by HLA.A new middleware layer is already available within TNO-FEL. This middleware layer, called the Run-time Communication Infrastructure (RCI), currently has a HLA implementation but other interoperability standards can be implemented if needed. Special properties of this layer are that it is not just a middleware layer for simulators on federate level but it is actually designed to extend the interoperability concepts of HLA by providing data-exchange between simulator components in a similar way [1].More and more simulators at TNO-FEL are HLA compliant by using the RCI. Experience has shown that legacy simulators can be made HLA compliant relatively easy by using the RCI [2]. Therefore we hope that in the coming years the whole joint simulation facility can be brought up to date by using this middleware layer.5. Conclusions and future plansSince the simulation facilities used in the demonstration are not designed to co-operate in a joint scenario we expected to find some difficulties. Still, apart from some adaptation of software and network considerations to ease the computational load, we succeeded within the short time-frame to our disposition.It proved to be a very useful strategy to build the scenario such that events and entities can be omitted. The need for assisting staff members can therefore be controlled depending on the nature of the presentation in which the joint scenario is used.The linked facilities and the joint scenario form a good testing ground for studies on interoperability standards. It will be used for testing the middleware layer now under development at TNO-FEL. With the use of the new RCI middleware layer the transition to all HLA compliant simulators will be facilitated.In the near future it is planned to link even more simulators. Especially the air traffic control simulator ICARUS will be added. Then, however, a larger terrain database will be needed. Another possibility is deploying simulators at other locations than at TNO-FEL. Currently the joint scenario is purely used for a technology demonstration. Research will be needed on the joint concept and the plausibility of the military actions to be able to satisfy the critical eyes of higher military staff.6. AcknowledgementsThe authors wish to thank the people working on the various simulation facilities and who helped us achieve the joint simulation.7. References[1]	M. Brassé, W. Huiskamp, "A Component Architecture for Federate Development", Simulation Interoperability Workshop, fall 1999[2]	M. Brassé et al., "Laguna Beach: HLA on Baywatch?", Simulation Interoperability Workshop, fall 1999[3]	ModSAF, STRICOM internet address: www.stricom.army.mil/PRODUCTS/MODSAF[4]	ITEMS, CAE internet address: www.cae.comAuthor BiographiesJEROEN BECKERS is a junior scientist at the scientific staff in the Command & Control and Simulation Division at TNO-FEL. He holds a M.Sc. in Computer Science from the Delft University of Technology and  his work concentrates on simulation scenario research and development, distributed simulation and visualization of Virtual Environments.JEROEN VOOGD is a member of the scientific staff in the Command & Control and Simulation Division at TNO-FEL. He holds a Ph.D. (1998) in Computational Physics from the University of Amsterdam. He has experience in modeling and simulating biophysical systems on parallel and distributed computing platforms. Currently he is involved in projects on virtual reality, joint forces operations and vertical interoperability.HANS JENSE is a senior scientist in the Command & Control and Simulation Division at TNO-FEL, and is currently the head of the Simulators Group. He holds a Ph.D. in Computer Science from the Leiden University. He recently spent a year as principal investigator in a virtual reality environment technology project at the NASA Ames Research Center. His research interests are in general VE and distributed simulation technology, its application in the defense and aerospace fields, information visualization and the relationship between technical and human factors issues.