Comparing the Joint Warfare System (JWARS) Conceptual Model to a Conceptual Model StandardMichael L. MetzInnovative Management Concepts, Inc.45625 Willow Pond PlazaSterling, Virginia 20164703-318-8044 ext 210e-mail:   HYPERLINK "mailto:mmetz@imcva.com" mmetz@imcva.comKeywords:    Military, Validation, Verification, JWARS,  Conceptual ModelABSTRACT:  The Joint Warfare System (JWARS) simulation is now under development in the Department of Defense (DoD) and is being supported by a concurrent Verification and Validation (V&V) process.  This paper, written from the V&V Agent’s perspective, describes the elements of the JWARS Conceptual Model as they were assembled together by the V&V Agent and compares that JWARS Conceptual Model’s elements with those recommended by Dr. Dale Pace in his “Simulation Conceptual Model Development”  paper that was presented at the Spring 2000 SISO-SIW. Conceptual Modeling is a current and important issue for the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office’s (DMSO’s) Verification Validation and Accreditation (VV&A) Technical Working Group.  The M&S development process has included the concept of a Conceptual Model and how this model can be used as a bridge between the requirements process and the design process for many years.  Additionally, the DoD  Recommended Practices Guide (RPG) for Verification, Validation and Accreditation (VV&A) has included Conceptual Model Validation as a key element of the VV&A process.  However, a good description of what is included in a Conceptual Model and specifically how to validate this Conceptual Model has not been well understood. This paper is a more detailed  and updated version of a similar paper the author presented at the 2000 Summer Computer Simulation Conference in July 2000.1.  The JWARS SimulationThe Joint Warfare System (JWARS) simulation is being developed by the US Department of Defense’s (DoD’s) Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) for use in theater level warfare analysis.  In May 1995 the Deputy Secretary of Defense approved the Joint Analytic Model Improvement Program (JAMIP) and directed OSD’s Program Analysis & Evaluation Directorate, in cooperation with the Joint Staff (the support staff of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff), to develop a state-of-the-art, closed-form simulation of joint, campaign-level warfare that: represents uniquely joint functions and processes, and component warfare operations; is based on joint doctrine; is capable of representing future warfare; and, supports analysis.The future users of JWARS include the Joint Staff, the US military Services, the US regional and functional combatant commands, OSD, Joint Task Forces, other DoD organizations, and industry.  The planned JWARS applications include: force assessment; force planning and execution (both deliberate planning and crisis action planning); system effectiveness and trade off analysis; and, concept and doctrine development and assessment.JWARS development began in April 1997 and the Verification & Validation (V&V) effort began in September 1997.  One of the primary tasks of the V&V Agent , as detailed in the JWARS V&V Plan (JWARS Office 1998), is to validate the JWARS Conceptual Model (CM).  JWARS development is now in process and Release 1.1 was made in January 2000.  Release 1.1 is the first in a series of releases that will culminate in a final Release 1 that will be used for user testing and will be designated as the Limited Initial Operating Capability (IOC) for study execution.  JWARS requirements are contained in the JWARS Operational Requirements Document (Joint Staff, J-8 1998).  This paper addresses the JWARS Conceptual Model, conceptual model validation, and compares it to Dr. Pace’s proposed conceptual model standards.  The author believes this comparison is an effective way to view the proposed standards and how they relate to an actual simulation development.2. Creating A Virtual JWARS Conceptual ModelJWARS development does not include a formal conceptual model product, requiring the V&V Agent to create a virtual conceptual model from the available development artifacts. The Defense Modeling and Simulation Office’s (DMSO’s) description of a conceptual model (DMSO 1996) includes everything in the simulation development process that occurs between the user requirements gathering phase and the design phase.  For JWARS this included the Joint Application Design (JAD) Packages, the Conceptual Model of the Mission Space (CMMS) document, and the algorithm descriptions2.1 Elements of the JWARS virtual conceptual modelThroughout the development of the JWARS V&V process the representatives of the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) on the JWARS V&V Oversight Group consistently identified CONCEPTUAL MODEL Validation as one of the most important tasks. Although the JWARS software development process did not include an artifact or deliverable identified as the JWARS conceptual model,  the V&V Agent realized that there was an identifiable concept for going from the JWARS requirements as identified in the JWARS ORD to the design.  From this concept the V&V Agent created a virtual JWARS conceptual model made up of the following artifacts:  Joint Analysis Design Packages; the JWARS Conceptual Model of the Mission Space (CMMS); and JWARS Algorithm descriptions.  The JADs were the derived requirements packages for each JWARS thread (or process) that bounded and specified a particular development work package.  The JADs were developed concurrently with the JWARS CMMS and provided a great deal of detail about the processes and the entities, actions, tasks, and interactions of the warfare functionality included in them.  The JWARS CMMS evolved from a largely text description of JWARS entities, actions, tasks, and interactions into an enterprise view (provided by the JWARS Enterprise Model) of a United States led coalition and Joint Task Force.  By examining various views of the JWARS CMMS an analyst and coder could see how the different organizations worked together and how functional control, orders, communications, and resources were identified, requested, and allocated.  The JWARS CMMS also provided the best view of the problem domain architecture.The JWARS Algorithm Descriptions provided identification of each algorithm used in JWARS as well as some of the conditions, limitations, and assumptions related to them.  Although not as well documented as the V&V Agent would have liked, the algorithm descriptions formed a key part of the virtual conceptual model.  Initially scenario validation was not part of the V&V Agent’s conceptual model validation.  However, during the third year of the V&V effort the V&V Agent proposed to add this task to the JWARS V&V processes.  This recommendation is under consideration by the JWARS Office.3. Validating The Virtual JWARS Conceptual ModelThis section describes the Verification and/or Validation of each of these artifacts, along with problems and recommendations for changes in the development and V&V processes.  The final part of this section will describe the results of each of these V&V activities and the status of the JWARS conceptual model.3.1 JAD verification and validationJAD V&V was the first V&V process conducted by the V&V Agent.  Initially the JAD Packages were not well standardized and the validation process was not formal enough for the V&V Agent to complete the JAD V&V.  After the V&V Agent’s recommendations for format and content standardization and a more formal subject matter expert (SME) review were implemented by the JWARS Office JAD V&V was improved.  The verification process included a review of the format to insure the correct items were included and the validation process included SME review (during sessions at the JWARS Office and via emailed responses to the V&V Agent by those who could not attend) to insure that the information was correct.  Many comments were received from the SME community for each JAD and each was adjudicated with the JWARS Office to make sure the proper changes were made to the JADs to correct or refine them.3.2 Conceptual Model of the Mission Space (CMMS) validationInitial validation of the text-based JWARS CMMS was unsuccessful due to insufficient SME review of the product.  Partially due to this and the adoption of a new Unified Modeling Language (UML) based development process, the JWARS Enterprise Model was adopted as the JWARS CMMS.  The V&V Agent was more successful in obtaining comments about the new CMMS and validation was completed after adjudicating the refinements and corrections from the SME community.3.3 Algorithm ValidationInitial algorithm validation was not completely successful.  The V&V Agent provided all the information obtained from the JWARS Office to the Validation Authority (the JWARS User Subgroup members) but they were unable to complete the validation due to a lack of information about the algorithms and their inability to place the algorithms in context of the simulation.  For the second attempt at algorithm validation the V&V Agent provided a more complete validation package (including limitations, conditions, data input, data output, and algorithm source) that were developed during a lengthy analysis of the JWARS Algorithms with the JWARS developers.  This algorithm validation process is ongoing at this time and is slated for completion in August 2000..4. Comparing The Virtual JWARS Conceptual Model To Dr. Pace’s Conceptual Model ConstructThis section compares Dr. Dale Pace’s recommendation (Pace 2000) for elements of a conceptual model with what was available for JWARS and describes how the lack of certain elements adversely affected the JWARS V&V process.  Dr. Pace proposes that a standardized conceptual model include simulation context, simulation concept, and simulation elements.  The context is to provide authoritative information related to the domain that the simulation will model.  His simulation concept  is to provide a description of how the developer proposes to build the simulation to satisfy user requirements.  Finally, his simulation elements are provided as a description of how the different pieces of the simulation that are required to be modeled will be identified and addressed.  Dr. Pace includes the elements shown in Figure 1 in his proposed conceptual model and the JWARS conceptual model elements are shown along with their validation status.  A key difference includes the lack of a simulation domain and system domain validation for JWARS.  Due to cost constraints in the JWARS V&V process and the ORD’s focus on the problem domain, it was decided that the JWARS V&V effort should be concentrated on the warfighting functionality shown in the problem domain.  Also, the current JWARS V&V effort does not include data V&V as that role is assigned to Office of the Secretary of Defense’s  Joint Data System (JDS) organization.  In the Interactions the JWARS conceptual model does not include design artifact validation as that is a verification process in the JWARS V&V effort. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1Figures 2a and 2b show another view of Dr. Pace’s proposed conceptual model and the elements of the JWARS conceptual model that maps to that view.  Dr. Pace begins with requirements for a simulation and the simulation context elements that support the requirements process and constrain the simulation.  The JWARS conceptual model includes most of these elements in the JAD products, the Conceptual Model of the Mission Space product, the algorithm descriptions, and the problem domain architecture.  In Figure 2b (Pace’s conceptual model Specifications) the same JWARS conceptual model elements are shown (plus data) in the specification role for a conceptual model. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2s EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 2bPace also lists the required documentation for a conceptual model (Figure 3) and the corresponding JWARS documentation, or lack of it, is shown along with their validation status.  The key difference is the lack of a single JWARS conceptual model document that identifies the conceptual model elements.  Although the virtual conceptual model the V&V agent was able to gather includes most of the recommended conceptual model elements, the lack of a structure and supporting documentation limits its usefulness.  Also, the JWARS system and simulation domain artifacts and documents were not validated for the resource limitation reasons discussed above and the Simulation Development Plan, as represented by the JWARS Software Development Process, was not validated.   EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 3Although a virtual conceptual model, the JWARS conceptual model meets most of Dr. Pace’s critical requirements for a conceptual model and most of these elements have been or are in the process of being validated. The V&V Agent believes that a more robust and documented conceptual model would have benefited JWARS development and the subsequent V&V effort.  This is not to say that the JWARS developers had no vision of how they were going to move from the requirements to the design.  They had a clear vision and are currently implementing that vision.  However, it was not captured in a single conceptual model document or artifact.  With the exception of requiring more time and resources to gather and validate the virtual JWARS conceptual model, the lack of a formal and robust conceptual model has not severely hampered JWARS development or the V&V of the development.5. How A Robust Conceptual Model Aids The V&V ProcessThe JWARS V&V Team supports DMSO’s effort to develop, standardize, and support conceptual modeling standards for simulation development within DoD.  It is not possible to successfully transition from a set of validated user requirements to a complete design without a complete concept of how that transition will be made.  A complete conceptual model provides the simulation developer with a complete view of how that transition will be effected and the V&V Agent with a product that can be validated by the user community to share the developer’s view and insure that it is understood and acceptable. The JWARS V&V effort would have been aided by the presence of a robust and documented conceptual model in at least two important ways, including reducing the time and effort required to gather and validate the virtual JWARS conceptual model and providing everyone involved in the JWARS effort a clearer picture of how the developers were going to go from a formal requirements set to the simulation design. The JWARS V&V Team believes that conceptual model standardization will both improve the simulation development process and the V&V of those simulations.  If adopted (and combined with appropriate verification, validation, and accreditation activities) use of these conceptual model standards will reduce simulation development risk and provide a higher probability of user accreditation and use of the completed simulation.6. References[1]  Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, 1996.  Department of Defense Verification, Validation, and Accreditation Recommended Practices Guide. 2000 edition beta test version (and future completed editions) available online at:  http://www.msiac.dmso.mil/vva/.[2]  Joint Staff J-8, 1998.  Joint Warfare System (JWARS) Operational Requirements Document (ORD), 27 August 1998.  Available online at  HYPERLINK "http://www.jointmodels.army.mil/jwars/library.html" http://www.jointmodels.army.mil/jwars/library.html[3]  JWARS Office, 1998.  Joint Warfare System (JWARS) Verification and Validation Plan, Version 3.0, 13 August 1998.  Available online at  HYPERLINK "http://www.jointmodels.army.mil/jwars/library.html" http://www.jointmodels.army.mil/jwars/library.html. [4]  JWARS Office, 1999.  Joint Warfare System (JWARS) Overview Briefing, 18 June 1999.  Available online at  HYPERLINK "http://www.jointmodels.army.mil/jwars/library.html" http://www.jointmodels.army.mil/jwars/library.html.[5]  Pace, D.K. 2000.  “Development and Documentation of a Simulation Conceptual Model.”  In Proceedings of the 2000 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop Papers, April 2000.Author BiographyMICHAEL METZ, Technical Director of the Joint Warfare System (JWARS) Verification and Validation Program at Innovative Management Concepts, Inc., is a specialist in the design, development, verification, validation, and accreditation of simulations.  He has been involved in the development of the RAND Strategy Assessment System, the Joint Resource Allocation Model, the Naval War College Air Model, JWARS, and TASCFORM.  He is a member of the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office’s Verification, Validation and Accreditation (VV&A) Technical Working Group and its VV&A Technical Support Team.                                               