Design and development of a Synthetic Environment (SE) Demonstrator for the UK Future Offensive Air System (FOAS)Kelvin Martinkelvin.martin@bae.co.ukNeil Smithnsmith@dera.gov.ukChris Rougetcjrouget@dera.gov.ukKeywords:Architecture, Database, Entities, Interoperability, FOM, Federation, HLA, Heterogeneous, Networking, Prototype, Real-time, Scenario, Simulations, SOM, Smart Procurement, ToolsABSTRACT: This paper will present the activities and lessons learned from developing a HLA Federation to support the UK FOAS-SE Demonstrator Project. This project is being used to demonstrate the use of Synthetic Environments (SEs) in the process of Smart Procurement. The paper will provide a focus on the design issues, requirements capture and the use of methods and software toolkits to underpin the Federation development process.The Federate simulations are supplied by a range of UK companies with the design activity being co-ordinated by the UK Defence Evaluation and Research Agency (DERA). During the Federation development process a ‘top down’ design approach was adopted, using the Real-time Platform Reference (RPR) FOM as a baseline for development. The RPR-FOM was extended to incorporate many FOAS specific communication and data logging interactions.IntroductionThe Smart Procurement Initiative (SPI), launched as part of the UK Strategic Defence Review in 1998 is set to revolutionise the UK MOD procurement process. The primary objective of Smart Procurement is to enhance defence capability by acquiring and supporting equipment more effectively in terms of time, cost and performance. Specifically Smart Procurement adopts a through life systems approach, improved requirements capture, trade-offs, partnerships with industry and new procurement techniques such as incremental acquisition.This process is currently being applied by a number of Integrated Project Teams (IPTs). One of these is the UK Future Offensive Air System (FOAS) IPT within the UK MOD Defence Procurement Agency (DPA).FOAS is aimed at fulfilling the need for an offensive air capability for entry into service in around twenty year's time. This capability may require a 'force mix solution' involving a combination of air vehicles, including manned aircraft, Unmanned Combat Air Craft (UCAV), Air Launched Unmanned Air Vehicles (ALUAV) and Conventionally-armed Air Launched Cruise Missiles (CALCM) - all operating within the digitised battle-space of the 21st century.One facet of Smart Procurement is the adoption of Synthetic Environment (SE) Based Acquisition (SeBA) which provides a framework for the use of Synthetic Environments within Projects.In the UK context a Synthetic Environment (SE) is defined as "linking a combination of models, simulations, people and real equipment into a common representation of the world" [1].As part of the FOAS programme a 3-year project is being conducted aimed at delivering a FOAS Synthetic Environment (FOAS-SE) Demonstration. This will initially form part of the Concept Study Phase of the FOAS programme and any results obtained will be used to supplement the more traditional approach to concept studies, which are based on high level Operational Analysis (OA) techniques.The FOAS-SE Demonstration Project is a collaborative, jointly funded project involving MOD/DERA (Defence Evaluation & Research Agency) and UK Industry. The industry partners include Aerosystems International (AeI), Alenia Marconi Systems (AMS), BAE SYSTEMS Warton, BAE SYSTEMS Avionics, British Telecom (BT) Defence, CORDA, Matra BAe Dynamics UK Ltd (MBD) and Thomson Training & Simulation (TT&S).Phase 1 of this Demonstration is split into two Stages. Stage 1 captured the User and System Requirements and was followed by a top-level design of the SE capability - this project stage concluded with a formal Design Review on 21st December 1999. Stage 2 includes the development of the SE capability and a subsequent study of force mixes and concepts of operation (CONOPS) based on using the SE. During the Stage 2 development an Initial Operating Capability (IOC) was successfully delivered to the MOD and Industry Customers on 31st March 2000. As part of Stage 2 the project plan called for the demonstration to be delivered through three 'Exercises' to be run between June and October 2000.Within UK Industry, the Customers are potential future system component suppliers to the FOAS programme and the UK simulation/SE community.Knowledge and experience gained from previous distributed simulation research projects carried out within the UK has provided a valuable source of information towards the development of the FOAS-SE. Examples of these earlier projects include "STOW-97" and "FlasHLAmp" [2,3]. In particular, Project "FlasHLAmp", was initiated in 1996 to provide MOD, DERA and Industry with an early understanding of the use, development and application of the US High Level Architecture (HLA) for event driven and human-in-the-loop (HumITL), real-time simulations. The key objectives included:to transfer HLA technology and knowledge into the simulation and modelling communities within the UK defence industry;to identify, and where necessary evolve those concepts, techniques and tools necessary to allow UK simulation applications to effectively exploit the HLA;to demonstrate the applicability of tools, techniques and guidelines using an agreed prototype federation of HLA models and simulations;to provide draft guidelines for specifying interoperability requirements when procuring models and simulations;to investigate the integration of legacy (e.g. DIS-like) simulations interoperating within an HLA framework.This paper aims to present the activities and lessons learned from designing, developing and executing a HLA Federation to support the FOAS-SE Demonstration Project.FOAS-SE RequirementsUser RequirementsThe FOAS-SE is primarily required to operate within a core facility co-located on a single site, to a classified level.  An additional requirement is to demonstrate a secure connection to at least one remote site, since any long-term development of this SE capability will have to provide for a geographically dispersed capability. Connection to one or more remote sites will be used to demonstrate risk reduction of using UK high-speed encryption devices within a real-time SE application involving multiple entities, i.e. requiring high bandwidth and low latency.The FOAS-SE Demonstration is required to be capable of simulating a co-ordinated coalition air-attack, one element of which will be FOAS. During the exercise study the scenario is executed several times for each of the FOAS force mixes to allow refinement of concepts of operation and tactics. The SE is also required to support both 'Monte-Carlo' type statistical analysis of varying fundamental parameters within the study scenario, in addition to supporting the execution of the study scenarios in real-time to enable human-in-the-loop assessments of particular cases.System RequirementsThe FOAS-SE consists of a core set of hardware and software systems co-located on a single site and connected together using a Local Area Network (LAN) infrastructure. This is known as the FOAS-SE Primary Site. EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure 2-1: FOAS-SE Primary Site InfrastructureOne of the design goals in the development of the FOAS-SE Demonstration was to provide a high degree of flexibility in the process by which candidate models and simulation applications could be integrated, tested and executed within the SE. Furthermore components of the SE are required to execute in different time domains, i.e. real-time and faster than real-time. In order to meet these requirements the development of the FOAS-SE was based around the HLA.FOAS-SE CORE SYSTEMSEADSIM (Core Battle Model)DIS LoggerDIS/HLA GatewayFederation Verification Tool (FVT)Federation Management Tool - "Director's Chair"HLA based 2D Plan View Display (PVD)HLA based 3D Stealth ViewerHLA based data collection/replay capabilityFile Server to maintain configuration control and provide a single point of access for importing software into the SE.Backup File ServerTable 2-1: FOAS-SE Primary Site Support ToolsThe LAN transport used to connect components of the SE is implemented to support network traffic at a sustained bandwidth, which is suitable for interactions between real-time simulation systems.In addition to the LAN a secure Wide Area Network (WAN) infrastructure has been configured to provide communications to two remote (i.e. Satellite) sites. Each of the Satellite sites is set-up to execute one or more simulation model applications relevant to the FOAS-SE Demonstration.Within the time and budgetary constraints of Phase 1 of the FOAS-SE Demonstration it has proved necessary to utilise existing public network providers. The FOAS-SE WAN is required to support the transmission of classified data using UK accredited encryption devices. This involves the implementation of ‘End-to-End Encryption’ involving the insertion of suitable serial bit-stream encryption / decryption units between the Primary Site LAN and the public WAN.In addition to data other information is required to be transmitted over the secure WAN infrastructure; this includes both audio and video information.Commercial security issues are addressed by ‘black box’ integration and testing.The System Design for the FOAS-SE is based on the integration of a traditional OA modelling tool, i.e. EADSIM (Extended Air Defence Simulation). Referred to generically within the project as the Core Battle Model (CBM) this is used to support pre-demonstration battle modeling activities with the objective of scoping the detailed requirements for SE implementation.The CBM is required to be populated with Computer Generated Forces (CGFs), i.e. constructive simulation entities.The CBM is also required to support an interface to HumITL (virtual) simulation devices, in addition to other constructive modeling systems, operating in a real-time domain.The FOAS-SE Demonstration requires there to be a single Synthetic Natural Environment (SNE) database based on digital data sources for an appropriate area of terrain. The single, common SNE is required to consist of a single source database from which all simulation system domains (e.g. visual, CGF, sensor), derive their run-time representations.The SNE database is represented and distributed in recognised database formats including derived DTED (Digital Terrain Elevation Data) Level 1 and Multigen OpenFlight.A large 'fly over' area, defined as the Base Level terrain database is required to represent the geographical contours and cultural features; area features such as forests and towns are elevated; no point features are included.Medium Level terrain areas are required for the UAV, UCAV and CALCM flight.Generic 3-D visual models are geo-typical rather than geo-specific, i.e. typical of the locality rather than representing specific geographical features.The level of 3D modelling for urban areas is also geo-typical rather than geo-specific. Urban areas are replicated to reduce development costs and time-scales. Therefore, a single model, which represents a small town, can be used for all small towns. Similarly, for large towns, villages and cities.The SNE is required to support weather effects (e.g. cloud layers) across all relevant simulation domains within the SE; these effects shall be static and uniform, not dynamic.The FOAS-SE Demonstration is required to support data collection, data replay and data analysis, based on the use of commercially available software tools where possible and tailored to provide results in the required format.All data captured is time-stamped to ensure that a correlation of events can be retrieved during later analysis work. This includes, but is not limited to the following:digital recording of simulation entity state information, including platform position, velocity, appearance and damage state, munitions fire and detonation events, communications, RF emitters, etc;audio and video recordings of operator actions and other communications not otherwise recorded digitally;other data gathering (whether paper based or computer aided), including participant questionnaires and other observations.Facilities are provided to the analysis team to allow read back and correlation of the data from the above recordings.The data is recorded and stored on media suitable for meeting long term storage requirements, relevant to the life cycle of the FOAS Programme.FOAS-SE Design & DevelopmentThe main design objectives for this stage of the SE Demonstration was to provide a stable, flexible and comprehensive Federation framework in which many different types of simulation models could be added. This allows flexibility in setting overall mission objectives and flexibility in the type of operational analysis to be performed from the results of any given Federation execution.To meet this objective a number of key components are needed.Firstly, a common set of Operator Stations is required which support the appropriate functionality for each platform entity, re-configurable by the use of simple text files and databases. The use of a generic Operator Station provides a common approach to the Human Machine Interface development and reduces the learning curve for Operators. Common tactical maps, icons and controls are available on all of the displays.Secondly, a number of services which are required by many Federate applications are provided by a few simulation ‘servers’. This includes a Weapons Modelling Federate (WMF), a Radio Communications Model, a set of common Sensor Models and a Mission Planning Station.The WMF handles all the blue force ‘simple’ munitions that are not part of the main FOAS concepts and calculates the impact time and position of those weapons after release.The Radio Model is implemented within the STAGE modelling tool and uses both a satellite and a line of site (LOS) model. The LOS model incorporates the simulation of High Altitude Long Endurance (HALE) UAVs. This provides a facility to handle terrain-screening effects, propagation delays and attrition factors affecting the overall mission control and outcome.An important aspect of the operational analysis is the use of verified sensor data sets used by specific entity platforms. The sensor models are also implemented within STAGE and a common interface for their use has been established.Key to executing the Federation missions was the mission planning and the dissemination of the routes to all the blue platforms. A single Mission Planning Station is provided that imports routes generated by the Core Battle Model, i.e. EADSIM, The mission routes are then transmitted to all the appropriate blue platforms for their execution at the desired time. Key to the analysis of the FOAS concepts is an understanding of the interactions between all of the different platform types. The Mission Planning Station enabled experimentation with different force mixes and their mission objectives.The third key component is the FOAS platforms that model the FOAS concepts. These simulations are mainly derived from legacy research simulations, adapted and enhanced to support the FOAS-SE Demonstration.The Federate modelling and simulation applications are supplied by the UK Industry partners, based on the output of the design phase which was co-ordinated by DERA. During the Federation development process a ‘top down’ design approach was adopted, using the Real-time Platform Reference Federation Object Model (RPR-FOM) as a baseline for development. The RPR-FOM has since been extended to incorporate many FOAS specific communication and data logging interactions (see below).The RPR-FOM (Version 1.0) was specified as the baseline FOM template for the detailed design teams, responsible for the development of Federate simulations to be integrated into the SE.The baseline FOM template includes a definition of the format and semantics of data messages that are exchanged between simulation applications and simulation management (sometimes referred to as federation management).The data messages provide information concerning simulated entity states, the type of entity interactions that take place in a distributed simulation exercise, and data for the management and control of the exercise.Primary consideration was given to those simulations and models that could demonstrate HLA compliance and could support the RPR-FOM. Legacy DIS (Distributed Interactive Simulation) simulation models were only considered if there were clear plans within the time-scales of the FOAS-SE Demonstration project to implement an upgrade to the HLA.Legacy DIS simulations were required to IEEE Standard 1278.1-1995. Specifically this included the following set of protocols / messages:DIS Entity State PDU (IEEE 1278.1-1995);DIS Fire PDU (IEEE 1278.1-1995);DIS Detonate PDU (IEEE 1278.1-1995);DIS Emissions PDUs (IEEE 1278.1-1995);DIS Simulation Management (SIMAN) PDUs (IEEE 1278.1-1995).The use of the RPR-FOM allowed many HLA middleware layers that were available within UK Industry to be re-used, including ‘SEAPI’ from MBD and ‘SimConnect’ from AMS. Furthermore, the RPR-FOM supported all the main platform interactions that were required.Below is a list of Federate application types (excluding support tools):RED FORCESCore Battle Model (EADSIM)BLUE FORCESMission Planning StationOperator/Pilot Stations Platform Dynamics ModelsSensor ViewersSensor Models (via STAGE)Radio Model (via STAGE)Weapons Model Federate (WMF)Recognised Air Picture Display (RAP)Table 3-1: FOAS-SE Federate TypesOne area that needed enhancements however, was communications. To allow for future capability and ease of use a set of three communications interactions were added which evolved the baseline RPR-FOM into the FOAS-SE-FOM. This allowed communications to be directed via the Radio Model and bypassed when modelling subsystem to subsystem communications (e.g. platform (( sensor). A simple text based messaging system was developed and a set of commands and status information was encoded to allow maximum flexibility. A ‘comment’ interaction has also been added to allow Federate applications to log key mission events that were unavailable as part of the original RPR-FOM. Another addition which has been included, as part of the FOAS-SE-FOM is a set of Observer Interactions used for the remote control of a 3D Stealth Viewer and for the control of IR and Visual sensor displays.In the context of developing the FOAS-SE-FOM an important lesson learned by the FOAS-SE Design Team is the need to capture all discussions and agreed decisions relevant to developing the FOM. Specifically the Design Team needs to:review the FOM and focus on areas of potential ambiguity which are complemented by Notes;maintain a FOM Design Document which MUST be updated to reflect any relevant verbal discussions/decisions;issue the FOM Design Document to all suppliers of Federate applications when any changes are made. FOAS-SE Integration & TestingThe networking infrastructure for the FOAS SE Demonstration has been achieved by providing an Internet Protocol (IP) based Local Area Network (LAN) at the Primary Site, and a transparent LAN to LAN connectivity to remote (satellite) site(s). All current simulation interoperability standards are IP based, including DIS (IEEE 1278.1-1995) and the proposed HLA Standard, IEEE 1516.Due to time and budgetary constraints, particularly related to the requirements for high bandwidth long haul secure network connections, the site-to-site WAN connectivity has been implemented using existing public services based on MegaStream circuits. This is a switched telecommunications service, which is readily available in the UK at reasonable start up and rental costs, with a data bandwidth of up to 2 Megabits/second (equivalent to Primary Rate ISDN) - peak utilisation is estimated at approximately 1.2 Megabits/second.Simulation Management using the SIMAN start/resume and stop/pause interactions has been used through a central Federation Management Tool called the ‘Directors Chair’. This provides a Figure 4-1: FOAS-SE Document Roadmapbasic level of control although some manual start-up process is required since the Federation includes a DIS application through a DIS/HLA Gateway.HLA Time Management Services have not been used within the FOAS-SE because the federation is currently executed in real-time and is not constrained by events in time. During real-time execution the federate platforms are synchronised to wallclock time using Network Time Protocol (NTP).The integration of many complex simulations and tools has been achieved through a steady evolution of the Federation rather than a ‘big bang’ approach. Starting from the Initial Operating Capability (IOC) Federation individual Federate applications have been integrated in a phased manner.Each Federate is required to be tested in a local networked environment before integration. This reduces many integration problems and allows a stable Federation to evolve.Federate simulation models are accepted for integration into the FOAS-SE following ‘black box’ testing. The testing of simulation models includes consistency checking to ensure that models are consistent within themselves as well as being mutually consistent with each other. This is achieved via SOM/FOM consistency checks.The FOAS-SE Test & Verification Strategy document outlines the test and verification processes to be carried out in more detail, including the testing to be performed at the Federation level (see FOAS-SE Document Roadmap diagram above).COTS Software ToolsTool AcquisitionThe Commercial-off-the-Shelf (COTS) tools used within the FOAS-SE Demonstration Facility were obtained from the Defence Modelling and Simulation Office (DMSO) via the Software Distribution Centre (SDC) and from the Institute for Simulation and Training (IST) sponsored by Simulation, Training and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM) via a distribution agreement.The Run-time Infrastructure (RTI) 1.3v6, the Federation Verification Tool (FVT) 1.3v3, the Java Bindings Version 1 for RTI 1.3, the Data Collection Tool (DCT) 1.3v3 and the Object Model Development Tool (OMDT) 1.3v4 were obtained from DMSO and the HLA Gateway v3.3 was obtained from IST.Tool Installation and ExecutionRun-time Infrastructure (RTI)The installation of the RTI 1.3v6 was straightforward and easily tested by executing the "Hello World" Application.Federation Verification Tool (FVT)The FVT 1.3v3 requires that the RTI 1.3v6 and the JDK (Java Development Kit) / JRE (Java Runtime Environment) 1.2 be installed.The JRE, which is part of the JDK, can be obtained from Sun Microsystems Inc. or from the appropriate FVT distribution.The installation of the FVT 1.3v3 was straightforward and easily tested by executing the "Hello World" Application.During IOC testing in March 2000, the FVT 1.3v3 experienced a problem that caused the tool to fail to start. This problem took some time to correct and was caused by a file being corrupted as a result of a failed Federation Execution. This problem was fixed, with the assistance of the FVT developers, by removing the “.FVTProps” file found in the user profiles directory.During Exercise #1 testing in May 2000, the problem of Federates not responding whilst running the FVT 1.3v3 on the same platform as the RTI 1.3v6 (RtiExec and FedExec processes) was resolved by replacing the FVT 1.3v3 with the beta-release of the FVT 1.3v4 obtained from the FVT developers. The FVT 1.3v4 requires that the Java Bindings Version 1 for RTI 1.3 also be installed.The FVT 1.3v4 public release was made available, from DMSO via the SDC, on the 26th June 2000 and was installed within the FOAS-SE Demonstration Facility for use during Exercise #2.Java Bindings Version 1 for RTI 1.3The Java Bindings Version 1 for RTI 1.3 requires that the RTI 1.3v6 be installed.The installation of the Java Bindings Version 1 for RTI 1.3 was complicated by the use of two README files that appeared to conflict with each other when, in fact, both were actually required. The installation was further complicated by there being several locations from which to obtain software from the SDC at the time. Furthermore, in order to test the installation, a Java compiler is required, which is not part of the JRE distribution.Object Model Development Tool (OMDT)The installation of the OMDT 1.3v4 was straightforward and easily tested by executing with the RPR-FOM (Version 1.0 Draft 2).The OMDT 1.3v4 was used for FOAS-SE FOM development, since the OMDT 1.3v5 reported a Consistency Checker failure, due to the presence of the DatumIdentifierEnum32 enumeration which contains values that exceed the enumeration value range of 0...65535 as defined in the OMT Specification.The OMDT 1.3v4 was used to generate the OMT and FED files named “FOAS-FOM_noDCT.OMT” and “FOAS-FOM_noDCT.FED” respectively from an OMD (Object Model Data Dictionary) file named “FOAS-FOM_noDCT.OMD”.Data Collection Tool (DCT)The DCT 1.3v3 requires that the RTI 1.3v6, the JDK/JRE 1.2, the Java Bindings Version 1 for RTI 1.3, Microsoft Office 97 Professional and Microsoft Visual C++ 6.0 be installed.Once the prerequisites were satisfactorily installed the DCT 1.3v3 had the following hurdles to overcome:manage the generation of the OMT (Object Model Template) and FED (Federation Execution Data) files during step 1;ensure the generation of the Collector Federate, during step 3, by removing all enumeration duplicates;manage the generation of a target database for each Federation Execution.During step 1, the resultant OMT and FED files “FOAS-FOM.OMT” and “FOAS-FOM.FED” were generated from “FOAS-FOM_noDCT.OMT” and “FOAS-FOM_noDCT.FED” respectively.During step 3, the generation of the Collector Federate succeeded once the presence of the enumeration duplicates inherited from the RPR-FOM in identifiers DatumIdentifierEnum32 and StationEnum32 had been resolved.As mentioned previously in this paper the FOAS-SE-FOM was derived from the RPR-FOM and shown below are a series of extracts from the OMT file and its associated schema file. The initial OMT file and its corresponding schema file are shown in Table 5-1 and Figure 5-1 respectively.Interaction “FOASIntTx”ParameterDataTypeCardinalityDataLengthlong1MessageTypeFOASMessageEnum81ReceivingObjectsRTIObjectIdArrayStruct1DataBufferoctet0+OriginatingObjectIDRTIObjectIdStruct1ComplexDataType "RTIObjectIdArrayStruct"FieldNameDataTypeCardinalityLengthunsigned short1IDRTIObjectIdStruct1+ComplexDataType "RTIObjectIdStruct"FieldNameDataTypeCardinalityIDoctet0+Table 5-1: Extract 1 from FOAS-SE OMT file[I27_FOASIntTx.txt]ColNameHeader=FalseFormat=Delimited(|)Col1=SerialNumber LongCol2=WallclockTime DoubleCol3=SimulationTime DoubleCol4=P0_DataBuffer MemoCol5=P1_DataLength LongCol6=P2_MessageType TextCol7=P3_OriginatingObjectID_ID MemoFigure 5-1: Extract 1 from FOAS-SE schema fileDue mainly to time constraints the final hurdle was to modify the OMT file without modifying the FED file, in order to generate the schema and database to capture the FOAS-SE data without impacting on the development of the Federate applications.Notice that the parameters were rendered in alphabetic order and that the “ReceivingObjects” parameter was not rendered, since the DCT does not cater for the "RTIObjectIdArrayStruct” complex-datatype, which was defined as a multi-dimensional variable length array.Interaction “FOASIntTx”ParameterDataTypeCardinalityDataLengthlong1MessageTypeFOASMessageEnum81ReceivingObjectsRTIObjectIdArrayStruct1DataBufferoctet0+OriginatingObjectIDRTIObjectIdStruct1ComplexDataType "RTIObjectIdArrayStruct"FieldNameDataTypeCardinalityLengthunsigned short1IDRTIObjectIdStruct1+ComplexDataType "RTIObjectIdStruct"FieldNameDataTypeCardinalityIDstring1Table 5-2: Extract 2 from FOAS-SE OMT file[I27P5_ReceivingObjects_ID.txt]ColNameHeader=FalseFormat=Delimited(|)Col1=SerialNumber LongCol2=Previous_Dimension_Serial LongCol3=IndexNumber LongCol4=P0_ReceivingObjects_ID_ID Memo[I27_FOASIntTx.txt]ColNameHeader=FalseFormat=Delimited(|)Col1=SerialNumber LongCol2=WallclockTime DoubleCol3=SimulationTime DoubleCol4=P0_DataBuffer MemoCol5=P1_DataLength LongCol6=P2_MessageType TextCol7=P3_OriginatingObjectID_ID MemoCol8=P4_ReceivingObjects_Length LongFigure 5-2: Extract 2 from FOAS-SE schema fileChanging the DataType and Cardinality from “octet 0+” to “string 1” in the complex-datatype "RTIObjectIdStruct" yields the resultant OMT file and its corresponding schema file as shown in Table 5-2 and Figure 5-2 respectively. Notice that “ReceivingObjects” is now being rendered in a master-detail format, since the "RTIObjectIdArrayStruct” complex-datatype is now defined as a single-dimensional variable length array.Changing the Cardinality from “1+” to “1” in the complex-datatype "RTIObjectIdArrayStruct" yields the resultant OMT file and corresponding schema file as shown in Table 5-3 and Figure 5-3 respectively.Interaction “FOASIntTx”ParameterDataTypeCardinalityDataLengthlong1MessageTypeFOASMessageEnum81ReceivingObjectsRTIObjectIdArrayStruct1DataBufferstring1OriginatingObjectIDRTIObjectIdStruct1ComplexDataType "RTIObjectIdArrayStruct"FieldNameDataTypeCardinalityLengthunsigned short1IDRTIObjectIdStruct1ComplexDataType "RTIObjectIdStruct"FieldNameDataTypeCardinalityIDstring1Table 5-3: Extract 3 from FOAS-SE OMT file[I27_FOASIntTx.txt]ColNameHeader=FalseFormat=Delimited(|)Col1=SerialNumber LongCol2=WallclockTime DoubleCol3=SimulationTime DoubleCol4=P0_DataBuffer MemoCol5=P1_DataLength LongCol6=P2_MessageType TextCol7=P3_OriginatingObjectID_ID MemoCol8=P4_ReceivingObjects_Length LongCol9=P5_ReceivingObjects_ID_ID MemoFigure 5-3: Extract 3 from FOAS-SE schema fileThe third and final example was used throughout Exercise #1.The techniques employed in the generation of a target database for each Federation Execution were as follows:save a DCP (Data Collection Plan) up to step 5 and then create a new schema and database for each execution;save a DCP up to step 7 and then create a new database from a template database for each execution.This option was used throughout Exercise #1.Throughout Exercise #1 a template database was the DCT generated database containing no data that grew in functionality by adding queries, forms, modules but no tables which could be used to interrogate the data in the target database generated for each Federation Execution.The DCT 1.3v3 does have an accuracy problem that only gives six digits of precision by default when using double data type attributes/parameters.The accuracy problem is to be addressed in the next release of the DCT.In order to test the DCT 1.3v3 a test federate was generated using the Framework Tool [4] from an OMD file. HLA GatewayThe HLA Gateway v3.3 acquired from IST which worked with RTI 1.3v6 and RPR-FOM v0.5, was modified to work with RPR-FOM v1.0 by DERA.This development was managed by a series of patches: HLA Gateway v3.3-3 was used throughout IOC and Exercise #1.hlaResultshlaResults v1.1 was acquired from Virtual Technology Corporation for evaluation and has the same installation pre-requisites as the DCT 1.3v3.The installation of hlaResults v1.1 was straightforward in comparison to previous versions.An initial test was successfully performed within the FOAS-SE Demonstration Facility on the 17th and 18th July 2000 concerning the Data Collection and the Playback capabilities respectively.However, there appears to be a problem in the generation of the schema and database in regard to Text and Memo fields. Whereas the DCT 1.3v3 generates Text and Memo fields, hlaResults v1.1 generates only Text fields. This is only a problem when more than 255 characters need to be captured, which is the case for FOAS-SE where about 1300 characters are required. To overcome this limitation it is necessary to modify the fields in the schema file and in the target database manually from Text to Memo. This approach does not appear to work for fields within Complex Datatypes.Tool EvaluationThe Federation Execution Planners Workbook (FEPW) 1.3v3 obtained from DMSO, hlaResults v1.1 and hlaControl v1.1 acquired from Virtual Technology Corporation for evaluation are planned to be evaluated during Exercise #2 and #3.ConclusionsFor potential FOAS product suppliers the FOAS- SE Demonstration offers an opportunity to gain an understanding of the FOAS User Requirements and to assess the effectiveness of their proposed solutions.For the UK simulation/SE community the demonstration offers an opportunity to gain early visibility of and participation in the expected longer-term implementation of SEs on the FOAS programme.The study will also provide a foundation from which FOAS-SE activities can expand by generating data to support future SE investment cases and giving UK Industry an early involvement in the application of SEs to the FOAS Programme.In the longer term SEs may be used to increase confidence and knowledge in many areas of the FOAS programme, e.g.requirements capture;CONOPS development;operational employment;training and mission rehearsal;test and evaluation;acquisition;research and development;warfare analysis.Traditionally, acquisition has been a linear and sequential process; the implementation of SeBA within FOAS aims to make the acquisition process more concurrent. This policy is consistent with the principles of Smart Procurement within the UK.References[1]	D/DG(R&T)/8/6/1/1, "MOD SE Policy Paper", May 1999.[2]	Neil Smith, Paul Henry, Chris Rouget: "UK Project FlasHLAmp Warfighting Federation", SIW paper #98S-SIW-067, Spring 1998 SISO Conference.[3]	Mike Jobson: "UK Project FlasHLAmp Analysis Federation", SIW paper #98S-SIW-070, Spring 1998 SISO Conference.[4]	Chris Rouget, Paul Henry: “Utilizing HLA Object Models within a C++ Repository to generate tools to support the Federation Development and Execution Process”, SIW paper #00S-SIW-095, Spring 2000 SISO Conference.Author BiographiesKELVIN MARTIN is a Principal Software Engineer working for Matra BAe Dynamics (UK) and has worked in the field of Simulation and Modelling for 15 years. A graduate of Manchester University he has been involved with the software design and development of Air Defence Training Equipment. He is presently working in the Matra BAe Dynamics Synthetic Environment Applied Research Laboratory. The purpose of his current research is to apply and evaluate SE standards and Advanced Distributed Simulation technology to current and future systems, including advanced guided missiles and ground based air defence concepts. Since 1996 he has been involved with a number of UK SE National Demonstration programmes including FlasHLAmp and ADSE (Air Defence Synthetic Environment).NEIL SMITH is a Senior Professional Scientist working for the UK Defence Evaluation & Research Agency (DERA) and is presently working for Flight Management and Control Department (Air Systems Sector) at DERA Bedford. Since joining the DERA (then known as the Royal Aircraft Establishment) in 1972 he has gained over 25 years experience in the use of simulation technology for piloted flight simulation applications. Since 1992 he has been involved with a range of UK research projects which have provided a focus on the application of methods and techniques to integrate fight simulation systems as part of a larger scale networked simulation environments. These studies have involved the application of Standards for Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS), in addition to managing the implementation of distributed simulation frameworks using the High Level Architecture. The purpose of this research work is to determine the scope and potential use of emerging distributed simulation standards and technology with respect to the integration of high performance, human-in-the-loop simulations.CHRIS ROUGET is a SE Research Contractor presently working for Flight Management and Control Department (Air Systems Sector) at DERA Bedford. A graduate of Imperial College, London, he has 20 years experience in mathematical and relational database modelling, working on simulation based applications associated with military weapons, military aircraft, civilian aircraft, and the communications industries. More recently practical experience has been gained in the use of methods and tools with respect to DIS and HLA application development. Matra BAe Dynamics (UK) LimitedBritish Crown copyright 2000. Published with the permission of the Defence Evaluation and Research Agency on behalf of the Controller of HMSO.