Lessons Learned in Virtual Strike Warfare Environment #7LT Todd AndelDaniel CaudillJames ZehAFRL/VACD2180 8th Street, Suite 1WPAFB, OH 45433937-255-6759Todd.Andel@wpafb.af.mil Dan.Caudill@wpafb.af.mil James.Zeh@wpafb.af.milChristopher BuellBret GivensDavid O’QuinnRobert SubrVeridian Engineering5200 Springfield Pike, Suite 200Dayton, OH 45431937-253-4770Chris.Buell@wpafb.af.mil Bret.Givens@wpafb.af.mil Dave.O’Quinn@wpafb.af.mil Robert.Subr@wpafb.af.mil Keywords:HLA, DMT, DRENABSTRACT: The paper presents a number of valuable lessons learned during execution of Virtual Strike Warfare Environment #7 (VSWE 7), which was the first distributed High-Level Architecture (HLA) event sponsored by the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program.  The primary focus of VSWE 7 was on issues associated with test and evaluation. It built upon the accomplishments of previous VSWE events, which used the Strike Warfare Collaborative Environment (SWCE) to support the development of the Joint Operational Requirements Document and Performance-Based Specification. Working closely with the Combined Test Working Group, VSWE 7 demonstrated the capabilities of the SWCE to support both contractor and government test programs.  It accomplished the first steps towards accrediting the environment and building confidence in the tools and processes. The exercise involved a distributed four-ship of JSF simulators being controlled through operator-in-the-loop Command and Control (C2), and opposed by pilot-in-the-loop interceptors, surface-to-air missiles, and enemy C2. VSWE 7 was a progressive step in JSF simulation-based acquisition program. More generally, it demonstrated the effectiveness of the SWCE to support the acquisition analysis during the current Prototype Development and Risk Reduction (PDRR) phase, as well as the government and contractor test requirements of the Engineering and Manufacturing Development (E&MD) phase. Such cross-phase usage is central to the DoD’s vision for simulation-based acquisition.1. IntroductionThe cornerstone of the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program is affordability—reducing the costs of development, production, and ownership.  The program was structured from the outset to be a model of acquisition reform, with an emphasis on “jointness,” advanced technology maturation, concept demonstration, and early cost-performance trades. A sizable effort is underway to reduce both risks and life cycle costs by maturing key technologies and demonstrating their effectiveness.  These technologies have been identified as high-payoff contributors to affordability, supportability, survivability and lethality. Numerous experiments have been accomplished and others are in process to validate the performance and life cycle cost impacts of these technologies on the component, subsystem, and total system levels [1].The need to evaluate the contractor’s weapon system concepts in a system-of-systems environment, in order to optimize total system performance and to minimize costs, led to the establishment of the JSF Strike Warfare Collaborative Environment (SWCE).  The JSF SWCE is a combination of models and simulations and disciplined systems engineering processes that provide quantitative and qualitative data for analysis. Additionally, the SWCE can augment the weapon system’s Test and Evaluation (T&E) program, including both developmental and operational testing.  Additionally, the JSF SWCE has laid the groundwork for training and mission rehearsal capabilities that will be required for the Production, Fielding/Deployment, and Operational Support (PF/DOS) phase.2. VSWE 7 Conceptual Model The approach for VSWE 7 is depicted in Figure 1 and discussed in the following sections.Figure 1.  VSWE 7 Analytic Approach2.1 Methodology/Analytic ApproachThe first task was a thorough scoping of the effort, beginning with the definition of the architecture and the information to be passed between the players and sites.  We then developed the constructive Design of Experiments (DOE) to determine the anticipated latencies based on the geographic dispersion of the federated models, and to assess the impact of latencies on the MOEs using the Joint Interim Mission Model (JIMM) model.  As part of this process, we assessed the range of expected latencies from the radar warning receiver, target track radar, and other key components, to identify threshold values for the latencies and their impact on affected Measures of Effectiveness (MOEs).  This was done to set the range of latency values used for the parametric analysis and to ensure that the proper MOE (at the right level of dis-aggregation) would be captured. A well-defined Federation Interface Document (FID) was the culmination of this taskThe end-to-end process is depicted in Figure 1. It features a feedback loop for post-event constructive execution to address any correlation issues arising from the virtual simulation.  The following sections detail the purpose and output of each of the four phases in the process.2.1.1 Pre-Event Constructive PhaseThe objective of this phase is to determine the sensitivity of various MOEs to induced activity delays that simulate distributed network latencies. There are three primary outputs: (1) threshold latency values that indicate inflection points for the affected MOEs; (2) various MOE values; and (3) correlation coefficients expressing the degree of linear association between the latency variation and the selected MOEs.2.1.2 Pre-Event Stand-Alone Phase  In this phase, data produced from constructive and stand-alone simulations is reviewed to uncover potential discrepancies. The objective is to validate the constructive simulation work by creating a more realistic representation of the virtual network than is provided by the JIMM model executed in the constructive mode.  It is a pre-virtual prediction effort to support the analytic correlation of the geographically distributed virtual simulation.  The outputs are the same as those of the previous step.2.1.3 Virtual Simulation PhaseThe purpose of this phase is to accomplish the primary objectives of the virtual simulation program.  In our case, it was to create the first SWCE build to support testing during JSF program’s EMD phase.  It provided an initial assessment of the survivability and effectiveness of JSF block upgrades, reflecting increasing levels of interoperability.The output products were the various MOE values relating to survivability and effectiveness for the JSF block upgrades; observed latency values at key nodes in the distributed network; and correlation coefficients associating latencies with MOEs.2.1.4 Post-Event Constructive PhaseThis phase is only necessary if the routes and latency values observed in the virtual event differ from the values that had been entered into the constructive model.  It ensures an apples-to-apples comparison and allows for adjustments to the virtual MOEs if needed.The primary outputs are the MOE values corresponding to the actual latencies observed in the virtual event.  Also included are correlation coefficients expressing the degree of linearity between the latency values and the MOEs.3.  VSWE 7 ScenarioThe scenario centered on the imaginary country of Calvada, a small, land-locked, ambitious nation with strong cultural, political, and military ties with a hypothetical former Soviet Union state called “Threat Nation.” According to official statements, Threat Nation has been invited by Calvada’s military government to support the Calvadian People’s Army (CPA) from the “aggression” demonstrated by its neighbor to the south and western, “Blue Nation.” (Figure 2)  In reality, Calvada is encroaching on territory just south of its borders, where large, easily obtainable deposits of boron have been discovered.  This is considered to be the first step toward Calvada’s long-range goal—the acquisition of oceanic port access.  Threat Nation is willing to bring its forces into the conflict to strengthen its influence in the region and to reap a portion of the boron profits.3.1 Topography and ClimateThe area is the major part of the Basin Range region.  It is an interior country that extends from essentially 35( to 42( north latitude and 120( to 110( west longitude.  The high mountain ranges on its western border preclude access to the western ocean.  The region is a mix of medium to high mountain ranges (4,000 to 12,000 feet) running essentially north/south, with interspersed valley and plains areas.  The territory ranges from semi-arid to barren desert with most water resources being concentrated in a few large lakes and rivers.  The high cost of well-drilling has resulted in widely distributed, small population centers across most of the country.  The three major population centers—Reno in the northwest, Salt Lake City in the northeast and Las Vegas in the central southern region—all have reasonable water access.  The climate is continental with the desert aspect predominating.  The days can be extremely hot and the nights icy cold.  Rainfall is extremely limited and seasonal.  The primary industries are mining and grazing, although related industries do exist in the population centers.  Buildings in the rural areas tend to be isolated, usually in support of the mining and ranching activities.  The transportation net is generally meager and is not well developed beyond the cities.3.2 Recent OccurrencesThe longstanding dispute with Blue Nation, ostensibly involving some mineral-rich territory on Calvada’sFigure 2.  Calvada and Surrounding Countriessouthwest border, is actually a steppingstone to its goal of oceanic access and has recently led to armed conflict between them.  In spite of limited local vistories, the CPA was essentially rebuffed by an unexpectedly strong reaction from Blue Nation forces.  The higher-than-anticipated casualties in soldiers and material disrupted the CPA timetable and initiated a period of force build-up for both combatants.The CPA is currently moving significant additional ground forces into the area, leaving light forces in possession of the immediate border area and the seized area.  Two ground force organic air defense brigades (SA-11s) have been deployed into the region as an adjunct to the territorial (strategic) air defense force, with the mission of providing air defenses to the primary lines of communication and force assembly areas.  Threat Nation forces are also participating in these activities in order to show solidarity with their CPA brethren and to further increase the pressure (both political and military) on the Blue Nation.3.3 The Immediate Military MissionThe U.S. 1st Mechanized Infantry Brigade has assembled to the south of the conflict area, ready to push north into the Calvada basin and to re-establish borders recognized by the United Nations. Threat Nation has learned of these plans and is sending elements of its 3rd Armored Brigade (62nd Tank Division) south to disrupt Blue force operations in the area. Threat Nation is prepared to inflict any kind of casualties on U.S. forces, whether ground or air, in order to adversely influence Blue public opinion.  It is doubtful whether CPA forces, even with Threat Nation assistance, could hold its newly claimed territory against the better trained and equipped Blue military supported by U.S. air and ground forces. Blue Nation knows, however, that it must move fast into the seized territory before Threat Nation reaches the area and establishes defensive positions of much increased strength.  In order to do this, U.S. air forces will strike the 3rd Brigade, which is still assembling its battalions and refueling after several days of travel over rough terrain en-route from the northeast. 3.4 Calvada Air DefensesCalvada’s Air Defenses are organized in a unique manner.  Centralized operational control is maintained within the Air Defense Operations Center (ADOC) that passes command and control messages to two Sector Operations Centers (SOCs), and provides tactical control of an SA-10 SAM battalion.  Each SOC exercises tactical control of its SA-11 SAM battalions and Intercept Operation Centers (IOCs), while providing tactical direction to a SAM Brigade.  The SAM Brigade, in turn, exercises tactical control of the SA-2 and SA-20 SAM battalions.  Each IOC receives early warning data from its subordinate Reporting Posts (RPs) and, after additional processing, passes this data up echelon to the SOC.3. VSWE 7 SWCE FederationThe federation described herein is the first iteration of a federation whose design will evolve over time to support the continued development of the JSF design, and to support the JSF as it matures. The following paragraphs provide a short description of each simulation or federate used within SWCE, although only the first four are federates within the VSWE 7 Federation Object Model (FOM). Two federations ran simultaneously, using two different message numbers, two RTIs, and different socket numbers in the RID file.  The cockpit simulation was connected to the second federation via the JIMM_FRED FOM, which furnished truth data.Figure 3. VSWE 7 ModelsJIMM: Joint Interim Mission Model is the next-generation Air Force/Navy mission model to support the evaluation and simulation of air-based warfare.  It is one of the core models of the JSF program.  Derived from SUPPRESSOR and Simulated Warfare Environment Generator (SWEG) simulations, it offers functionality beyond the capabilities of its ancestors.  JIMM is the core model of the federation and provides the primary support environment for modeling JSF systems.  In addition, JIMM’s shared memory interface is used to integrate the cockpit federates, JMASS, ESAMS, CEESIM/HITL, and pico-AMES.  None of these simulations interacted with the other federates through the HLA RTI.DIADS: Digital Integrated Air Defense Simulation is a highly realistic simulation of threat integrated air defense systems. It is a derivative of the REDCAP simulations produced by the defense intelligence community.  Our use of DIADS within the federation yielded a robust threat integrated air defense system environment that supported JSF design evaluation and testing at the detailed engineering level.EADSIM: Extended Air Defense Simulation is general two-sided mission model whose primary strength is its models of command, control, and communications (C3), both friendly and hostile, that have been implemented within the simulation. EADSIM served to provide the off-board Intelligence/Surveillance/ Reconnaissance (ISR) environment with which the JSF aircraft and pilot interacted.MDST: The Missile Defense Simulation Tool models various space-borne surveillance assets used to detect and track missile firings.  It provided alerts and tracks to EADSIM’s C3 systems, influencing the ISR processing with regard to offensive actions against missile launch systems detected by the MDST-modeled sensors.FRED: Fighter Requirements Evaluation Device (FRED) is a real-time, reconfigurable, operator-in-the-loop simulator. FRED enables the development or validation new cockpit configurations under realistic, adverse, and high-workload conditions.  FRED simulates a real-world environment built from Defense Mapping Agency (DMA) Digital Terrain Elevation Data (DTED), covered in a shaded terrain skin.  The inclusion of cultural features such as buildings, roads, rivers, and forests enhances the realism of the environment. FRED’s tactical mission environment exposes the simulated aircraft to realistic threat stimuli during the mission. JMASS: The purpose of including a specific real-time variant of the Joint Modeling and Simulation System in this federation was to test the capability of JMASS to interact within an HLA federation.  This is an important capability because it will allow the JSF program office to use the intelligence community’s threat models that are being implemented in compliance with JMASS.CEESIM: Combat Electromagnetic Environment Simulator (CEESIM) and hardware-in-the-loop (HITL) for a Radar Warning Receiver (RWR).  The stimulator represented an RF stimulator environment that replicated the instantaneous threat Target-Tracking Radar (TTR) signals received by one or more of the JSF aircraft.  CEESIM stimulated an RWR HITL system within the same facility, with the RWR used in an open-loop fashion; that is, detections made by the RWR were be displayed to the JSF pilot.  Figure 4. VSWE 7 FederationAs Figure 4 shows, the VSWE 7 Federation comprised of two separate federations.  The decision to implement FRED cockpit as a federate came late in the Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP).  Therefore, we decided to isolate the JIMM_FRED interface, in order to reduce the risk to other models already interfacing with the VSWE 7 FOM.4. ConnectivityThe computer network consisted of four geographically separated 100 Mb Ethernet Local Area Networks (LAN) connected via an Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) Wide Area Network (WAN), as shown in Figure 5.  The ATM WAN was actually a reserved portion of the Defense Research Engineering Network (DREN) with data protection provided by General Dynamics FASTLANE ATM encryptors.  The sites involved included ASC/HPM (SIMAF) and AFRL/SN, both at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base; the 412th Flight Test Wing at Edwards Air Force Base; and NAWCAD at the Patuxent River Naval Air Station.  Figure 5. VSWE 7 ConnectionsEach of the ATM circuits was set up as a point-to-point Permanent Virtual Circuit (PVC), with SIMAF being the central node.  Virtually these PVCs are three separate connections, although they are physically running into one ATM port on SIMAFs router.The PVCs were nearly identical, with the exception of minor compatibility issues between the routers.  The bandwidth on each circuit was set to a Sustained Cell Rate (SCR) of 10,000 cells per second (cps), or 4.24 Mbps, and a Peak Cell Rate (PCR) of 80,000 cps or 33.92 Mbps.  The SCR guaranteed that each circuit was reserved the 4.24 Mbps and if needed, the bandwidth could grow to the PCR of 33.92 Mpbs for short bursts.  The encapsulation type was set to Logical Link Control/Subnetwork Access Protocol (LLC/SNAP or RFC 1483).   This permitted the running of multiple protocols over each circuit, and enabled simple setup of individual PVCs.  The following protocols were enabled on each PVC: Internet Protocol (IP), Routing Information Protocol (RIP), Address Resolution Protocol (ARP), Internet Group Management Protocol (IGMP), and Distance Vector Multicast Routing Protocol (DVMRP). No additional settings were required between Patuxent River and SIMAF because we had identical routers.  For the PVC between SIMAF and AFRL/SN, the ARP setting was set to ATMARP to allow our Nortel BLN router to talk with their Xylan OSR router.  On the SIMAF to Edwards PVC, we set up an “ip adjacent host” bound to the Virtual Path Identifier/Virtual Channel Identifier (VPI/VCI).  This ensured compatibility between Edwards’ Cisco 3620 router and our Nortel BLN router.  The Cisco 3620 also used Protocol Independent Multicast (PIM) instead of DVMRP, although it was compatible with DVMRP.  IGMP and DVMRP were required to allow us to use multicast.  Multicast is required by HLA, our Advanced Simulation  Technologies  Incorporated (ASTi) voice communication system, and other software tools.   Multicast technology allows a software suite to send out a single data stream using one destination IP address to multiple computers on completely different logical IP subnets.  It does this by using a reserved set of IP addresses in the range of 224.0.0.0 – 239.255.255.255 (Class D), with 224.0.0.1 – 224.0.0.255 reserved for routing protocols. When data is sent out during multicast transmission, the first router it encounters will pass it to any routers that it recognizes as a multicast neighbor.   When the next router gets the multicast packet, it forwards it to any multicast neighbor. If any local client is subscribing to that specific multicast address, the traffic will then be forwarded to the local network.  If no multicast neighbor or no client is subscribing to a multicast address, the router will not forward the specific multicast address.  Most software that uses multicast data will subscribe to dynamic multicast groups; the router will then pass any data destined for that group.  Some older software/systems that can receive multicast traffic do not participate in this subscribing function; it is then necessary to add a static multicast group to the router for the address expected.4.1 Speed, Delay, and BandwidthThe use of ATM provided tremendous speed. The standard round trip ping times to Edwards, Patuxent River, and local connections averaged 70 ms, 22 ms, and less than 1 ms, respectively. We used Multi Router Traffic Grapher (MRTG) to gather network bandwidth statistics. While the reserved size of our PVCs was 4.24 Mbps each, we actually attained speeds of 4.13 Mbps during large FTP transfers.  MRTG was configured to get data for both our Ethernet and ATM ports.  		In Kbps		Out KbpsMax		176.39		708.56Min		106.89		173.35Avg		138.96		338.55Table 1. Ethernet Network StatisticsTable 1 shows sustained network statistics during an average run on our Ethernet port.  The “In” data shows traffic being sent through our router and onto our local Ethernet network.  The “Out” data shows traffic being sent from our local Ethernet network through the router.  Table 2 shows sustained network statistics during an average run on our ATM port.  The “In” data shows traffic being sent from the other three sites into the ATM port on our router.  The “Out” data shows traffic being sent out of the ATM port. The in and out data is almost identical because, with the exception of traffic being from/destined for the Ethernet side of our router, our router is just routing traffic between the three other sites.		In Kbps		Out KbpsMax		722.28		698.01Min		543.86		484.14Avg		628.53		592.99Table 2. ATM Network StatisticsAll simulation data from SIMAF, Edwards, AFRL/SN, and Patuxent River passed through the SIMAF router.  For comparison, Table 3 shows the maximum bandwidth capacities for four common network types.			In Mbps	In KbpsT-1 serial		1.544		154410base Ethernet		10		10000100base Ethernet		100		100000ATM (DREN)		155.2		155200Our ATM allocation	4.24		4240Table 3. Common Network CapacitiesA typical simulation run, therefore, used about 17% of available bandwidth, or 46% of a T-1 line. Though it might seem that we could have had the same success using T-1 lines, the high bandwidth network did much to minimize our data latencies. (Any hardcore QuakeArena player knows that network latency drops from 200ms to 70ms when switched from a 56Kbps modem to DSL! In such a “twitch game,” if you can see the opponent sooner—or more accurately, “less later”—than he sees you, you get the first shot.) This was a primary goal of VSWE7: to determine the effects of such latencies in a distributed simulation. To do so, all computers needing GPS time were synchronized using NTP. We time-stamped our entity state data with GPS time and compared this time against the current time when the data packet was received. The entity state data used the HLA best-effort protocol. Two cockpits ran at SIMAF, and the other two at Patuxent River, along with the JIMM model. The cockpits were the consumers of all entity state data, as well as the producers of their own state. The JIMM model was a producer of all entity state data other than the cockpits.  The typical observed latencies are listed in Table 4.	Latency	Latency varianceSIMAF	40.1 ms	183.9 msPax-MFS	29.7 ms	101.4 msTable 4. VSWE-7 LatencySince the Pax River cockpits were on the same LAN as the JIMM model, these numbers reflect the combined overhead of HLA, the networking software, and the 100base Ethernet back bone. The SIMAF number encompasses all of this plus the overhead of the DREN, routers, DVMRP, and the encryptors. The difference is the latency incurred by using the DREN. The difference, ~11ms, seems to indicate the ping time can be used as a good approximation of the latency incurred by a particular network. Remembering that ping is a round-trip measure, the SIMAF – Pax River ping time of 22ms (11ms for one direction) agrees with our measured number. Ping times of about 100ms were reported between Edwards and Pax River, therefore the network latency should have been about 50ms. Add to this the 30ms for HLA, networking software, and LAN, its likely their overall packet latency to be about 80ms. In an attempt to study the effects of such latencies on this federation, a standalone event was perform entirely at SIMAF, using “dial-a-delay” network boxes between each major simulation piece (DIADS, JIMM, and 2 cockpits). Since there was enough bandwidth to run on a T-1 line, could that have been used? If the induced latency from using a slower T-1 network didn’t prove to be a problem, then perhaps it could be used. From other networking studies, ping times on a T-1 WAN could range from 150-230ms, thus latencies of 75-115ms. Latencies up to 200ms were tested on the cockpit federation and 400ms on the DIADS-JIMM federation. At the time of this writing, the data from this event haven’t been fully analyzed. But, latencies of 100ms or great seemed to have an effect on what DIADS saw, and an increased number of false tracks were observed. Often, the number of SAM engagements by JIMM was considerably fewer. It seems that a T-1 network for this federation might not work well. There were out-lying case which are currently being studied to see if there were more subtle effects at work.6. Lessons Learned 6.1 Network HardwareDREN bandwidth and latency are fully satisfactory for closely coupled virtual federations. However, although the latency and bandwidth usage data reported in this paper would suggest that the DREN provided ample bandwidth and latency, we observed significant spikes during the initial discovery period. 6.2 Multiple FederationsThe decision to develop a separate federation for the virtual cockpits led to the need for separate RTI executives and Federation executives running simultaneously over the WAN.  Without detailed knowledge of the implementation of the RTI, it is difficult to speculate as to what effect this had on the operation of the separate federations.  We observed during integration testing that when both federations were executing simultaneously, the RTI federate discovery process was adversely affected. During standalone testing of the JIMM/FRED federation, it appeared that the order and number of federates joining the federation had no adverse affect on the discovery process.  During testing of the JIMM/FRED federation with the simultaneous execution of the VSWE7 federation, we found that the only reliable method of joining federates to the federation execution was to have them do so one at a time.  It was also observed that if a single federate failed to join properly, this usually resulted in having to resign all previously joined federates and to restart the process with a fresh execution of the RTI and federation executives.  Once all federates had joined properly, we observed that the federation execution during multiple federation execution was essentially the same as it had been when only a single federation was being tested.One advantage to the multiple federation approach was the ability to separately configure the RTIs by having different RID files for each federation.  The importance of this came to light for the JIMM/FRED federation, when it was discovered that the RID file used by VSWE 7 federation constrained its RTI to process a single callback per RTI tick.  This constraint would not have been acceptable for federates in the JIMM/FRED federation.6.3 RTI 1.3v6Usage of the unconstrained tick() call of the RTI ambassador was thought to be inappropriate for the federates of the JIMM/FRED federation, because no limit is set on the amount of time taken to process RTI calls.  Instead, we decided that the federates would use the tick(min,max) version of the call in order to limit the amount of time consumed by the RTI.  The question then arose as to what would be “good” values to use for the call in order to balance between federate update rate and network bandwidth.  Tuning the RTI tick caused the bandwidth to change.  Although this was not unexpected, we were surprised to learn that bandwidth usage increased as the minimum tick was reduced on passive (non-publishing) federates such as a stealth viewer federate. For the JIMM/FRED federation, a min/max setting of 0.1 seconds for the minimum and 1.0 seconds for the maximum appeared to be a good compromise between bandwidth and update rate for all of the federates.6.4 Modification of “Standard” RTI.RidDuring the initial testing of the JIMM/FRED federation which occurred on a LAN, we found that we did not need to modify the RID file supplied with the RTI. However, once we began testing over the WAN, we discovered that the multicast RTI discovery method would not work, due to routers.  We learned that the RTI could also use point-to-point TCP for discoveries. When we configured the RID file for the JIMM/FRED federation for point-to-point discoveries, this appeared to cure the problem. The directions for this are contained in comments in the supplied RID file.  6.5 HLA in GeneralHLA Optimization: HLA was setup to send only the non-static data after the initial full update.  Problems arose when changing the network interface from "Reliable" to "Best Effort.”  On our network, it was not uncommon to find that the initial full update never reached the federate.  Thus caused interface problems with unknown static data.  In a perfect environment with no collisions or packet loss, this would not be a problem.  As more federates are added to the exercise, it becomes increasingly more of a problem. The best solution is to set the full update request packets to "Reliable," and periodic non-static data to "Best Effort."  This problem was easily visible in the passive viewer and the DCT collection tool.In the JIMM_FRED Federation, entity state data was set to “Best Effort,” and event data to “Reliable.”  The default RID file was modified only to add the IP address of the reliable distributor and increase the time out for discovery.In a WAN, “Best Effort” means just that. We did not always reflect all attributes, but only ones that had changed. Therefore, when the simulation began, we would post a request for a full attribute update. But since the entity state data was best effort, we might not get the full update. We had to create our mechanism to realize when we received a full update and to periodically request full update until we received one.The toughest challenge was trying to attach to the federation at the start. For the federates that were truly separated by the WAN and not on the same LAN as the Fedex, it seemed that the Fedex would sometimes simply ignore us. This could have been attributed to a router/multicast configuration problem, or perhaps due to the fact that we were truly were running two federations. Since our ASTi communications system also used multicast and never experienced such problems, we tended to suspect HLA. The only solution that worked for us was to reboot our router.7. Summary The paper presents a number of valuable lessons learned during execution of VSWE 7, which was the first distributed High-Level Architecture (HLA) event sponsored by the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program.  These lessons as well as those that surfaced during the federation execution will be documented and presented at the Fall SIW.  This event built upon the accomplishments of previous VSWE events, which used the SWCE to support the development of the Joint Operational Requirements Document and Performance-Based Specification. Working closely with the Combined Test Working Group, VSWE 7 demonstrated the capabilities of the SWCE to support both contractor and government test programs.  It accomplished the first steps towards accrediting the environment and building confidence in the tools and processes. The exercise involved a distributed four-ship of JSF simulators being controlled through operator-in-the-loop C2, and opposed by pilot-in-the-loop interceptors, surface-to-air missiles, and enemy C2. VSWE 7 was a progressive step in JSF simulation-based acquisition program. More generally, it demonstrated the effectiveness of the SWCE to support the acquisition analysis during the current PDRR phase, as well as the government and contractor test requirements of the Engineering and Manufacturing Development (E&MD) phase. Such cross-phase usage is central to the DoD’s vision for simulation-based acquisition.7. References[1]  Joint Strike Fighter Program Whitepaper, 14 June 1999.Author BiographiesLT TODD ANDEL received a Bachelor of Science in Computer Engineering from the University of Central Florida in 1998.  He entered the Air Force in 1989 and was commissioned in 1998. He has been working at the Air Force Research Laboratory’s Simulation and Assessment Branch (AFRL/VACD) since November 1998. Currently, Lt Andel is the Lead Networking Engineer responsible for network and communication support for both VACD and ASC/HPM (SIMAF).CHRIS BUELL received a BS Degree in Mathematics in 1985 and an MS Degree in Computer Science in 1992 from Wright State University.DAN CAUDILL received a BS Degree in Aerospace Engineering from the University of Cincinnati in 1989.  Mr. Caudill has worked for the Air Force Research Laboratory’s Simulation Assessment Branch (AFRL/VACD) since 1989 and has more than 11 years of technical experience in developing and conducting various flight simulation experiments.  Currently, Mr. Caudill is the Lead Simulation Engineer for the JSF Project at AFRL/VACD.BRET GIVENS received his BS degree in Computer Engineering in 1985 and his MS degree in Computer Engineering in 1990, both from Wright State University.  Mr. Givens works for Veridian and has more than fifteen years of technical experience in software engineering.  He is currently supporting the Joint Strike Fighter Project, and is also the secretary of the Research, Development and Engineering (RDE) Forum for the Simulation Interoperability Workshop. DAVE O’QUINN received a BS Degree in Computer Science in 1989.  Mr. O’Quinn works for Veridian and has more than ten years of technical experience in software engineering.  He is currently supporting the JSF Project at AFRL/VACD.ROB SUBR received his BS Degree in Computer Engineering from University of Idaho in 1995.  He was commissioned into the Air Force in 1995 and worked at the Air Force Research Lab providing simulation support for numerous Air Force programs.  As a Veridian engineer, he supplies technical experience in visual simulation for the Joint Strike Fighter Project at AFRL/VACD.JIM ZEH received his BS degree in Electrical Engineering from University of Cincinnati in 1980 and his MS degree in Computer Science from University of Dayton in 1987.   Mr. Zeh works for the Air Force Research Laboratory’s Simulation Assessment Branch (AFRL/VACD) and has more than 19 years of technical experience in modeling, simulation and analysis.  He currently heads the Wright Patterson Air Force Base Joint Strike Fighter Virtual Simulation Team Lead. EMBED Word.Picture.8  