Personnel Modeling in WARSIM 2000Ronald KlaskyMichelle GriffinScott HopkinsScience Applications International Corporation12479 Research ParkwayOrlando, FL  32826-3248407-306-2959, 407-306-1617, 407-306-5105ronald.s.klasky@saic.com, michelle.e.griffin@saic.com, kendall.s.hopkins@saic.com Keywords:WARSIM 2000, Crew, Personnel, Attrition, DismountABSTRACT:  Personnel modeling issues (i.e., crewing, attrition, effectiveness, allocation, transportation) present a complex set of challenges for software designers on Warfighter’s Simulation (WARSIM) 2000.  Issues such as how to differentiate between personnel as crew or cargo and how to reallocate excess personnel are only two of several issues that, while on the surface may appear straightforward, after some study prove to be more complex.  The WARSIM team has developed several algorithms that address these and other personnel modeling issues.  Personnel attributes such as crew size and crew type are modeled so as to yield proper degradation effects.  Personnel related state attributes such as fitness, morale, and training level contribute to performance degradation and are also modeled.  The focus of this paper is to describe the WARSIM personnel allocation and attrition algorithms as well as performance degradation algorithms and their affect on subsystems such as: medical, damage, and mobility.IntroductionWARSIM Project SummaryThe WARSIM 2000 training system is a computer-based simulation system with associated hardware to support training of U.S. Army commanders and their staffs from battalion through theater level.  This system uses object-oriented software engineering techniques, government validated algorithms and data, world-wide communications connectivity, and has the capability for the training audience to interface to the simulation system through their organic Command, Control, Communications, Computers and Intelligence (C4I) equipment.  WARSIM 2000 supports single echelon and multi-echelon training exercises; large-scale distributed exercises for Army division, corps, and theater headquarters, as well as joint and combined exercises.  The WARSIM 2000 system is installed in Regional Training Centers (RTCs) and Battle Simulation Centers (BSCs).  RTCs are capable of running Division and higher levelhigher-level exercises.  Command Post Interface Modules (CPIMs) provide the capability to support training audiences in their command posts in the field.  A CPIM provides an interface to the organic C4I equipment in the training audience’s command post.  WARSIM 2000 reduces the overhead associated with support of current command post simulation training systems, while meeting the training requirements across the range of military operations from war to operations other than war. The WARSIM 2000 training system consists of the following:Primary simulation computational infrastructure for the WARSIM 2000 system installed at government RTCs and BSCs.CPIMs to link the WARSIM 2000 system to the organic C4I equipment of the training audience.Battlefield simulation models that portray the joint and combined environment needed to support Army training events.Software modules and gateways provided as a part of the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) that allows WARSIM 2000 to interoperate with other simulations, simulators, and live instrumented vehicles to expand the training environment both within the Army and for joint force training exercises.Databases to support training exercises.Computer systems to run the simulation model and support the databases.Technical control systems and workstations for use by observer/controllers, senior controllers, technical controllers, after action review analysts, opposing forces (OPFOR) role players, and surrounding forces (BLUFOR) role players in an exercise support function.Terrestrial and satellite communications gateways and media for transmitting and receiving voice, data, facsimile, and video between different elements (RTCs, BSCs, and CPIMs) at remote locations supporting a training exercise.Training scenario preparation system for generation and modification of scenarios to support the training exercise.After Action Review (AAR) system to provide feedback on the training event.WARSIM Equipment Models Component DesignThe purpose of the Equipment Models Component is to provide a representation of physical entities (equipment and personnel) and physical processes on the simulated battlefield.  The Unit and Equipment components together form the Model Computer Software Configuration Item (CSCI) and simulate military units and non-combatant groups.   Equipment executes the physical commands of the parent unit.  These parent units may be automated or role player directed.    Equipment reports the status of location, supply levels, damage, injury, sensor information, messages received, combat events, and obstacles to the parent unit.  Equipment also publishes location, state data and battlefield interactions to the simulation infrastructure in order to support detection and targeting between WARSIM (and other JSIMS simulations') battlefield entities.Equipment and personnel are represented as “platforms”.  Figure 1.1 depicts four sample platforms.  Platform types are predefined to be composed of a collection of components.  Scenario analysts may create new components and platforms by editing the Equipment Source Database. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 1.1.  Sample Platform Types.To avoid the complexity of requiring the parent unit or group to direct individual platforms, the platforms are aggregated into Equipment Groups (EGs).  EGs can contain one or more platforms, but will most commonly be used for representing military Platoons.  Non-combatant groups are also represented by EGs; these groups include refugees, civilians and enemy prisoners of war (EPWs).  Figure 1.2 depicts a sample EG representing a Tactical Operations Center (TOC). EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 1.2.  A sample EG representing a TOC.The parent unit creates EGs at scenario initialization using unit organization data.  The parent unit may also split, merge or create new EGs during the simulation to represent changing unit organizations.The EG is the element that is directed by the parent unit to carry out physical tasks.  The EG maintains location, motion, ownership of platforms, and current assigned task.  Each EG possesses a set of capabilities that are enabled and affected by the quantities and types of platforms, personnel and supplies present.  This is where most of the modeling takes place.  For example, the EG senses, communicates and fires as an aggregate from a single location in the battlefield.   Each platform instance maintains basic state data, to include location, velocity, cargo contents and damage.  Platform parametric data, i.e., components and performance data, are maintained in data tables for each type of Equipment (instead of as state data for each instance). This Equipment architecture provides a flexible framework upon which both new capabilities/ functionality and new equipment types may be added.  The Equipment Models Component is currently designing the third major iteration of capabilities upon this existing architecture.  Build 1 consisted of basic platforms and EGs performing movement and communication.  Build 2 added more combat systems as well as sensing, direct fire, air defense artillery (ADA), indirect fire, damage assessment, combat engineering and minefields.  Build 3 will provide medical, maintenance, personnel/crew, biological, chemical and smoke operations, supply/cargo and non-battle loss.Personnel ModelingPersonnel RolesIn WARSIM, people are classified as either:  dDismounted Infantry (DI), cCrew, or mMounted pPersonnel.  Each classification handles personnel in a slightly different manner. DismountsDismounts classify people as their own self-propelled platform.  For example, a dismounted platform has a speed, location, damage state, etc. - the same as a tank.  Dismounts may form 1, 2, 5, or 10-person dismounted platforms.  They can take fire, take damage, move, and consume supplies.  A unit, thatwhich contains at least one dismountedDI platforms, will move at the speed of the slowest dismountedDI platform.  The four types of dismount mobility bundles in WARSIM are: Special ForcesInfantryAll Other MilitaryCivilians and Refugees.Each bundle has its unique characteristics (i.e., Forced March Rate, Sustained Rate). Characteristics of the synthetic natural environment (SNE), such as terrain type, slope, and surface conditions, affect the speed of the dismounts.  Visibility and obstacle spacing are not considered in the dismounted mobility model.  The SNE degradation factors are additive up to a maximum speed degradation of 90%.  Negative slope (downhill) will neither degrade nor enhance dismounted movement.  To simulate rest without unnecessarily constraining the training audience, a limitation of total distance traveled during a 24-hour period is used. CrewPersonnel designated as crew are contained within another a platform and have a much smaller set of state attributes than do dismountsDI (i.e., no separate velocity or location information stored).  Crew are tracked at the EG level as well as the platform level. This is necessary to facilitate split/merge operations.  Each crewmemberman has the following attributes: Platform ID, Name, SSN, Rank, Rank Priority, MOS/CMF, and Health.  Crewmembersman can be wounded, killed, removed from an EG, added to an EG, and queried.MountsMounted personnel are similar to crew, however, they are different in that the only way for them to take damage is for the EG they're mounted on to assign them damage.  What's different is except that they don't affect the operation of the equipment they are mounted on.  They also differ in that; and they are maintained in a separate EG from the EG they are mounted upon to facilitate dismounting and autonomous control by the parent unit. They do not interact directly with the environment - that is left up to the control of the EG on which they are mounted.CrewingInitial AllocationThe initial assignment of crew to platforms is done at Uunit and EG creation during simulation initialization.  The list of personnel in the EG is sorted by rank priority.  Another list, aThe list of platforms, is sorted by their priority.  Personnel are then assigned to platforms one-by-one, in a card- deal fashion, until all personnel have been assigned to all platforms.  This algorithm assures that both officers and enlisted personnel are spread out as evenly as possible among all the platforms in the EG.  All platforms are to have at least one crew member provided that the platform is not catastrophically destroyed.  In a catastrophic destruction the platform is obliterated with all crew and supplies being completely destroyed. Cross-levelingAs the simulation unfolds and platforms (and crew) take damage, personnel are cross-leveled to maintain even levels of personnel distribution among all remaining platforms.  Cross-leveling of personnel assigns each crew member to each platform in order of rank priority and platform priority.  Personnel can be re-shuffled among platforms (within the same EG) as often asif necessary.  The goal is to spread distribute remaining personnel as evenly and effectively as possible among all EG platforms.Crewing EffectsOther personnel effects are: degradation and splitting.  Degradation of performance is a result of crewing platforms having either the incorrect amount or type of crew.  If the crew has is less than the minimum number of requiredcrew to perform a task or if the minimum crew are of the incorrect type (i.e., cooks instead of helicopter pilots) performance will either be degraded by a fixed amount or completely due to the severity of the mismatch.Degradation manifests itself as either a lessened probability of hit (Ph) factor or as the inability of the platform to move if the minimum number of crew is not met.  Ph degradation values are kept in a table where crew size, type, and criticality are mapped to the various Ph degradation factors.Splitting is occurs as a result of damaged vehicles being removed from the EG to be sent to a repair facility.  When this occurs, personnel are split from (i.e., removed from) the EG.  To facilitate this, the personnel subsystem maintains the platform assignment for each crewperson.ReplacementsReplacement occurs from the direction of the Unit Component.  Unit may decide to re-crew platforms with personnel replacements.  As medical treatment occurs, and personnel are returned to their original units, cross-leveling EG platform crews with the new replacements occurs.  When crews are back to full crew strength, any degradationsdegradation due to insufficient crewing cease.Personnel Damage AssessmentIn WARSIM, people sustain injuries based upon the source that caused the damage and the platform with which they are associated.   Equipment assesses injured personnel and submits them to Unit for treatment.2.3.1	Injury CausesThe types of damage that can cause personnel to be killed in action (KIA) and wounded in action (WIA) are bundled into four categories: injury due to battle non-battle chemical encounterbiological encounter.  Each type of damage causes a certain percentage of personnel to be KIA or WIA.  2.3.1.1	Injury Due to BattleIn the case of injury due to battle, the percentage of personnel KIA or WIA is based on the vulnerability bundle and the level of damage a platform receives.  All platforms are categorized in specific vulnerability bundles.  These vulnerability bundles take into account whether the personnel are members of a dismounted infantry personnel platform or crewmembers of a particular piece of equipment, such as a motor vehicle.  Members of a vehicle could be the crew for the vehicle or personnel loaded as cargo.   The vulnerability bundles provide define a level of protection to the personnel based on the vehicle or infantry with which it is associated.  For instance, personnel in a truck would be more vulnerable in an attack than personnel in a tank.  The second factor to affect the percentage of personnel injured is the level of damage the equipment or dismounted personnel platform or infantry received.  The damage level is acquired by a random number generated between 1 and 9 with 1 being catastrophic for equipment or killed for dismounted infantry and 9 being no damage or injury.  This damage level is applied against the vulnerability bundle for the platform to get a casualty percentage.  The casualty percentage is then broken down into a KIA percentage or WIA percentage.  These percentages are applied to the personnel associated with the damaged platform.  2.3.1.2	Injury Due to Non-BattleIn the case of injury due to non-battle, the percentage of personnel WIA is based on the total number of personnel in the platforms in Equipment Group.  The total number of personnel in the Equipment Group is applied to an injury factor to give a number of personnel that will be WIA after a 24-hour period in simulation time.  The injury factor is a parametric data value derived from Army planning factors. Chemical/Biological EncounterIn the case of injury due to a chemical or biological encounter, the percentage of personnel WIA and KIA is based on the type of chemical or biological agent encountered, the strength of the chemical or biological agent at the time of contact and the Mission Oriented Protected Posture (MOPP) level of the Equipment Group at the time of the encounter.  These three factors together produce a certain percentage of WIA and KIA that is applied to all the personnel on platforms within the contaminated Equipment Group.Mounted PersonnelMounted Equipment Groups (EGs) register interest in and receive detonation events targeted at the carrying EG.  Both the carrying EG and the mounted EG process the same detonation event against their own respective platforms.For example, if an EG is mounted on a carrying EG and the mounted EG’s platforms take damage, the carrying EG’s platforms are also affected.  The KIA and WIA percentages for the personnel on the mounted EG are determined by using the damage level and vulnerability bundle of the carrying EG platform that was damaged.   The KIA and WIA percentages for the mounted EG personnel are computed differently due to the fact that the mounted EG personnel are not directly associated with a specific platform in the carrying EG.Damage on the mounted EG is incurred as follows.  The carrying EG receives a detonation event (i.e., message) which contains information describing which carrying EG platforms to damage and how much to damage them.  When the mounted EG was mounted on the carrying EG, the mounted EG registered for the same events as did the carrying EG.  Therefore, the mounted EG will receive the same detonation event that the carrying EG receives.  There is one difference.  The platforms described in the detonation event are carrying EG platforms and not mounted EG platforms.  To account for this, random mounted EG platforms are chosen to take the place of the carrying EG platforms and mounted EG damage is thereby incurred.When an equipment platform in an Equipment Group (EG1) receives damage due to battle and this Equipment Group is carrying another Equipment Group (EG2), the platforms in the mounted Equipment Group (EG2) are also affected by the battle damage.  The damage level and the vulnerability bundle of a damaged platform helps to determine the KIA percentage and WIA percentage for the personnel associated with the platform.  In the case of mounted Equipment Groups, the personnel in the mounted Equipment Group (EG2 in our example) are not directly associated with a platform in the carrying Equipment Group (EG1).  Therefore, an additional calculation must be made in order to determine which personnel should be affected by the KIA percentage and WIA percentage of the damaged platform.  In order to determine the mounted personnel that should be affected due to damage of an equipment platform in the carrying Equipment Group (EG1), the percentage that the damaged platform makes up out of the total equipment platforms in the carrying Equipment Group (EG1) is found.  For example, if the damaged platform is in a carrying Equipment Group with a total of 10 platforms then the percentage for the damaged platform is 10%.  The KIA percentage and WIA percentage for the damaged platform is multiplied by the platform percentage to account for the percentage of mounted personnel associated with the damaged platform in the carrying Equipment Group (EG1).  For example if the KIA percentage is 75%, the new KIA (i.e., 10% of 75%) and WIA percentages are applied to the total number of personnel in the mounted Equipment Group (EG2).Medical TreatmentThe medical treatment necessary to heal injured personnel is based on the kind of wound that person received.  The type of damage that caused his injury and the source of the damage determine the kind of wound an injured person receives.In the case of injury due to battle or non-battle, a random value is derived between one and the total number of wounds that can occur to personnel during battle.  The random value is used to index into the total list of wounds to arrive at a particular kind of wound for an injured person.  New wound types can be added to the system without software changes.In the case of injury due to a biological or chemical encounter, the source or agent determines the type of wound the person receives.  Each wound type has an associated treatment time, which is the amount of time a WIA has to receive medical treatment before he becomes KIA.  Each wound type also has an associated surgery time and a list of medical supplies that must be present in order to heal the injured personnel.  The surgery time is the amount of time it will take a doctor to repair the injured person.   While in a treatment center, if an injured person receives further injury, this results in a KIA.ConclusionPersonnel modeling presents a number of issues that must be considered; key factors include model fidelity and compatibility with WARSIM architecture, personnel roles and transition between roles as well as interfaces to damage, medical treatment and replacement capabilities.  WARSIM Equipment software engineers have developed a design that effectively addresses these key factors, is consistent with WARSIM architecture and also meets the user's training requirements.  ReferencesAvery, Al, and Byrd, Richard, “Dismounted Mobility Model (Algorithm)”, 8 December 1999.Dudley, Richard, and Byrd, Richard, “WARSIM Equipment Crewing Model (WECM)”, 18 January 2000.Robel, Michael, “WARSIM Repair and Parts Supply Model (Algorithm)”, 13 April 2000.“Staff Officer Field Manual: Organizational, Technical, and Logistical Data”, U.S Army, FM 101-10-1/2, Vol. II, 17 July 1990.Author BiographiesScott Hopkins is a Senior Software Engineer for Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC).  Mr. Hopkins earned a B.S. in Computer Science from Florida State University in 1985.   He has accumulated 15 years of software engineering experience to include robotic process control software development for the NASA Space Shuttle program and training simulation software development for U.S. Army and Marine Corps programs.  Mr. Hopkins is currently serving as the team lead for the Equipment Physical Models component of the U.S. Army's WARSIM 2000 program.Ronald Klasky is a software engineer with SAIC assigned to the design and implementation of the Personnel subsystem on WARSIM.  Ron earned his M.S. degree in Computer and Information Science from Ohio State University in 1987 and has 13 years of experience in simulation software.Michelle Griffin is a software engineer with SAIC assigned to the Medical, Maintenance and Damage subsystems on WARSIM. Her responsibilities are the software design and implementation of these subsystems in addition to the maintenance of the WARSIM Equipment Requirements Database.  Michelle earned her B.S. in Computer Science from National University in 1999. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSThe authors wish to acknowledge the contributions of the following individuals:  Robert Mudge (LMIS), Richard Fuchs (SAIC), Richard Byrd (DRC), Alan Avery (DRC), Michael Robel (Logicon), Gordon Knapp (STRICOM), and Maj. Timothy Metivier (USA).