Department of the Navy (DoN) Corporate Approach toSimulation Based Acquisition (SBA)James W. HollenbachSimulation Strategies, Inc.8615 Conover PlaceAlexandria, VA 22308-2515703-360-3902jimh@simstrat.comKeywords:  Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA), Integrated Digital Environment, product development, acquisition reform, advanced acquisition environments, data interchange standards, FOMsABSTRACT:  This paper describes the Department of the Navy’s approach to realizing advanced acquisition environments, such as have been described under the term Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA).  A current assessment of SBA is presented.  In accordance with its responsibility as DoN lead for SBA, the Navy Acquisition Reform Office (ARO) is developing a campaign plan to realize the goals of SBA and related initiatives.  Current Navy SBA-related efforts are reviewed.  A plethora of other activities related to SBA are identified, all of which seek to achieve advanced information sharing and product development environments under different names.  These exist across both government and industry.  In the aggregate, these activities cause confusion across the acquisition landscape, frustrating program managers but also offering the opportunity for synergy and the accelerated realization of SBA.  A methodology is proposed for considering these various activities and achieving these benefits cooperatively.  This involves focusing on the underlying strategies and the associated enablers for each, then cooperatively crafting a composite plan of action.  The rationale for concerted DoD action is presented.  The Navy’s management strategy, for accomplishing the tasks at hand and achieving the broad cultural changes envisioned, is described.  Some solution elements are identified, including the need for DoN involvement with commercial standards bodies.SBA Assessment within the DoNSBA BackgroundThe concept we now know as Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) emerged over the last seven years as various studies, speeches, documents and presentations (including references [1] through [9]) identified and promoted the potential benefits of comprehensively applying M&S to the acquisition of DoD systems.  M&S came to be seen as a key tool for meeting many DoD objectives, including aggressive goals for reducing the time and cost to acquire weapon systems.In December 1997, the Acquisition Council of the DoD Executive Council for Modeling and Simulation approved a vision statement for Simulation Based Acquisition:SBA VisionAn acquisition process in which DoD and Industry are enabled by robust, collaborative use of simulation technology that is integrated across acquisition phases and programs.The council also stated the following SBA goals:Substantially reduce the time, resources, and risk associated with the entire acquisition process;Increase the quality, military worth, and supportability of fielded systems while reducing total ownership costs throughout the total life cycle; andEnable Integrated Product and Process Development (IPPD) across the entire acquisition life cycle.In March 1998, the Acquisition Council established a Joint SBA Task Force to develop a roadmap for DoD’s implementation of SBA.  The task force developed a notional architecture for SBA and recommended actions to implement SBA in DoD, which were documented in the draft SBA Road Map released for coordination in December 1998 (references [10], [11] and [12]).Disputes arose among the DoD Components over various aspects of the SBA Road Map, resulting in its failure to gain formal approval as a guidance document.  It remains the most cited reference for SBA.  However, other SBA depictions, agreeing on vision and goals but differing on important points such as architecture, exist within both industry and government (for example, references [13], [14] and [15]).An SBA Implementation Plan [16], drafted under the council’s auspices to provide more specific guidance to the DoD Components, similarly failed to gain approval.Nonetheless, the SBA concept is alive and moving forward, albeit unevenly.  Contributions to this progress include continued industry advances in using M&S for product development, additional DoD pronouncements about the benefits of modeling and simulation in support of acquisition (e.g., [8] and [9]), inclusion of M&S guidance in the DoD 5000 series directives [17], and formal M&S guidance by other Services (e.g., [18] and [19]).  Other factors include SBA advocacy by various individuals and organizations within both DoD and industry, such as the Assistant Secretary of the Army’s Simulation, Modeling for Acquisition Requirements and Training (SMART) initiative, the Air Force Material Command’s SBA Tiger Team, and the continuing activities of NDIA’s SBA Industry Steering Group.SBA Status Within DoNGiven this background, the current state of SBA within the Department of the Navy is as follows.There is an acceptance at the Secretariat level regarding the ability of M&S to improve acquisition.  Program manager commitment to M&S as a central aspect of their programs is increasing, but far from universal.  There is little M&S expertise within most program offices.Across the department, there is still significant confusion about what SBA is and is not.  Many people equate it to just using M&S in an acquisition, complicating the task of assessing commitment to SBA.Unlike the other Services, there has not been a strong champion for SBA, as a major initiative, at the highest levels of the Navy.  DoD’s failure to approve the SBA Road Map and SBA Implementation Plan, and the ongoing turmoil in OSD-level SBA leadership over the past 18 months, have effectively reduced OSD pressure for action on SBA.A clear case has not yet been made to the Navy’s leadership about why corporate investment in SBA is necessary.  Some officials believe the goals of SBA will be realized through commercial advances alone, with no DoD action required beyond the now established policy of following sound commercial practices.There is general appreciation that the technical and cultural challenges inherent in the full SBA vision are significant, particularly those aspects related to broad collaboration and the sharing of information and tools across programs.  Reuse remains limited, with most occurring only when the same contractor is involved in both programs.  Decision makers in the development and test and evaluation (T&E) domains have also been largely unable to agree on what is good enough in terms of M&S scope and fidelity.  Thus there is much skepticism towards some of the more visionary aspects of the SBA concept.Many Navy programs are implementing aspects of SBA, which will yield valuable lessons.  However, this is in the absence of approved source documents or a coordinated plan, so these efforts are largely performed in isolation.Finally, SBA is one of many related initiatives with overlapping goals that are competing for each program manager’s attention.  Trying to understand, let alone adopt them, poses a significant burden on the PMs.Taken as a whole, the above observations make it clear the Department of the Navy has many challenges in achieving widespread adoption of SBA.  However, that somewhat discouraging prospect is balanced by many bright spots in individual programs and projects.Leading DoN SBA ContributorsMany Navy acquisition programs are implementing some aspect of SBA, bringing significant, sometimes dramatic, benefits to these programs.  These efforts will achieve meaningful advances in the state of the practice, realize important lessons learned, and yield artifacts that offer the potential for reuse.  Although it is beyond the scope of this paper to describe the specifics of their efforts, the following acquisition programs are among those contributing to, or being influenced by, SBA in significant ways:Joint Strike Fighter (JSF)LPD-17AAAVDD 21CVXVirginia SSNThere are also many other projects underway, within the system commands, laboratories and warfare centers, to attack different aspects of SBA, including development of advanced IT tools, simulation federations, process changes, information models, information access mechanisms and information interchange standards.  Among these projects are:The MARITECH Advanced Shipbuilding Enterprise (ASE)NAVSEA’s Navy/Industry Digital Data Exchange Standards CommitteeNATO Specialist Team for Warship Simulation Based Design and Virtual PrototypingNAVSEA’s Distributed Engineering Plant and its emergent offshoot, the Joint Distributed Engineering Plant (JDEP)ONR’s Distributed Object Modeling Environment (DOME) project at MITNSWC Carderock Division’s Leading Edge Advanced Prototyping System (LEAPS)ONR Naval Undersea Weapons SBD ProgramThe simulation development efforts of SPAWAR’s PMW-131, including its involvement in the JMASS programNAVSEA e-Business InitiativeAssessment SummaryThe DoN Acquisition Community has gained a much greater appreciation of the potential benefits of M&S and many programs are moving out smartly.  However, there is no comprehensive corporate effort to realize the advanced acquisition processes envisioned, albeit inconsistently, by SBA proponents.  The Navy faces many challenges, but opportunities as well.Role of the Acquisition Reform ExecutiveARE ResponsibilityGiven the cross-cutting nature of SBA, touching the requirements generation, procurement, acquisition, logistics and M&S communities, determining the best DoN official to lead its SBA activities was difficult.  In December 1998, that responsibility was given to the Navy’s Acquisition Reform Executive (ARE) [20].The ARE is now responsible for direction and coordination of all Navy SBA activities and coordination with other DoD SBA-related efforts.  This responsibility includes issuing interim guidance, developing and promulgating policy, and establishing the necessary organizations for planning and execution.  In fulfilling this responsibility the ARE is charged to coordinate with the Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Navy for C4I, the Program Executive Officer for Acquisition-Related Business Systems (PEO ARBS), the DoN Chief Information Officer, and the Chief of Naval Operations staff, including N1, N4, N7, N8 and Navy's M&S Management Office, N6M.ARO ActionsThe ARE, Ms. Eileen Roberson, directed the formation of an IPT within the Acquisition Reform Office (ARO) to support her in executing these responsibilities.  The IPT is headed by the Deputy ARE, Mr. Ray Grant, and includes the author.In addition to handling day-to-day coordination regarding SBA across the DoN and DoD, the IPT has been tasked to:Develop a campaign plan to:Realize the goals of SBA and related initiatives in a harmonized wayContain cost by leveraging ongoing projects and standards activities, both government and commercialElicit DoN, PM and industry support and investmentCoordinate execution of the planDeliver real value to PMs, DoN, DoD, and the Navy’s Industrial BaseA key point is that the Navy does not want to consider SBA in a stove-piped way.   Development of the campaign plan is underway now.  A majority of the initial portion of the team’s work has been focused on identifying and understanding the “related initiatives” and “ongoing projects and standards activities, both government and commercial.”Discovering Other SBA-Related ActivitiesThe ARO team has found the landscape is indeed rich with SBA-related activities that offer potential synergy towards realizing SBA.  Many of these seem to have been unknown to, or at least have not been carefully considered by, the majority of SBA advocates.  Although these projects may appear quite different from SBA when considering only their name, organization and stated objectives, it rapidly became apparent that they have a high degree of overlap with SBA.  Plain evidence of that was provided by the various documents associated with each activity, quotes from which are selectively included in the lists below.These lists are extracted from a more comprehensive, albeit undoubtedly still incomplete, inventory assembled by the ARO team.  The term “initiative” is used here to identify an effort focused on realizing a fundamental change to an acquisition (product development) process, akin to the fundamental changes envisioned by SBA.It should also be noted that the lists below exclude efforts under way in other Services that are directly SBA-associated, such as the Army’s Simulation Through the Life Cycle (SimTLC) project, the Air Force Research Laboratory’s Collaborative Engineering Environment (CEE) and the UK’s Synthetic Environment Based Acquisition (SEBA).  Also excluded are older projects such as DARPA’s Rapid Design Exploration and Optimization (RaDEO), from which artifacts and lessons-learned may possibly be harvested.U. S. Government Initiatives (government led or sponsored)Integrated Digital Environment (IDE)  (“every activity involved with the program throughout its total life cycle to exchange data digitally”)Life-cycle Integrated Product Data Environment (a.k.a. Integrated Product Decision Environment- IPDE)  (“easily access product data regardless of where it resides…to improve material acquisition and sustainment”  “for full life cycle”)Joint Computer-Aided Acquisition and Logistic Support (JCALS) (“an infrastructure...integrating digitized technical data that supports a weapon system’s acquisition and logistics life cycle”)Performance Based Business Environment(particularly its effort to “define policies and standard formats for Product Description Data”)Interoperability Clearing House (information technology interoperability frameworks)Integrated Manufacturing Technology Initiative (a joint DoD, DoC, NIST, NSF, and DOE project.  “M&S will be the way products and processes are designed and integrated”)NASA’s Intelligent Synthesis Environment     (“a cultural change that integrates…widely distributed…teams to rapidly create innovative, affordable products”)Knowledge Management InitiativesU.S. Government ProjectsPublic Key Infrastructure (PKI) (security and access control)Complex Systems Engineering (FY00 Congressional add under DUSD(L), “an integrated digital environment for complex systems design”)Affordable Multi-Missile Manufacturing (DARPA Agile Manufacturing project)Commercial Activities (often termed “product development automation,” “manufacturing collaborative commerce,” etc.)Advanced Digital Enterprise Process and Tools (Boeing)Virtual Product Development Initiative (Lockheed Martin)Center for Innovative Product Development (MIT, industry)Technologies for Enterprise Wide Engineering (TEWE)  [Industry consortium]Chrysler’s Book of KnowledgeEmergent B2B E-Commerce marketplacesMany more individual company initiatives (e.g., Concurrent Product and Process Development at Caterpillar)Data Interchange Standards ActivitiesDoD Data Administration Program(“to manage data as a resource”)DII-COE Shared Data Environment(“information sharing, interoperability, and software reuse…secure, reliable, global…”)Joint Electronic Commerce Program Office’s Product Data Mark-Up Language (PDML)ISO’s Standard for the Exchange of Product Data (STEP) Application ProtocolsObject Management Group (OMG) Product Data Management Enabler SpecificationNational Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) Knowledge-based Interoperability ProjectNIST Process Specification LanguageVarious XML Document Type Definitions(many commercial consortia and companies, such as RosettaNet, Ariba, and Commerce One)Emerging XML Schema standardsData standards coordination among the OMG, OAG (Open Applications Group), RosettaNet and OASIS (Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards)StudiesAdvanced Engineering Environments (NRC, for NASA)Complex Product Realization 2020 (IDA, for DARPA)Modeling and Simulation Enhancements for 21st Century Manufacturing and Acquisition (NRC, for DMSO)The PM’s PerspectiveThankfully it is unlikely that any program manger is aware of, let alone has to deal with, all of the above activities.  However, each PM gets prodded about many of them.  Add the other DoD and Service initiatives, such as Single Process Initiative and HLA, and it is easy to see why many PMs feel overwhelmed, mad or numb.  Besieged by people knocking on the door and sending documents and other promotional materials, all claiming to enable PMs to do their job better, a typical reaction is depicted in Figure 1.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1.  The PM's DilemmaIf we ever expect to get the PM’s attention, let alone support, we need to bring some rationality and coordination to all these “helpful” activities.Comparing the ActivitiesHypothesisAs explained above and illustrated by the quotes from project documents included in the lists of SBA-related activities above, the ARO hypothesized that although these activities may have different names, be focused on different application areas, and define their objectives in different terms, they are all appeared to be trying to do similar things and therefore must share common needs.Identifying the CommonalitiesTo explore this premise, the ARO team dug deeper into a few of the projects and found that there was indeed a high degree of commonality in the strategies the various activities planned to follow.  Likewise, we saw these strategies were dependent on some common enablers.  The decomposition and assessment process followed is depicted in Figure 2.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2.  Considering the ActivitiesDefining SBABefore SBA can be compared to other initiatives, an accepted understanding of SBA is necessary.  The SBA Vision and Goals statement by the Acquisition Council is not detailed enough to allow this.  The SBA Road Map coordination process had raised definitional issues, and the roadmap was too voluminous in any case.Providentially, the need for a common definition of SBA arose in both the DoD’s Acquisition Council and the SBA Industry Steering Group.  In December 1999, both embarked on efforts to develop such a definition.  The author was able to facilitate work within both groups to arrive at a common two-page definition, which as of August 2000 was nearing final approval.  It states:SBA IsA dramatically improved acquisition process, enabled by the application of advanced information technology (IT); legislation, policy, budgeting and management changes; and the education and motivation of all participants.Better informed decisions and reduced risk by more accurate and comprehensive assessments of design, manufacturing, employment and support concepts earlier in the acquisition cycle.The optimization of system performance versus total ownership cost (TOC) by early and continuing collaborative exploration of the largest possible trade space: Across all of a system’s life cycle activities; within and among multiple government and commercial organizations; across professions and disciplines; and up through system of systems mission area perspectives.Faster time to field through increased concurrency, tighter decision cycles, more efficient and effective testing, and a reduction in costly fixes for problems discovered late in the acquisition cycle.Lower total ownership cost of individual systems via lower personnel and material costs accruing from the above, and from the standards-based reuse of information and software to minimize their cost.Greater modernization for DoD through this reduction in the cost of individual systems and the more optimal program investments enabled by system of system mission area assessments.The provision of enduring collaborative environments, in which government and/or industry experts utilize off-the-shelf (or minimally modified) sets of reusable, interoperable tools and supporting resources (such as information sets) to assess the attributes of an emergent capability, concept, doctrine, tactic, process or situation in the broader context of an expected real-world environment.The efficient, automated and near-real-time sharing of relevant information among all personnel with a need to know, such that they have accurate and consistent understandings of a system (both physical and behavioral) and its external environments, including their variants, as they evolve.  Information about the system is shared via a distributed product description (DPD).  Information about its external environments is shared by similar mechanisms.  A DPD is characterized by:The integration of information in disparate locations into what appears to the user as a single integrated data set;Minimal data duplication, such that data is created once, but used many times;Data set coherency in terms of semantics, syntax, levels of resolution (granularity), and integrity among interdependent attributes;Web-based access and user-friendly search, display, parsing, download and subscription mechanisms, with alert, trigger and threshold functions to enable delivery of only relevant information (to minimize bandwidth and processing costs, and avoid human overload);Security/access controls to protect classified, proprietary or private information; andConfiguration management of multiple versions and their histories, to include analysis results and decision rationales.The aggressive, comprehensive application and sharing of mature advancements in information technology such as distributed networking, multi-user computer environments, database management systems and particularly advanced modeling and simulation (M&S) tools, including commercial product development automation tools (e.g., CAD, ERP), HLA-based distributed simulation, and interactive virtual reality.  The models and simulations will:Be verified and validated, with documentation of this to facilitate accreditation and reuse;Communicate system concepts and capabilities;Manage the details of complex spatial, causal and temporal relationships, helping humans assess key parameters, identify issues, track trends and assess the merits of alternatives;Allow a system to be designed, built, tested and operated in the computer before critical decisions are locked-in and manufacturing begins;Allow alternative designs to be carried further into the acquisition process;Make test an integral aspect of design, make live testing more cost-effective, and allow effective testing where live testing is impractical; andCollectively satisfy all program needs capable of being addressed via M&S.Dependent on the capability to interoperate and reuse heterogeneous tools and digital information, and to incrementally insert technology upgrades and replacements for each, made possible by specifying:Reference operational and system architectures, adaptable to individual programs;A common technical architecture; andOpen, preferably commercial, data interchange standards.A non-proprietary environment, allowing the use of proprietary tools and information as appropriate.An enduring means for understanding, managing and modifying a system throughout its lifetime.Dependent on competent professionals, including M&S experts, in both government and industry.SBA is not:A replacement for good systems engineering.Having simulations make the decisions.Giving all information to everyone and letting everyone see everything you do.The loss of security and proprietary advantage.The loss of responsibility, authority or accountability.Just using M&S in an acquisition program.Defining the Common EnablersWith that SBA definition in hand, the ARO team proceeded to do a limited comparative analysis with other SBA-related activities.  The common enablers identified thus far, derived via the decomposition process depicted in Figure 2, include the following:Policy and law changesMaking a contractor’s M&S capabilities and M&S plans one of the evaluation criteria used when awarding contractsDefining responsibilities and liabilities regarding reuse of information, tools, processesContractual procedures and language regarding sharing of information, tools and processesVerification of electronic delivery and digital signaturesRevised budgeting methods and standards to support revised spending profiles and facilitate trades among funding categoriesProcess changesReimbursement methods for reuse of data, tools and services across programs and organizationsStandard or best practices for all activities, e.g.:On-line solicitations, proposal submission, and contract awardsFinancial transactions (e.g., invoice, payment)Systems engineeringTestingEtc.Authoritative sources for all informationDefinition of specific information categories within the domains of systems, natural environment, doctrine, behavior, policies, etc.Unambiguous identification of the authoritative source for each categoryEffective access and release proceduresData interchange standards to foster a coherent understanding of shared informationData engineering methods and notationsCommon information models for classes of informationDefinition of the classes, such as:Armored vehiclesAircraftShipsSolicitations and proposalsFinancial transactionsEtc.For each class, development of information models which are coherent in terms of semantics, syntax, levels of resolution (granularity) and integrity among interdependent attributesAssociated glossaries capturing each model’s semanticsProvision of relevant data models to programs for their tailored useStandard metadata template(s) to describe appropriate and inappropriate uses for datasetsTransformation of the information models and metadata template(s) into data interchange formats (DIFs) using a commercially accepted tagged data format standard such as Extensible Mark-Up Language (XML) or STEP ExpressEstablishment of the DIFs as commercial standards to foster broad acceptanceCapable, reusable software:  both applications (e.g., models, simulations) and software components (often termed models, product models, or digital system models)Standards for software interoperabilityA standard technical architecture for application-level runtime interoperability and reuse (e.g., HLA)Intra-application technical architectures to support interoperability and reuse of software components in widely used applications (e.g., JMASS)Standard non-runtime data transfer mechanisms for initialization and post-execution data collectionConceptual models of what is to be representedDefinition of the domains and levels of resolution, prioritized to serve the most common needsCampaign level land warfareEngineering level electronic warfareEtc.Conceptual models identifying the entities, actions and interactions to be representedReference federation object models (RFOMs) for assembling simulation federationsRPRFOMNTMFEtc.RFOM equivalents for software components within specific applicationsJMASS engagement level electronic warfareJMASS engineering level electronic warfareJWARS campaign level land warfareEtc.Models, simulations and software components, developed per the above conceptual models(A long list)VV&A enablers for both information and softwareRecommended practicesDocumentationCompliance mechanismsMeans to identify, obtain and protect reusable resourcesDistributed information repository systems (e.g., commercial Product Data Management [PDM] systems) to help find and manage reusable resources inside an organization or enterpriseCapability to handle the full scope of resourcesPrevious studies and analysesData, information, knowledgeProcessesStandardsApplicationsSoftware componentsEtc.Coherent and efficient information managementIntegration of information in disparate locations into what appears to the user as a single integrated data setMinimal data duplication, such that data is created once, but used many timesConfiguration management capabilities to keep data current and define applicabilitySearch, parse and download capabilitiesPrecise information flow mechanisms to avoid network, processing or human overloadPublish & subscribe at any granularityTriggers, alerts, thresholdsNewsgroups, reflectors, etc.Bulletin boards to identify reusable resources outside an organization or enterprise.  Notionally limited to resource name, description and POC; not intended to provide access or distribution.Supporting same broad scope of resources as listed above for repositoriesStandard resource metadata template and keywordsSearch meansProtection for classified, proprietary or private resourcesAdjudication procedures for deciding access privileges across organizational boundariesEncryption as required by policy (e.g., Public Key Infrastructure)Methods to provide multi-level security (MLS) on a single computing platformPopulation of the above repositories and bulletin boards with the resources themselvesMotivation for original developers to support reuse (e.g., funds transfer for reuse by others, license fees)Delineation of responsibilitiesConfiguration managementVV&ATraining and assistanceTools and methods to manage collaboration & multi-domain optimizationHuman interaction meansTelephone, e-mail, VTCShared briefings, whiteboards, etc.Virtual presenceEtc.Multi-domain optimization methods and toolsDefined measures of meritWeighting and/or prioritization algorithmsMetric (data) visualizationManagement toolsWork flow planning and monitoringGroupware and ballotingDecision records with rationaleBusiness caseCost-benefit metricsCost-benefit assessment methodsAnecdotes and analysesMarket trendsEducation of the work forceOn-line informationWritten pamphlets/documentsConferences and technology fairsFormal classroom trainingDistance learningHelp desksOne-on-one program office visitsFeedback mechanismsMotivation of the work forcePositiveFinancialNon-financialNegativeEvolution of the work force to provide the necessary skill setsPersonnel evaluation policiesCareer path managementRecruitingThis list is a starting point for further assessment, additions, culling and organization.A Collaborative ApproachRationaleBecause it is drawn from the activities of people who know DoD acquisition best, an enabler list like that above can provide an informed, composite view of what should be done to improve the DoD acquisition process.  Trying to accomplish all the necessary action by attempting to implement a new, all-encompassing, program to replace or compete with those already underway would be unwise.  Creating one big program, under a single manager, is impractical in almost all respects.  No one organization, including all of DoD, has the resources to develop a comprehensive solution.No one has a monopoly on good ideas.  Lots of patriots are “feeling the same elephant” from a different perspective.  DoD will need to enlist all the brainpower and resources available to succeed.  Hence we concluded it is better to leverage the ideas and resources of all these activities through a coalition of cooperating parties:  A distributed, collaborative effort, just as the acquisition process itself was envisioned to become with the adoption of SBA.The enabler list can serve as a work breakdown structure for implementing actions.  Many of the above enablers are in hand (e.g., HLA, VV&A RPG, ISO STEP, PKI) and others are in work (e.g., PDM tools, education).  However, it will be necessary to perform a gap analysis of the implementing actions for each activity before an accurate list of required actions can be determined. These actions will fall into three broad categories:Harvest/share the enablers available nowCoordinate, influence, adjust and support the enablers already in workInitiate activities as necessary to fill the gaps or reduce risk No New NameTrying to rename existing initiative names with a new umbrella name is probably unwarranted, for names can be an obstacle.  No one wants his or her pet project/initiative go away.  Names aren’t important at this point; the enablers are.  It is better to talk about “advanced acquisition environments” (all lower case) and let the markets and bureaucracies work it out.  The “Baseball Pool” ApproachWith the required enabler set as a framework, coalition members could readily map their work - successes, failures and current actions - into that framework.  The result might resemble a baseball pool, as depicted in Figure 3.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3.  Baseball Pool ApproachIn the case of high-risk endeavors, multiple projects might be needed within a single area.  In the situation where a new start is warranted, volunteers could be solicited or partnerships could be formed.Management StrategyProgram managers and PEOs will follow what makes sense and resist to the death anything that doesn’t – as well they should!  The Navy’s campaign plan to achieve advanced acquisition environments must, and will, make sense.  Corporate goals, strategy and a composite plan of action must be clearly understood at all levels, but trying to manage actions at the grass roots level is not practical, productive nor necessary.  The Navy ARO is proposing a management strategy of influence, not control.  This is depicted in Figure 4.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 4.  Management StrategyThe DoN leadership’s decisive influence will be through (1) goal and strategy setting, (2) actions to harvest or develop enablers as necessary, and (3) education, to include apprising PMs of enabler availability. It is expected that “grass root” implementers will tend to align their own efforts with the plan because (a) it will be logical and compelling; (b) using the enablers will save time and avoid cost; and (c) it will provide a firmer foundation for their own program planning and execution reviews.FundingThe return on investment from advanced acquisition environments will occur at two levels:  within programs and corporately.  As discussed in the SBA definition earlier, the payoff for individual programs will come from:The optimization of system performance versus cost by early and continuing collaborative exploration of the largest possible trade space.Better decisions and reduced risk by more accurate and comprehensive assessments of design, manufacturing, employment and support concepts earlier in the acquisition cycle.Faster time to field through increased concurrency, tighter decision cycles, more efficient testing and a reduction in costly fixes for problems discovered late in the acquisition cycle.Lower total ownership cost of individual systems via lower personnel and material costs accruing from the above, and from the standards-based reuse of information and tools to minimize their cost.The payoff to the Navy and Marine Corps at the corporate level will accrue from a reduction in the cost of individual systems and the more optimal program investments enabled by system of systems/mission area assessments.  This will allow greater modernization within the same top line budget.  In the case of commercial firms, the corporate payoff will be greater market share and greater profit.It is already clear that funding will be needed at both levels.  PM investment will flow from practical proofs, the business case, and exposure to viable solutions.  Corporate investment will flow from recognition that some enablers are beyond the reach of individual programs.The ARO planning effort currently underway is expected to establish the business case for a corporate Navy investment.  Budgeting battles will follow after the assessment and plan achieve consensus.  We anticipate that the funding already committed to the aforementioned activities may, if cooperatively applied in a more optimally coordinated manner, suffice to meet much of the total need.Thus, any necessary additional investment may be less than previously projected.  Whatever the requirement, any case for corporate funding arising from this process will be stronger than previous, for it will be built from a broad, vice stove-piped, perspective and the traceability of benefits to required actions will be solid.Why DoD Action Is RequiredAlthough a complete rationale for DoD action will not emerge until the above-discussed enabler set is matured and the gap analysis is completed, it already appears clear that corporate DoN and DoD action ill be required to realize advanced acquisition environments like SBA.DoN and DoD must act to rationalize the plethora of overlapping initiatives.  The current situation is wasting resources and confusing everyone.DoD must exert its mass and “bully pulpit” function to achieve data interchange standards.  Current product development automation tools (e.g., CAx, PDM, ERP) are generally not interoperable except with a single vendor’s family.  To get the capability they need to compete, defense contractor teams today are standardizing on tools from a single vendor and/or building bilateral interfaces.  The net result is a serious obstacle to interoperation with outsiders, which:Reduces competition by inhibiting teaming;Impedes FMS offsets and second sourcing; andIncurs a high cost for government offices that must electronically interact with multiple contractors.Standardizing on tools inhibits technology insertion because the practical impediments to changing tools (e.g., having to re-enter all your data) means the tool vendor effectively owns its customer.  The DoD needs application standards, not standard applications.  Current market forces may not be enough to force the development of acceptable data interchange standards, and so DoD should act to provide critical mass for the establishment of data interchange standards, and thus protect its critical interests.Lastly, DoN and DoD must act corporately to achieve the kind of culture change required.  There are certain things that industry can’t do.  These include internal DoD matters such as PM education and assistance; reuse facilitation and motivation; and policy, process and law changes.SummaryThe DoN Acquisition Community has gained a much greater appreciation of the potential benefits of M&S and many programs are moving out smartly.  However, there is yet no comprehensive corporate effort to realize the advanced acquisition environment envisioned, albeit inconsistently, by SBA proponents.The Navy’s Acquisition Reform Office is developing a campaign plan to realize SBA, but with a view to the many other activities underway across government and industry which overlap with SBA.  An assessment of each activity can decompose it to the point of strategies and enablers, at which point commonality among the activities becomes obvious.The composite picture of the required enablers that emerges from this analysis provides a good work breakdown structure.  Since a single program to accomplish the full span of work is impractical and undesirable, the Navy is embracing a distributed, collaborative approach (an SBA tenet) to accomplish the necessary work.Budgeting actions will follow the completion and acceptance of the plan.  Advanced acquisition environments, as envisioned by SBA, will be achieved incrementally, as the enablers are realized.References“Report of the Defense Science Board on Improving Test and Evaluation Effectiveness,” OUSD(A&T), December 1989“Report of the Defense Science Board on Simulation, Readiness and Prototyping,” OUSD(A&T), June 1994T. Parker, “Final Report of the DDR&E Acquisition Task Force on Modeling and Simulation,” ODDR&E, 17 June 1994“Naval Research Advisory Committee Report on Modeling and Simulation,”  NRAC 94-3, Office of Naval Research, November 1994DoD 5000.59-P,“Modeling and Simulation Master Plan,” October 1995H. H. Portmann, “Study on the Application of Modeling and Simulation to the Acquisition of Major Weapon Systems,” American Defense Preparedness Association, 27 September 1996A. Patenaude, “Study on the Effectiveness of Modeling and Simulation in the Weapon System Acquisition Process,” SAIC, October 1996.P. Sanders, “Simulation, Test and Evaluation Process,” OUSD(A&T), 04 December 1997.J. S. Gansler, memorandum on “Modeling and Simulation in Defense Acquisition,” USD(A&T), 16 March 1998.“A Roadmap for Simulation Based Acquisition – Report of the Joint Simulation Based Acquisition Task Force,” Acquisition Council Draft for Coordination, 04 December 1998.R. R. Lutz and J. F. Keane, “An Architecture for Simulation Based Acquisition,” 1999 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 1999.R. Frost and D. Thomen, “Simulation Based Acquisition, the Road Map,” 1999 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 1999.N. E. Karangelen, “The Simulation Based Acquisition Vision – A Brief Tutorial,” proceedings of NDIA Workshop on Simulation Based Acquisition, Orlando, March 1998.“Simulation Based Acquisition Functional Description Document” (draft), NDIA SBA Industry Steering Group, 23 September 1998.S. Olson, “Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) – A U. S. Overview and Industry Perspective,” Proceedings of the SMi Conference, London, March 2000.“SBA Implementation Plan,” Acquisition Council draft of 14 June 1999.DOD-5000.2-R, “Mandatory Procedures for Major Defense Acquisition Programs (MDAPs) and Major Automated Information Systems (MAIS) Acquisition Programs,” 15 March 1996“Simulation Support Plan Guidelines,” Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Army for Research, Development and Acquisition, May 1997.Air Force Instruction 16-1002, “Modeling and Simulation Support to Acquisition,” 01 June 2000.ASN(RDA) memorandum, “DON Leadership for Simulation Based Acquisition,” 04 December 1998Modeling & Simulation Support Plan (MSSP), Joint Strike Fighter (JSF), Version 4.00, Joint Strike Fighter Program Office, July 2000.R. R. Lutz and J. E. Coolahan, “Developmental Concepts for Digital Distributed Product Descriptions,” 1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 1999.“VV&A Recommended Practices Guide, Year 2000 Edition,” Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, http://www.msiac.dmso.mil/vva/.Author BiographyJAMES W. HOLLENBACH, Captain, USN (ret), holds a BS in Mechanical Engineering and an MS in Aeronautical Systems.  A Naval Aviator, former EA-6B squadron commander and DoD Acquisition Professional, he has devoted much of his professional life to analyzing, defeating, developing or managing complex information systems.  During his career he has managed over $250M in projects addressing standards, services, software and infrastructure in the areas of C3I and M&S.  As Director of the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office from 1994 to 1998, he led development of the DoD and NATO M&S Master Plans and key initiatives such as the High Level Architecture, Conceptual Models of the Mission Space, and Synthetic Environment Data Representation and Interchange Specification.  His company, Simulation Strategies, Inc., provides modeling, simulation and enterprise integration expertise to government and industry.