Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements: Resolving Ambiguity the CMMS-DD WayRon SmitsBruce A. HarrisDynamics Research Corporation60 Frontage RoadAndover, MA 01810978-475-9090 ext.1498bharris@drc.com,  HYPERLINK "mailto:rsmits@drc.com" rsmits@drc.comKeywords: Conceptual Modeling, CMMS, Data DictionaryABSTRACT: This is the last paper in a linked series of eight individual papers that detail how knowledge acquisition products are conceived, produced, and employed in the development of models and simulations. This paper will present a case study, with lessons learned, on the continued developments in taxonomies for the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office’s (DMSO) Conceptual Model of the Mission Space (CMMS) toolset. It serves as a review of the state-of-the-art in development of taxonomies and ontologies that support M&S activities broadly sponsored by DMSO. The paper’s broad focus is on an evaluation of organizational schemas that appear to offer advantages to DMSO efforts in bridging the linguistic and conceptual differences between M&S activities and warfighters. The development of doctrinally correct, logically consistent, and linguistically unambiguous taxonomies requires the judicious adherence to an established plan, complete with V&V. See also:00F-SIW-136 “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements:  Missions, Operations, and Tasks for JSEAD.” by Bruce Harris (DRC) and Jack Glasgow (DRC). 00F-SIW-137 “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements:  Task Organization and Equipment for JSEAD." by Mike Hopkins (CoTs), Mike Burk (DRC), Juan Paron (DRC), and Jim Murphy (DRC).00F-SIW-138 “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements:  Integration of Task and Forces into a JSEAD Mission using FDP-KAT." by Michael Loesekann (SAIC), Cynthia Tuttle (DRC), Lee Lacy (DRC), Wayne Randolph (DRC) and Mike Burke (DRC). 00F-SIW-139 “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements:  Integration of Tasks and Forces into a JSEAD Mission using DoD-Capture.” by Michael Loesekann (SAIC), Mike Hopkins (CoTs), James Plimpton (Vi-Tech), and Fran Dougherty (IMC).00F-SIW-140 “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements:  Cognitive Task Analysis for JSEAD Command and Control.” by LtCol Marvin (NAWC-TSD), Dr. Fowlkes (NAWC-TSD), Dr. Willis (DMSO) and Michael Loesekann (SAIC).00F-SIW-141 “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements:  Integration and Analysis of JSEAD Conceptual Models using the CMMS Model Library.” by Fran Dougherty (IMC) and Jack Sheehan (DMSO). 00F-SIW-142 “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements:  Exchange of Mission Space Models using the CMMS Data Interchange Format (DIF)”. by Dr. Furman Haddix (ARL:UT), Corey Balon (IMC), Scott Lear (IMC), Cynthia Tuttle (DRC), and James Plimpton (Vi-Tech).1. IntroductionIf one examines the doctrinal and other sources produced by and for military Service components, vast differences in jargon can be observed. There is no lack of linguistic ambiguity among Services, between the military language and the English language, and between military language and M&S language. Each domain, be it military, civilian, M&S, or logistics, etc., seems to promulgate a private language, loosely derived from English, that intends to capture concepts, processes, and procedures that are supposedly unique to that domain. The effort to structure data and institutionalize data standards extends beyond the definitional aspects of terms. As important as the semantics are, the structure of semantics in a recognized syntax deserves equal attention. That syntax is often referred to as the taxonomy of a data source or data product.The M&S community faces difficult challenges in creating realistic and authoritative representations of what we commonly refer to as the real world of the military mission space. While assessing the utility of taxonomies for M&S, the transition from the real-world warfighter jargon, presented in doctrinal and operations data products, to the synthetic representation of that action or task should be facilitated. As the transition is made from these operational data products through the internal processes of other user communities, preservation of original intent is a concern. Linguistic and conceptual challenges must be confronted and overcome to specify a realistic representation of the actions, entities, and interactions in the synthetic environment. A “common” resource serves the purpose of providing access to domain data products for users not normally associated with that domain, or cross-domain purposes, by informing the cross-domain user of the producer’s intent. By necessity, a common resource accommodates the needs of users of different domains. By organizing the data (or data-products) into a common resource, the producer of the common resource endeavors to categorize the existing products into an ontology or taxonomy. While assisting in the population of the common resources, the organizational structure of the resource also guides intended users in their search for information or data. Much research has been conducted on taxonomy and ontology development in general. Not all this research directly relates to military operations. Discussions and debates on methods to structure military domain knowledge, often conducted to assist outsider understanding of the warfighter's domain, can quickly become acrimonious and parochial. The study and use of taxonomies, ontologies, taxons (as a taxonomic group in a formal nomenclature), or a combination thereof, can create an almost toxic atmosphere in which bias and prejudices run rampant. However, many of the findings and conclusions regarding their feasibility for capturing and categorizing knowledge are relevant regardless of domain. This paper synthesized some leading studies in their respective fields and presents a CMMS-DD data model derived from a compilation of taxonomy and ontology (tax-on). For now, a general discourse regarding differences and similarities between taxonomy and ontology is provided.2. Taxonomies And OntologiesTaxonomies are widely researched and employed in scientific literature, biology probably foremost, while other areas of academia embrace ontology to facilitate enterprise modeling. A primary distinction between taxonomy and ontology appears to be the conceptualization of the organizing classes or hierarchy. A taxonomy typically resembles a tree structure of progressively more detailed classes. Within each branch a commonality, explicitly defined, exists, but instance data is placed at the lowest possible sub-class, consistent with the defining characteristics of the branches and sub-classes. A taxonomy is a hierarchy of concepts. In addition to the basic isA relation, partOf relation may also be used from time to time in a taxonomy. Figure 1. Kinds of OntologiesIn examining an ontology, the relationships between the classes and concepts that define the organizational structure appear of more importance. Initially, the term “ontology” was used in philosophy as a “theory of existence.” Following Thomas Gruber [1][2][3], the Artificial Intelligence (AI) community adapted ontology as "an explicit representation of conceptualization.” Ontology is an explicit and precise description of concepts and relations that exists in a particular domain such as a given organization, a study field, or an application area. Mike Uschold [4][5][6] developed an “Enterprise Ontology” to model business enterprises, along with a guide for building the ontology. Benjamin Perakath [7] and his team expanded on that work and constructed the IDEF5 method to capture ontology. In their research they describe and define the central concepts of ontology at three levels of generality: domain ontologies, practice ontologies, and site-specific ontologies (Figure 1). A key difference between a taxonomy and an ontology is that an item appears exactly once in a taxonomy but may appear more than one place in an ontology.3. An Organizing Structure for CMMS-DDThe construction of mission space models, the individual components of the CMMS, requires a multi-step process. Knowledge about the domain needs to be acquired, but not all knowledge is relevant. The analyst needs to develop a focused context before gathering domain information within that context. Next, the information needs to be formalized to enable software engineers to use their favorite modeling tools to construct a mission space model.The exchange of domain knowledge is vitally important to the modeling and simulation process. In the past, knowledge gathered to support simulation efforts was often incomplete, not well documented, ambiguous, and not reusable. The costs associated with the KA are substantial and the need to construct authoritative and accurate simulation systems within constrained resources has increased. The CMMS Toolset Architecture as part of the DMSO Data Engineering strategy intends to mitigate risks associated with the development of military simulations.The CMMS-DD, or the CSS, assists the SME or analyst in turning gathered domain information into formalized data that can be used and understood by software engineers. Its applicability extends beyond that scope, however. By providing authoritative explanations of term-definition combinations, the CMMS-DD can serve many users not traditionally considered part of the M&S domain. The CMMS-DD structure should accommodate the needs of these different users to fulfill its potential. The next section of this paper examines some structures for capturing domain information.3.1 Data Organization and Enterprise ModelingThe CMMS-DD was primarily constructed by mining relevant term-definition combinations from Joint and Service publications. The gathering of these authoritative combinations into a single resource provides interested parties with easy access to this data. It is the organization of the data into a meaningful structure, however, that creates the “value-added” to the resource, as shown in the review of the literature earlier.CMMS-DD exists in a relationship to other tools developed to support the building of conceptual models. The use of unambiguous term-definition combinations in the context of the appropriate domain would greatly facilitate the reuse of the produced models, while reducing development risk and cost. The need to bridge the linguistic gap between the warfighter (often the SME) and the simulation developer (also an SME albeit in a different domain) is paramount to the success of the CMMS-DD. This can be accomplished by removing linguistic ambiguity present within the different military domains and between EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure 2. DMSO-Sponsored KA Tool Interactionsthe military domain and the simulation developer’s domain. Understanding the function (purpose) the CMMS-DD fulfills within this constellation of tools is important. Data exchanges between the tools occur and the CMMS-DD intends to bridge an “information gap” between different domains. Figure 2 illustrates the interactions among some of the tools and tool users in the development of a conceptual model.3.2 CMMS-DD StructureJohn Zachman [8][9] introduced an architecture for enterprise modeling that represents a mix between a taxonomy and ontology. He examined how information could bridge the gap between the strategy (expectations) and implementation(s) for an enterprise. This bridge was the enterprise architecture. The challenge faced by information systems was to capture those components that create an enterprise environment that was conducive to change.Zachman found by studying aircraft manufacturing and building construction that the method to accurately represent a “product” largely depended on one’s perspective. He discovered a set of representations was necessary to accommodate these different viewpoints. Additionally, he identified intersecting representations for the characteristics of the “product” itself, such as the production process, the material used, who built it, etc. The Zachman framework (Figure 3) resulted from the realization that these product characteristics can be completely represented in six columns. The “user” viewpoints can be represented within each column as a distinct row for the enterprise architecture.Figure 3. Zachman’s FrameworkThe columns in the framework represent the “what, how, where, who, when, and why” of the enterprise. These columns capture succinctly all aspects related to a “product” for any particular point of view within the enterprise. The material description is captured in the “What” column, with a focus on entities and relationships. This column describes what makes up organizational information, the data. Data, however, needs to be related to other data, so this column also describes the relationships that should be maintained among the data. The functional description is contained by the “How” column and describes the input-process-output model of the enterprise. Its focus is the functions and arguments, or describes “how” the data (“what”) is used. Next, the location is represented in “Where” column, describing the flow of information and work within the enterprise. The connections between the different locations should be identified in this column as well. “Who” describes the allocation of work to people and organizations involved.Finally, “When” is used to communicate event-to-event relationships that establish performance criteria and quantitative levels of enterprise resources, while the “Why” column’s focus is on ends and means. It describes the motivation of the enterprise, the objectives (ends) and its strategies or methods (means).For the CMMS-DD, term-definition combinations need to be assigned attributes that uniquely identify their location in a data model. Expanding Zachman’s framework to include a third dimension enables the access to data from all required viewpoints. The data (term-definition combination) can be stored at only one instance in the model and therefore is uniquely identified by its use. Figure 4 provides a graphical representation of the three-dimensional data model. The CMMS-DD data model uses the column format (focus or abstraction perspective) from Zachman’s Framework, modifies the participant perspectives, and adds the domain perspective. Each of these three perspectives is briefly discussed below.Figure 4. CMMS-DD Data Model3.2.1 Domain Perspective. In defining the domain perspective, two choices present themselves. First, one could use the Services as the attribute that places data in the respective slice. The Army may define a term differently from the Air Force and thus, given a similar Participant and Focus, the data could be differentiated based on Service. For a term that is defined or described differently (even just slightly) within a Service, as is often the case, given the same Participant and Focus, the analyst filling the data model would be required to choose among these combinations. This would lead to “second-guessing” the needs of the Service and the SME. By removing the Service orientation from the Domain perspective, a choice by the CMMS-DD analyst represents the preferred term-definition combination for the CMMS Toolset, without restricting the Services to define the term differently. The CMMS-DD analyst can thus avoid a parochial view and instead concentrate on capturing all relevant domain concepts. The categories chosen for the domain perspective are related to the operational (or physical) environment. 3.2.2 Participant Perspective. The Participant perspective in Zachman’s Framework often represents successive viewpoints. They reflect the need to develop, manage, maintain, and use the information system in the enterprise. The business of the military can arguably be described as the protection and enforcement of national security interests through the use of military force. This leads to five categories of participants. The first group identified includes those who operate the equipment that delivers military force, the operators. Next are those who maintain the equipment, the maintainers. Someone has to supply the equipment and its consumables, the suppliers. All these participants require care to stay healthy and ready for duty. Caregivers are in the business of providing health and welfare to the force. Finally, all these folks need to be paid, transferred, fed, housed, and directed. Supporters provide these needed functions. 3.2.3 Focus/Abstraction Perspective. The Focus or Abstraction perspective of the CMMS-DD can be mapped to doctrinal references of what needs to be done by whom, how, when, where, and why. The SMEs involved with KA would like to access the data in relation to the terminology for which they develop products. Such categories include equipment, tasks, missions, task performers, organizations, information items, locations, etc.While the Zachman generic column terms are relevant in Service doctrine, a simple “translation” of those terms to an easily understood and bound term is more problematic. If the “what” is equipment, it leaves operations to migrate to the “how” or “why” column. The question that could be asked about the placement of terms in the “how” or “why” column must link to another attribute of the term-definition combination: the part-of-speech (POS) attribute.The “what” column could very well differentiate between nouns (equipment) and processes (operations), if the generic column name is maintained. To store a task in the three-dimensional model, the analyst would assign the verb property in the POS attribute and place the term-definition combination in the “how” column.3.3 CMMS-DD TaxonThe CMMS-DD data model stores four attributes for each selected term-definition combination. Each entry in the CMMS-DD will be identified with the focus or abstraction of the term-definition combination, its applicable (physical) domain environment, its participants’ perspective, and the part-of-speech that the entry refers to. Figure 5 lists the possible values for the four attributes.Table 1. CMMS-DD Attribute Values4. Verification and ValidationWhen discussing verification and validation, several issues take center stage. Not only the scope of the V&V effort should be determined, but also the semantics of V&V. What needs to be “verified” and/or “validated?”  What is involved in V&V of a data dictionary?  Ultimately, it is the customer who determines the program’s needs for traceability and accuracy for the resource. Programmatically, V&V add costs early to the development process, but should save resources later. For the purpose of the CMMS-DD, the need to establish clear and concise business rules to populate the resource was established in earlier work [10]. This stated need was taken one step further in the current effort, by clearly establishing the requirements and constraints for the organizational structure of the resource. For the life cycle of the CMMS-DD, it is envisioned that at a minimum, “verification” will take place by the customer at each major milestone. The verification of the CMMS-DD taxon as a meaningful representation for the military domain and a useful methodology to structure domain knowledge would greatly enhance the resource’s potential for use and re-use. Figure 5. Conceptual Model Development WorkflowNext, business rules approved by the customer need to restrict the population of the CMMS-DD to provide the degree of authoritativeness and accuracy required. These business rules need to address the constraints and mining criteria, in addition to the explicit declaration of the attributes and meta-data required for the data entered into the resource. Automated tools can greatly assist in the systematic population of the resource by enforcing the strict application of the approved business rules. To that end, a data entry tool will be used to ensure all involved analysts can mine and process data consistently.Ultimately, the goal of the CMMS-DD is unambiguous and authoritative semantic descriptions of data elements required to communicate knowledge about the military domain. Business rules, tools, source selection criteria, mining criteria, categorizations, and semantically unambiguous descriptions all serve to advance the ability to communicate concepts clearly between and across domains. Therefore, the CMMS-DD should be able to withstand the same scrutiny as the simulations it intends to enhance. Knowledge representation about the military domain within a simulation construct transitions through many stages. Figure 6 provides a notional overview of a set of DMSO-sponsored simulation development tools that can assist during the various stages. The envisioned CMMS-DD role within that cycle will be highlighted next.5. CMMS-DD at WorkAs the use-case to demonstrate the advantages of authoritative representations of military requirements for simulation purposes a Korean scenario was developed to provide a mission thread, involving, among other operations, the suppression of the enemy’s air defenses. Utilizing the Joint Training Information Management System’s (JTIMS), formerly known as Joint Exercise Management Package III, a mission requirements analysis was conducted, the results of which are displayed in Figure 7. One of the Joint operations required is the Joint Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses, or J-SEAD.Figure 6. JTIMS Mission AnalysisThe description of the operation provided by the analyst states: “Any activity that neutralizes, destroys, or temporarily degrades enemy surface-based air defenses by either destructive or non-destructive means. Joint Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses (J-SEAD) is a broad term that encompassed all SEAD activities provided by components of a joint force in support of one another. SEAD and J-SEAD should be integral to planning and executing joint air operations.”Following the mission analysis and requirements definition,, real or constructive forces can be identified though the use of the Unit Order of Battle Data Access Tool (UOB-DAT). During the information-gathering phase of simulation development, the Knowledge Acquisition Tool (KAT) formalizes the SME’s domain knowledge through the use of a repeatable process into Formalized Data Products (FDP) that provide the baseline for knowledge engineering activities in support of the simulation development. As the mission requirements, developed by the military SME (the warfighter), transition through the development process a disassociation can take place between original intent and inferred intent regarding semantics. For instance, the provided description of the compound term “joint suppression of enemy air defenses” provides links to many of the individual components of the term [11]. The description provided in the mission analysis does not match an authoritative source’s definition of the term(s) that make up the “concept” of J-SEAD. In fact, it appears to combine the definition of J-SEAD and SEAD, with some changes. It is therefore important for traceability purposes that not the description, but the Authoritative Data Source is referenced. The CMMS-DD utilizes authoritative sources to select term-description combinations and categorizes these, in accordance with the business rules. Assigning values to the four attributes for each entered term-description combination ensures unique, authoritative, and traceable definitions. Searching the CMMS-DD on “suppression” yields seven different entries (the CMMS-DD prototype does not provide Boolean searches, just part or complete match searches). “Suppression” and “enemy air defenses” are separate entries in the CMMS-DD, as are “J-SEAD” and “SEAD.”  Each of these terms is categorized according to the earlier introduced scheme, providing a unique term-description based on the values of the four associated attributes. A better understanding between the simulation developer and the doctrine writer, perhaps even direct access by the simulation developer to the intent of the analyst in reference to the authoritative definition would be of great benefit. To accomplish such direct access, the attribute values for the particular term-description need to be identified by the original SME. As the abstraction of domain knowledge about the real world takes place, different SMEs may be involved. From mission requirements analysis through UOB selection through gathering focused information during knowledge acquisition, one or more SMEs are involved, typically within their own domain, in synthesizing their interpretation of the real world. That SME will normally not require a data dictionary to understand the concept or terms involved. However, the domain influence, the SME’s perspective and focus, as well as the syntactical context are lost to any subsequent analyst or user. By capturing these attributes, with no orminimal intrusion for the involved SME, the original intent is retained and (semantical) data verification can be accomplished.TermDescriptionDomainFocusParticipantPOSadministrative escort(DOD, NATO)  A warship or merchant ship under naval control, carrying a convoy commodore and his staff, serving as a platform for simultaneous communication with an operational control authority and a coastal convoy.JointWhoSupporterNounconvoy escortA naval ship(s) or aircraft in company with a convoy and responsible for its protection.JointWhatOperatorNounconvoy escortAn escort to protect a convoy of vehicles from being scattered, destroyed, or captured. See also GroundWhoOperatorNounconvoy through escort(DOD, NATO)  Those ships of the close escort which normally remain with the convoy from its port of assembly to its port of arrival.JointWhoSupporterNounescortA combatant unit(s) assigned to accompany and protect another force or convoy.JointWhoOperatorNounescortAircraft assigned to protect other aircraft during a mission.Air and SpaceWhatOperatorNounescortAn armed guard that accompanies a convoy, a train, prisoners, etc.JointWhoSupporterNounescortAn armed guard accompanying persons as a mark of honor.JointWhySupporterNounescortTo convoy.JointWhatSupporterVerbescortA member of the Armed Forces assigned to accompany, assist, or guide an individual or group, e.g., an escort officerJointWhatSupporterNounescort force commanderThe senior officer of the forces detailed for the close escort of the convoy or the officer designated by competent authority to act as such.MaritimeWhoSupporterNounescort forces(DOD)  Combat forces of various types provided to protect other forces against enemy attack.JointWhoOperatorNounescort group, antisubmarineAn organization of combatant ships of antisubmarine warfare (ASW) types convoy. This group is trained in ASW operations and, normally, is retained intact as a tactical assigned to protect a organization for successive escort missionsMaritimeWhoOperatorNounescort jammingAn electronic attack (EA) tactic whereby the jamming platform accompanies the strike vehicles and provides protection by jamming enemy electronic systems.MaritimeHowOperatorProcessescort leaderDesignated by the striking group commander to command all fighter escort aircraft from the striking group. May also be the strike commander, if so designatedMaritimeWhoSupporterNountechnical escort(DOD)  An individual technically qualified and properly equipped to accompany designated material requiring a high degree of safety or security during shipment.JointWhoSupporterNounTable 2. CMMS-DD Search ResultsTable 2 lists an example of a CMMS-DD search on “escort”. The SME used a form of escort twice in the Formalized Data Product, as follows:	“SEAD missions may be tasked as escort missions for force protection of a package or high value asset.”	“Based upon the briefed mission and rules of engagement, the SEAD flight will attack radar emitters which are deemed to pose a threat the force being escorted—normally the bomb droppers of a package.”The first use of “escort” is in the assumptions section of the FDP, while the second instance can be found in the background information.  Neither of these uses of the term is explained in the FDP, i.e., no definition is provided.  One clear distinction between the two use-instances is the syntax.  The second instance refers to the use of escort as a verb, while the first instance is either a noun or adjective.  Referring to Table 2, the use of the verb “escort” can be unambiguously defined without a need to distinguish between further attributes.  However, escort used in the context of a noun still leaves five possible descriptions.  Further refining the attribute search to the Air and Space domain provides a single, unambiguous, authoritative description of the semantics appropriate for the FDP.6. SummaryConstructing mission space models requires the collaborative efforts of many individuals and organizations. Communicating requirements, specifications, desires, and intents clearly among and across all involved parties has been a major obstacle. The CMMS-DD intends to bridge that linguistic gap by capturing domain knowledge and concepts in an authoritative and unambiguous fashion. Data resources can be structured using taxonomies and ontologies, each with advantages and disadvantages that are well documented in the literature. For the CMMS-DD, a combination of the two is proposed, resulting in a three-dimensional data model that can uniquely capture military domain knowledge from a variety of perspectives. The data model includes vantage points for participants, focus, domain, and part-of-speech. Together with a robust suite of support tools (verified business rules, categorization schema, capture tools, taxonomy mapping) the CMMS-DD can provide confidence and traceability to the data (term-description combinations) entered. The resource should withstand a level of scrutiny that is equal to the integrity required from military simulations. The verification and validation of the resource can and should be enabled and simplified by the very tools that support its development.7. References[1]	Gruber, Thomas R., “Ontolingua: A Mechanism to Support Portable Ontologies,” Stanford University, Knowledge Systems Laboratory, Technical Report KSL-91-66, March 1992 Revision. [2]	Gruber, Thomas R., “A Translation Approach to Portable Ontology Specifications,” Knowledge Acquisition, 5(2): pp.199-220.	 HYPERLINK "http://ksl-web.stanford.edu/knowledge-sharing/papers/ontolingua-intro.rtf" http://ksl-web.stanford.edu/knowledge-sharing/papers/ontolingua-intro.rtf[3]	Gruber Thomas R., “Toward Principles for the Design of Ontologies Used for Knowledge Sharing,” Originally presented at International Workshop on Formal Ontology March 1993. 23 August 1993	HYPERLINK "http://ksl-web.stanford.edu/knowledge-sharing/papers/onto-design.ps"http://ksl-web.stanford.edu/knowledge-sharing/papers/onto-design.ps[4]	Uschold Mike, et al, “The Enterprise Ontology,” The Knowledge Engineering Review, Vol. 13, Special Issue on “Putting Ontologies to Use” (eds. Uschold, M. and Tate, A.), Cambridge University Press. 	HYPERLINK "ftp://ftp.aiai.ed.ac.uk/pub/documents/1998/98-ker-ent-ontology.ps"ftp://ftp.aiai.ed.ac.uk/pub/documents/1998/98-ker-ent-ontology.ps[5]	Uschold Mike, et al, “Ontologies: Principles, Methods and Applications,” Knowledge Engineering Review, Volume 11, Number 2, June 1996, Cambridge University Press, February 1996.	 HYPERLINK "http://www.aiai.ed.ac.uk/project/enterprise/enterprise/ontology.html" http://www.aiai.ed.ac.uk/project/enterprise/enterprise/ontology.html[6]	Uschold Mike, “Building Ontologies: Towards a Unified Methodology,” Expert Systems ’96, 16th Annual Conference of the British Computer Society Specialist Group on Expert Systems.[7]	Perakath, Benjamin C., et al, “Ontology Capture Method (IDEF5),” Armstrong Laboratory AL/HR-TP-1994-002, Air Force Materiel Command, 21 September 1994.	 HYPERLINK "http://www.idef.com/downloads/rtf/idef5.rtf" http://www.idef.com/downloads/rtf/idef5.rtf[8]	Zachman, John A. “A Framework for Information Systems Architecture,” IBM Systems Journal, vol. 26, no. 3, 1987. IBM Publication G321-5298.[9]	Zachman, John A. and J.F. Sowa, “Extending and Formalizing the Framework for Information Systems Architecture,” IBM Systems Journal, vol. 31, no. 3, 1992. IBM Publication G321-5488.[10]	Harris, Bruce A., et al, Final Report Conceptual Models of the Mission Space Data Dictionary, Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, Alexandria, VA 22311, 31 December 1998.[11]	National Air &Space [Warfare] Model FDP Unique ID NSMTD0278, NSPRO0067: “Conduct Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses (SEAD)”. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIESBRUCE HARRIS is the program manager for the CMMS Data Dictionary project for the Dynamics Research Corporation. In addition to his 30 years experience in military force planning and analysis as an Army officer, he has an extensive background in conceptual modeling and requirements analysis. One of his earlier projects involved the Universal Joint Task List and the definition of performance measures for joint tasks and operations.RON SMITS is a systems analyst for Dynamics Research Corporation. He is the DMSO CMMS DE liaison to the NASM program and brings 16 years experience flying operational fighter aircraft to the simulation world. He has been involved with the CMMS Data Dictionary and NASM conceptual models since joining DRC in 1998.