The TIM Suite – A Federation for Live/Virtual Simulation of C4I SystemsJohn PeaceUSACECOM RDEC, Command and Control Directorate (C2D)AMSEL-RD-C2-MSMyer Center, Building 2700Fort Monmouth, NJ 07703(732) 427-2049, DSN 987john.peace@mail1.monmouth.army.milEric WoodElectronic Proving Ground (EPG) Ft. Lewis Field OfficeCSTE-DTC-WS-EP-TFBox 339500, MS#94Fort Lewis, WA 98433(253) 966-2381, DSN 347woode@epg.lewis.army.milKeywords:C4I, FBCB2, FCS, HLA, Live, Realistic Effects, SMART, STORM, Tactical InternetABSTRACT: For the last several years, a major emphasis of the US Army has been on reducing force size while at the same time achieving force multiplication through digitization of the battlefield.  The concepts of Force XXI, Army After Next (AAN) and now the Army's objective force - Future Combat System (FCS), are representative of this theme of force multiplication through digitization.  Central to the digitization of the Army's lower tactical echelons is the Tactical Internet (TI).  The TI is emerging as the initial foundation and implementation of a more automated system for Army Command and Control (C2).  The critical system of this emerging TI is the Force XXI Battle Command Brigade and Below (FBCB2) system.  FBCB2 is the "eyes and ears" of the TI, allowing the transfer of digitized C2 data across the battlefield at the tactical echelons.  This data includes tactical C2 messages initiated by the soldiers and Situational Awareness (SA) messages for automated distribution of the friendly force positioning.  In these early years of the TI, the primary C4I systems providing the RF communications infrastructure for this C2 data distribution are the Internet Controller (INC), SINCGARS and EPLRS radios and the Global Positioning System (GPS) for navigation and position information.	As with any major new complex system, careful consideration must be given to identification of requirements, R&D, test and training.  Given the complexity of the emerging TI and digitized battlefield, the C4I and M&S communities have clearly identified the need for simulation across all three domains to support these needs.  The Tactical Internet Model suite of C4I simulation software (TIM Suite) has been developed by the Communications-Electronics Command (CECOM), in parallel with FBCB2 development, to address some of these needs.  The suite may be used in the research, development, and acquisition (RDA), advanced concepts requirements (ACR), and training, exercises, and military operations (TEMO) domains to support the Army's migration toward FCS.  It's major initial contributions have been demonstrated within the Simulation, Test, Operations, Rehearsal Model (STORM) federation during several live-virtual tests of the FBCB2 system as it progresses through its spiral development process.  STORM is an Army Test & Evaluation Command (ATEC)-sponsored program that simulates units adjacent to live forces, with test participants unable to differentiate between live and STORM-simulated units.  STORM provides Situational Awareness (SA) of simulated forces to live units’ FBCB2, and receives SA into the simulation from the live units.  Additionally, STORM provides connectivity to the TI for transmission of Command and Control (C2) messages between role players and live entities equipped with FBCB2 in the field.	STORM's ability to provide the realism necessary for both test and training, in term's of C2 processing, communications, navigation and other recently added capabilities such as RF jamming, come from the TIM Suite, which has earned it the nickname "the heart of the STORM" from ATEC.  Within the CECOM development team, several sub-organizations have collaborated to create the TIM Suite, and several Army agencies, including CECOM, have collaborated to create the STORM federation.  One of the challenges that STORM has begun to face is the transition from a DIS-based architecture to the High-Level Architecture (HLA).  Its initial foray into HLA is with the TIM Suite portion of STORM.  To satisfy interoperability issues, the TIM Suite components have been designed with DIS/HLA selectable interfaces to allow continued operation with major DIS-based legacy simulations as well as provide interoperability with emerging HLA-based simulations.  The TIM Suite is also a significant component of CECOM's System of Systems Integration (SoSI) initiative to support Simulation and Modeling for Acquisition, Requirements and Training (SMART) for the Army.	This paper, at a high-level, describes the TIM Suite along with some of its current and potential applications, while also referencing more detailed papers on specific component functionality and HLA designs.BackgroundThe Command and Control Directorate (C2D) is part of the US Army's Communications-Electronics Command (CECOM) Research, Development and Engineering Center (RDEC).  C2D's mission is obtaining and maturing basic technology for integration into command and control systems.  C2D's Modeling & Simulation (M&S) Division has the responsibility for supporting Command, Control, Communications, Computers and Intelligence (C4I) system development and acquisition decisions through use of M&S technology.  One of its flagship simulations is the subject of this paper, the Tactical Internet Model suite of C4I simulation software (TIM Suite).The intent of this paper is to describe the TIM Suite, at a high-level, along with some of its current and potential applications, especially for live-virtual simulation, while also referencing more detailed papers on specific component functionality and HLA designs.  Also referenced are lessons learned from multiple developing organizations that have transitioned the suite to the High-Level Architecture (HLA) based on a C4I reference FOM described in an earlier SISO publication [1].TIM SuiteThe TIM Suite is a product in constant evolution, in large part due to its target applications, specifically the Force XXI Battle Command Brigade and Below (FBCB2) system.  As the Tactical Internet (TI) continues to evolve and FBCB2 changes in step, the TIM Suite must adapt to these changes as well to provide simulation/stimulation capabilities for the latest architectures and software versions.  A few key high-level aspects of the suite are provided in the following sections.Historical OverviewThe TIM Suite has been developed over several years primarily to provide simulation support for battlefield digitization, specifically including TI evolution.  There have been several iterations of the suite since 1995.  These have been developed by a team of engineers and programmers, including contractor support, led by C2D.TIM Suite roots are in the SINCGARS Radio Model (SRM), developed to support the Focused Dispatch Advanced War fighting Experiment (AWE) at Forts Knox, Bliss and Rucker.  Later versions were implemented to support not only training, but also analysis and test.  TIM Suite version 1.0 followed, providing a realistic communications environment for Applique' (FBCB2 predecessor) training at Fort Hood, prior to the Task Force XXI AWE at the National Training Center (NTC) at Fort Irwin. [2]TIM Suite 2.0 supported the Navigation Warfare (NAVWAR) experiment, known as GPS – Distributed Interactive Simulation (GPS-DIS).  This soldier-in-the-loop experiment was conducted at Forts Knox and Rucker to assess the impact of GPS denial on combat force effectiveness.  TIM Suite 2.1 was the initial architecture to support STORM requirements, including a Jan 98 Alpha test and Integration Workshop in May 98, for test and stimulation of the Applique' system.  Version 2.2 was used to support the FBCB2 Limited User Test (LUT) in Aug 98 at Fort Hood, interfacing with FBCB2 for the first time.  STORM and significant uses of the TIM Suite during the past two years are discussed later in this paper.Core DIS-compliant ComponentsThe core TIM Suite components are the Simulation Converter (SIMCON), Communication Effects Server (CES), CECOM Integrated GPS Navigation Model (CIGNM) and Client Interface Device (CID).  Minor components include the Live-feed System and the Proxy INC.  These are illustrated in Figure 2.1.  Brief descriptions follow.  Information regarding the methods and content of simulation data exchange are available in TIM Suite manuals and other documentation.Figure  STYLEREF 1 \s 2. SEQ Figure \* ARABIC \s 1 1  Generic TIM Suite ArchitectureSIMCONThe Simulation Converter (SIMCON) main functions are to process both SA and C2 JVMF messages for other simulations and to synchronize the functionality of the TIM Suite.  The SIMCON makes possible the conversion of JVMF messages from live platforms on a test range into simulation language understood by virtual simulations such as ModSAF or Janus.  Part of its processing includes automatic generation of SA data for all virtual entities in a simulation, based on time and motion filters for each (as is done within the real FBCB2).  SIMCON includes realistic potion information in each SA message as calculated and provided by the CIGNM Server discussed below.  It determines the TI FBCB2 address destinations for all SA and C2 messages and interfaces with the CES, discussed below, for realistic distribution of those messages.CESThe Communications Effects Server (CES) performs all of the calculations necessary to add brigade and below communications realism to simulations, including message delays and loss from RF line-of-sight and networking considerations.  The CES includes the Terrain Integrated Rough-Earth Model (TIREM) developed by the Joint Spectrum Center (JSC) to compute pathloss between points.  It distributes messages received from the SIMCON to other simulations, including the SIMCON itself and CIDs, as appropriate.  Significant detail on the simulation of the TI protocols, networking, pathloss and radio (SINCGARS and EPLRS) representations are available in another SISO publication. [3]CIGNM ServerThe CECOM Integrated GPS Navigation Model (CIGNM) is a high fidelity, physics-based model that simulates the Global Positioning System (GPS), including its satellite constellation, and provides GPS-receiver data for simulated entities.  CIGNM also provides other navigational data and simulations including the Inertial Navigation System (INS) and Doppler radar.  CIGNM realistic navigation solutions are provided to other simulations such as the SIMCON and CIDs for generation of SA messages and to other simulations for creation of targeting solutions.CIDThe Client Interface Device (CID) provides the physical interface between the simulation systems and the target application.  The primary target application of interest to TIM Suite users is the FBCB2.  The CID provides all of the Tactical Internet (TI) interfaces expected by the FBCB2; namely the Internet Controller Point-to-Point Protocol and the PLGR Block 3 position data.  The PPP link allows SA & C2 message exchange between actual FBCB2 software and the simulated TI.  The SA and C2 messages are received at the CID from the CES and the realistic PLGR data is generated by a CIGNM client that receives precisely calculated position, time and other information from the CIGNM Server.Latest AdditionsSeveral components have been recently added to the suite.  These components provide initial base functionality and have been internally tested; however, they have not been used in a program or experiment to date.  The newest members of the family are the C4I Jammer Analysis Model (CJAM) and Internet Attack Simulator (IAS); both depicted in Figure 2.1.  These are the most significant of the new additions.  Two other additions are the Emitter-Location Error Model (ELEM) and the Anti-Jam Process (AJ Pro).  These are described below.CJAMCJAM will provide the missing link between the core TIM Suite C4I simulation capabilities and the world of Electronic Counter Measures (ECM), an expected threat to the TI.  Initial capabilities of CJAM include broadband jamming of SINCGARS and EPLRS frequencies, and a high fidelity, parameterized jammer for GPS frequencies.  Within the TIM Suite, CJAM will exchange this jammer information both with CIGNM and the CES.  The jammer noise term "J", incident at the receive antenna, will be provided to both CIGNM and the CES for determination of additional impact on the ability of a signal or message to be successfully transmitted or delivered.  In this manner, jamming effects are now added to the simulated TI environment, influencing the quality of SA position information transmitted and how well it is distributed between friendly units within the TI.  Additional information on CJAM is available in another SISO publication. [4]IASThe purpose of the IAS is to provide a capability for simulating information attacks that are likely to be directed against networks based on commercial Internet technology as well as those encountered by military-specific systems.  Attacks generated can include denial of service, spoofing and unauthorized access.  Integration of the IAS into the TIM Suite will permit soldier-in-the-loop experiments involving information attacks on the TI and can expose FBCB2 users to information attacks in a training environment.  More information on the IAS can be found in a previous SISO publication. [5]ELEM & AJ ProELEM and AJ Pro are components of a community-based architecture (CBA) which is a subset of the TIM Suite.  ELEM works very closely with both CIGNM in simulating platform targeting through various methods such as Time Difference of Arrival (TDOA) or Bi-static Radar.  The link between the two is found in the position realism and position tracking of simulated entities.  AJ Pro is more closely linked with CJAM and simulates the effects of electronic counter-counter measures (ECCM) implemented in various communications equipment.  The simulation provided by AJ Pro is used by CJAM to reduce the impacts of jammers on individual platforms accordingly.  More information on both of these components can be found along with CJAM details in another SISO publication referenced earlier. [4]HLA/DIS Selectable InterfaceThe incomplete migration from DIS to HLA in the distributed simulation community imposes upon the TIM Suite a requirement for a flexible capability to operate in either DIS or HLA mode (or in both simultaneously).  Current typical approaches to interoperability between DIS and HLA simulations often include the use of a DIS/HLA “Gateway” that translates from DIS to HLA and vice verse.  A selectable interface will permit the TIM Suite to operate with DIS-compliant legacy simulations OR current HLA-compliant federates.  Simultaneous operation would eliminate the need for the DIS/HLA Gateway and avoid the non-desirable constraints associated with using a Gateway (e.g., limited throughput).  Around this concept, the TIM Suite is leveraging a C4I reference FOM [6] to develop the HLA portion of its interfaces and meet the Oct 2000 HLA-compliance mandate of Dr. Paul Kaminski, former Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Technology.  Additional detail on the simultaneous mode can be found in a publication on CJAM. [4]STORMThe most significant application of the TIM Suite is within the Simulation, Test, Operations, Rehearsal Model (STORM) federation.  Because of the importance of the STORM program and the close interdependency between the TIM Suite and STORM, significant discussion of STORM is provided in this section.Background and NeedThe Force XXI Battle command Brigade and Below (FBCB2) system and the Tactical Internet are the newest components of the Army Battle Command System (ABCS), providing command and control connectivity down to the individual fighting vehicle.  FBCB2 interoperates with ABCS systems located at battalion level and higher.  The best test of this system for the Initial Operational Test and Evaluation (IOT&E) would be to place a force of an entire brigade combat team (BCT) in the field, and most elements of at least one additional brigade, using all command and control systems, and with all appropriate non-organic supporting assets, representation of flank and higher units and a doctrinal live opposing force.In late 1996, Operational Test Command (OTC) (then TEXCOM) recognized the prohibitive cost of such a test and the shortfall of FBCB2 equipment that would be available. They directed EPG conduct an Engineer Study to determine the feasibility of developing a test tool “to provide a seamless, synthetic battlefield environment to prepare for and conduct the brigade and below FBCB2 IOT&E and subsequent C4I tests.”  In May 1997, EPG delivered the Engineer Study and OTC accepted the recommendations contained therein. The design, starting from the original, was to be flexible enough for training and other use as well as test applications. [7]  STORM has been recently approved for use across all three M&S domains by the RIWG.System EvolutionA system capable of creating the virtual presence of such a force would have these fundamental functions:Situational Awareness (SA) Joint Variable Message Format (JVMF) traffic out to live systems over tactical radio and back into simulationCommand and Control (C2) JVMF message traffic within, into, and out of STORM to live systemsCorrect tactical communications with live forces and internal communications modelingFire support simulationIntelligence simulationAAR in the form of battlefield replay of both live and simulated systemsThe C2 messaging presented special concerns, as most C2 messages are human-created and human readable, and therefore cannot automatically be easily created.  Fire support systems were varied and complex, as were intelligence systems.  Because FBCB2 was new, simulations for it and the fledgling Tactical Internet (TI) were just beginning to emerge.It was realized from the very beginning of the engineering study in 1996 that overcoming these issues and meeting the need and original timeline of one year or less would require a team of experts and as much reuse as possible.The engineering study therefore included research and resource-search trips to agencies including STRICOM, CECOM, WSMR and TRAC WSMR, Battle Labs, and many others in search of existing systems to meet the requirements.  A core team of OTC, EPG, CECOM, and TRAC-WSMR was created, as each had expertise and a system or prototype that could fulfill part of the functionality described above.  The core systems STORM uses today are listed below.STORM Federation DesignThe architecture for STORM that has evolved over time is shown in Figure 3.1.  A brief description of the major components of STORM follows, with identification of component developer.Figure  STYLEREF 1 \s 3. SEQ Figure \* ARABIC \s 1 1  STORM FederationJanus:  Recommended and accepted as the simulation “driver” for the STORM synthetic environment.  Currently Janus version 7.06d.  Entity based (supports up to 9,999 entities) and Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) compliant.  The large number of entities is essential to simulating the size of the forces required.  Ease of entity database changes and force structure build allows flexibility.  (TRAC-WSMR)Tactical Internet Model (TIM) Suite: (Including the Simulation Converter, SIMCON.)  The “nerve center” or “heart” of STORM.  Processes all situational awareness and command and control traffic.  Models the Tactical Internet and provides communications effects and navigational position functionality.  This system is described in detail elsewhere in this paper.  (CECOM)FBCB2 Surrogate:  Provided in the simulation facility for the commander to use for display of graphic messages. This system is essentially FBCB2 software running on a PC.Role Player Workstation:  Designed to receive and send command and control messages for multiple roles (addressees), but requires only one operator.  Greatly reduces the requirement for FBCB2 surrogates, yet allows for human responses to all C2 traffic.  This is critical to creating a belief in the field units that there are real soldiers on the flanks, and feeding the correct amount of information in the correct format to commanders in staff’s.  These may be overloaded with information, or receive the wrong kind of information or at the wrong time, all of which are just as critical to testing the system as the digital stresses.  (EPG)DAUVS:  Entry point for STORM into the Tactical Internet.  It connects to the INC and configures it so role players can send and receive messages with live units in the field.  DAUVS uses FBCB2 database information to enter the correct EPLRS radio nets as the correct role, permitting it to act as both a C2 gateway and a CSMA server.  (EPG)Entity Based Model (EBM)-ATCCS Stimulation:  Takes Protocol Data Units (PDUs) from Janus and converts them to into the appropriate USMTF messages to stimulate MCS (blue SA, Class III and V logistics), ASAS (red SA-ground truth), and FAAD (air tracks). This system was included in STORM in order to stimulate USMTF using systems at the brigade and occasionally battalion levels.  This permits a stand-alone capability when augmenting systems are not available.  (EPG)Augmenting Systems:FireSim:  Driven by Janus; doctrinally models Fire Support and stimulates AFATDS using TACFIRE messages. Integrated into STORM in September 1998.  Created by the Depth and Simultaneous Attack (D&SA) Battle Lab.Digital Battle Staff Trainer (DBST):  A federation in its own right, the National Simulation Center’s (NSC) DBST uses EADSIM, TSIU, and Meta-VR to simulate intel functions, and often includes FireSim.The Janus system, portions of the TIM Suite, DAUVS, FireSim and DBST were all leveraged capabilities.  Though substantial growth and modification has been required for the first three through STORM, the original systems provided the starting point and base capability from which STORM could grow rapidly.  The SIMCON, RPWS, and EBM-ABCS are the only completely new items developed specifically for STORM.STORM ImplementationSTORM typically plays the role of battalions, frequently all battalions of a brigade.  Perhaps the most significant benefit from using STORM is the significant reduction of live resources required to support testing and training.  A notional representation of this benefit for FBCB2's IOT&E is depicted in Figure 3.2.Work cells, from which soldiers fight the battle in simulation, are created containing a Janus Workstation, an RPWS co-hosted with the Client Interface Device (CID), and an FBCB2 surrogate.  Each work cell acts as a unit, usually but not always at the company level. The soldiers in this cell are a training audience in many respects, as well as a testing and training aid:  The FBCB2 surrogate’s role is usually that of company commander, who can be forced to use only the SA and information in FBCB2 (as well as the usual voice nets) to fight the battle, rather than the what Janus or another simulation would show.  He is segregated from the Janus operator and required to give commands digitally and by voice only, rather than directly into Janus.  The RPWS operator in the cell practices the full range of company level logistics, personnel, spot reports, etc. according to company SOP.The work cells are connected to the TIM Suite and RPWS server via the DIS LAN.  After communications processing at the TIM suite, information is passed through the DAUVS to the Tactical Internet (TI).  The injection via tactical radio requires no special actions or equipment on the part of the receiving platform; traffic is sent via standard TI communications.  Coordination with the unit S6 for the DAUVS radios is required only to obtain the correct radio encryption fill, access to the EPLRS Net Control Station (NCS) and to prevent duplication of live and simulated roles.Figure  STYLEREF 1 \s 3. SEQ Figure \* ARABIC \s 1 2  One Major Benefit of STORM Application to Live TestingUnits in the field detect no difference between information from other live units and STORM portrayed units:  Messaging is sent and received the same, the correct positions (e.g. company commander, platoon leader, First Sergeant) can be communicated with and appear on the SA map, and because of correct communications modeling the fidelity and reliability of information from live and simulated units look the same in the SA portrayed on the map.An example of Force structure supported by STORM at the FDT&E at Ft. Hood in Apr 00 is shown in Figure 3.3.Figure  STYLEREF 1 \s 3. SEQ Figure \* ARABIC \s 1 3  FBCB2 LUT2 / FDT&E Force Structure (Live & Simulated)Recent Uses of STORMSTORM has been very successfully used to support:PEO C3S Central Technical Support Facility testing since AUG 98 (limited capability) with full capability in SEP 99.FBCB2 Field Test 2 phase 1, DEC 99FBCB2 Field Test 2  phase 2-3, FEB-MAR 00FBCB2 FDTE/CT, APR 00 (Force structure previously illustrated in Figure 4)Warrior Summit and Mountain Peak exercises at Ft. Drum, MAY-JUL 00 (precursor to JCF AWE)Division Capstone Exercise (DCX) at Fort Irwin, AUG 00Joint Contingency Force AWE at Fort Polk, AUG-SEP 00Interim Brigade Combat Team (IBCT) testing at Fort Lewis, SEP 00Other TIM Suite ApplicationsAlthough STORM is the major application of the TIM Suite, many other programs require the capabilities of the suite.  Some of these efforts are briefly described to present a flavor for the spread of present TIM Suite applications.SoSIThe System of Systems Integration (SoSI) collaboration is an initiative of the CECOM Research, Development and Engineering Center (RDEC).  The objective of the SoSI initiative is to establish a virtual, distributed collaborative environment to revolutionize the Army’s ability, in collaboration with the other Services, to develop, optimize, integrate, and assure interoperability of C4I2WS Systems in the network-centric battlefield.   The concepts of Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) and Simulation & Modeling, for Acquisition, Requirements and Training (SMART) will be implemented by using GOTS/COTS M&S tools to develop and test virtual prototypes early in the acquisition life cycle.  The TIM Suite is a key federate of the SoSI federation, providing current TI Command and Control (C2) processing, communications and navigation realism for its "sensor-to-shooter" collaborative simulation experiments.  The C4I referenced FOM discussed earlier is being leveraged for continuing SoSI FOM development.Light-TOCThe Light Tactical Operations Center (LTOC) effort is a C2D test bed for evaluation of baseline and modified Army Battle Command System (ABCS) systems.  The role of the TIM Suite is to provide the brigade & below stimulation up into a Brigade-level TOC, particularly to the Maneuver Control System (MCS) and the All-Source Analysis System (ASAS).Specific ProgramOther programs are able to make use of TIM Suite simulation/stimulation realism.  In particular, one specific program is using the suite for experimentation, hardware test comparison and proof-of-concept evaluation through force-on-force simulations.  The focus is on wide area jamming and platform targeting and identification, which are not easily evaluated through force-on-force live testing.Potential TIM Suite ApplicationsSeveral organizations have expressed interest in leveraging TIM Suite capabilities in their simulation programs and still other programs would be a "good fit" for the TIM Suite.  These programs and experiments include the Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT), Land Warrior (with its requirement to interoperate with FBCB2 and the TI) the Joint GPS Combat Experiment (JGPSCE) Guardrail/Common Sensor, Crusader and the Army Experiment Program.  The TIM Suite has been designed with enough flexibility to be modified or segregated to support applications such as these.Planned Future CapabilitiesIn addition to current applications of the TIM Suite, it is flexible enough to be modified and enhanced for other uses.  Many parties have expressed significant interest in the integration of the TIM Suite, in particular its CJAM federate, with a semi-live jamming injection system, such as MCREWS or TRIM.  Such an integration will permit the exchange of purely simulated jamming information with live platforms at a test site and vice-versa.  This potential marriage is also discussed in another SISO publication. [4]Another significant planned addition to the TIM Suite is a Co-site Interference Model (CIM).  This is a planned joint development with The Joint Spectrum Center (JSC), based on the latest JSC algorithms developed for near-term electromagnetic interference.  This would have direct application to representing interference generated in TOCs from the various C3 systems they employ within close proximity.ConclusionGiven the complexity of the emerging TI and digitized battlefield, the C4I and M&S communities have clearly identified the need for simulation across all three M&S domains to support identification of requirements, R&D, test and training.  It increases in importance as the Army continues to reduce force structure and rely more on digitization as a force multiplier, especially within the TI and eventually in the objective force.  The TIM Suite is one product that has been developed to help meet these needs.  The suite is a CECOM verified federation that provides realistic representation of navigation, C2 processing, communications, ECM and targeting for simulation of C4I systems with application to RDA, ACR and TEMO domains.As part of a larger STORM Federation, live-to-virtual simulation of the Tactical Internet has been performed at several significant FBCB2 field tests during the past two years.  Additionally, a dual DIS/HLA interface, developed based on a C4I prototype FOM, allows TIM Suite interoperability with legacy DIS architectures or with emerging HLA federations.The Suite consists of numerous federates, some of which can be autonomous, with flexibility to modify or add functionality or use with additional applications to support new C4I simulation requirements for the Army's emerging Future Combat System (FCS).  Additional detailed information on various aspects and components of the TIM Suite are provided in other SISO publications referenced within this paper and below.References[1] W. Sudnikovich, J. Roberts:  “Implementation of a prototype C4I FOM: Continued Progress,” Fall 1999 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, paper number 99F-SIW-077.[2] Manoski, S., McConnell, J., Riehl, M., Sudnikovich, W., Tafoni, T., Vogel, J.: “The Tactical Internet Model (TIM) Provides Realistic Communications for Task Force XXI Training”, Spring 1997 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, paper 97S-SIW-44.[3] J. Dulmage, T. Hoang, J. McConnell, M. Riehl, J. Sytwu, J. Wessel, J. Peace: “The Communications Effects Server (CES) Provides Realistic Communication Effects in Distributed Simulations”, Fall 2000 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, paper number 00F-SIW-069.[4] M. Berry, J. McGowan, J. Peace: “CJAM – Assessing the Force-Level Impact of Tactical ECM on C4I Systems through Distributed Simulation”, Fall 2000 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, paper number 00F-SIW-068.[5] J. Roberts, J. Bott, J. Mostow, J. Wakely: "Integration of an Internet Attack Simulator in an HLA Environment", Fall 1999 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, paper number 99F-SIW-039.[6] J. Roberts, V. Dobbs: “Application of a C4I Reference FOM to an Existing Simulation Environment", Fall 2000 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, paper number 00F-SIW-067.[7] T. Christopherson, L. Dacunto: “STORM, A Testing and Training Tool for Lower Echelon Command and Control Systems”, Spring 1998 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, paper number 98S-SIW-027.Author BiographiesJoHN PEACE is the TIM Suite manager, coordinating the efforts of multiple organizations in the development of distributed C4I simulations for CECOM RDEC's Command and Control Directorate (C2D) at Fort Monmouth, NJ.  He has spent 13 years in support of DoD efforts at Fort Monmouth, including over 7 years as a Project Manager on several Special Operations Forces (SOF) and Test Equipment Modernization (TEMOD) programs.  He completed CECOM's 3-year Civilian Leadership Development Program (CLDP) in 1996, holds a BS in Electronic Engineering from Monmouth University and a Masters in Technology Management from Stevens Institute of Technology.eric wood is the EPG lead for the STORM project and its overall integration, as EPG acts as the technical integrator for STORM.  He has worked for EPG at the Ft. Lewis Field Office on both modeling and simulation projects and as a test officer, including lead test officer for the IMETS DT/OT, one of the first combined operational and technical tests.  He holds a BS in Physics from Carnegie-Mellon University.