The Joint Strike Fighter (JSF)Strike Warfare Collaborative Environment (SWCE)James E. CoolahanFrederic T. CaseJohns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory11100 Johns Hopkins RoadLaurel, MD 20723-6099240-228-5155, 240-228-8740James.Coolahan@jhuapl.edu, FT.Case@jhuapl.eduLt Col Robert J. Hartnett, Jr., USAFJoint Strike Fighter Program Office1213 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 600Arlington, VA 22202703-601-5650HartnettRJ@jast.milKeywords:Joint Strike Fighter (JSF), Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA), Architecture, Collaborative Environment, Modeling & Simulation.ABSTRACT: The Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) program is the U.S. Department of Defense’s focal point for defining an affordable next generation strike aircraft weapon system for the Navy, Air Force, Marines, and U.S. allies.  During the Engineering and Manufacturing Development (EMD) phase of acquisition, the JSF program will enhance its ability to represent the JSF in realistic synthetic environments, emerging from the program’s persistent application of the Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) concept, which calls for the aggressive, collaborative, integrated, and extensible use of M&S throughout the JSF life cycle.  In March, 1998, the Acquisition Council of the DoD Executive Council for Modeling and Simulation (EXCIMS) established a Joint SBA Task Force to develop a road map for DoD’s SBA implementation.  Two key architectural concepts described in the Task Force’s report, collaborative environments (CEs) and the Distributed Product Description (DPD), have been incorporated into the JSF M&S architecture.The purpose of this paper is to describe the JSF Strike Warfare Collaborative Environment (SWCE) and the processes that will be used to maintain it.  The JSF SWCE will be developed and maintained by the JSF Program Office (JSFPO), and will be used during EMD to support JSF collaborative activities in three overlappingthe focus areas: of mission effectiveness analysis, supportability analysis, and cost (affordability) analysis, and engineering and manufacturing analysis.  The JSF SWCE Toolset will include the JSF SWCE Suite of Models and Simulations (SoM&S) (which is currently planned to include over 20about 30 models and simulations), a set of authoritative databases, and the JSF DPD.  Government and Industry stakeholders in the JSF SWCE will have access to the JSF DPD, to the databases, and to other authoritative resources via the JSF Resource Access System (RAS).  The paper will describe the overall design concept for the JSF SWCE as presented in the JSF M&S Support Plan, its constituent SoM&S, its relationships to the JSF DPD and the JSF RAS, and the management processes that the JSFPO has established to evolve and maintain it.Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Background1.1 JSF Program OverviewThe Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) program was established in the early days of DoD’s current revolution in business affairs, when senior decision makers realized that acquisition reform was the key to enabling DoD to help close the gap between the reality of declining defense budgets and the real need to modernize the force.  The JSF Program Director was charged with incorporating the recommendations of the Packard and Carnegie commissions into a model acquisition reform program.  The original program charter focused on six key initiatives:establishing an integrated team of users and developers;facilitating evolution of fully developed and validated operational requirements;evolving requirements over time,reducing development, procurement, and support costs;performing tradeoff analyses of critical user defined performance parameters; andconducting unprecedented levels of joint analysis and simulation.This commitment to modeling and simulation was made not for its own sake, but because it provides a solid analytic foundation for the other initiatives.The program’s Operations Analysis Study Plan, published in April 1995, provided a broad description of JSF modeling, simulation, and analysis (MS&A) as applied to the entire acquisition program (i.e., through Milestone III scheduled for fiscal year 2008).  The JSF program has relied heavily on modeling and simulation (M&S) through the Program Definition and Risk Reduction (PDRR) phase to integrate warfighters and maintainers into the development process early in the system’s life cycle.  The objective of this has been to reduce requirements creep and, consequently, development costs.Virtual Strike Warfare Environment (VSWE)The Virtual Strike Warfare Environment (VSWE) was the virtual, or interactive, component of the M&S architecture for the JSF program during the PDRR phase of the JSF acquisition.  Development of the JSF VSWE began in 1994, guided by the VSWE Implementation Plan.  The VSWE Working Group (composed of both Government and Industry team members) initially developed requirements for the VSWE in 1996.  The objective of the JSF VSWE was to provide a consistent environment, or “level playing field” between Government and Industry for support of interactive M&S from project inception to post-deployment support.  The VSWE was intended to support “common yardstick” assessment of concepts of operations (CONOPS) and tactical utility.  The VSWE was intended to be used to support mission-, engagement- and system-level requirements analysis during PDRR, with models developed at a level of detail appropriate to that use.The first experimental use of the VSWE by JSF occurred at Patuxent River Naval Air Station (NAS) in May, 1998.  Since that time, six additional experiments have been performed at several locations (the SimAF at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base (AFB), China Lake NAS, and the simulation facility at the USAF Research Laboratory in Mesa, AZ). Each VSWE experiment was built upon the previous experiment and added complexity and capability to produce quantifiable answers to questions posed by the warfighters (the JSF Operational Advisory Group, a.k.a. the OAG) tasked to develop the JSF Joint Operational Requirements Document (JORD). The first three VSWE experiments addressed OAG questions associated with JSF capabilities required to perform the air interdiction (AI) mission.  Subsequent experiments addressed concepts for real-time information into the JSF cockpit (RTIC), close air support (CAS), and capabilities required to perform as a component of the DoD’s future C4ISR architecture.During this same period, the DoD began to formalize the concept of using virtual and constructive simulation to support streamlining the acquisition process associated with major system procurements.  The concepts associated with Simulation Based Acquisition were readily adopted by the JSFPO.2. Review of SBA Architecture Concepts2.1 OverviewIn 1997, the Acquisition Council of the DoD Executive Council for Modeling and Simulation (EXCIMS) developed a vision for Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) that included the following goals:substantially reduce the time, resources, and risk associated with the entire acquisition process; increase the quality, military worth, and supportability of fielded systems while reducing total ownership costs throughout the total life cycle; and enable Integrated Product and Process Development (IPPD) across the entire acquisition life cycle.  In March, 1998, the Acquisition Council established a Joint SBA Task Force to develop a roadmap for DoD’s SBA implementation.  Over a six-month study period and a three-month review period, the Task Force developed a notional architecture for SBA and a roadmap of recommended actions to implement SBA in DoD, both of which were documented in the Task Force’s report in December, 1998  REF _Ref485789457 \r \h [1].  The notional SBA architecture defined in the roadmap consists of three views: the operational view, the systems view, and the technical view. Five principal SBA architectural concepts were proposed:Collaborative Environments (CEs);the Collaborative Environment Reference Systems Architecture (CERSA);Distributed Product Descriptions (DPDs);the DoD/Industry Resource Repository (DIRR); andData Interchange Formats (DIFs).A high-level description of these architectural concepts may be found in  REF _Ref485789804 \r \h [2].  The relationships among these concepts are depicted in Figure 1.2.2 Collaborative Environments (CEs)As defined in  REF _Ref485789457 \r \h [1], a CE, in the context of SBA, is “an enduring collection of subject matter experts (SMEs) supported by interoperable tools and data bases, authoritative information resources, and product/process models that are focused on a common domain or set of problems.”  The statement that a CE comprises an enduring collection of resources implies that it is not an ad hoc creation.  It exists throughout the life cycle of a system, such as a specific fighter aircraft (system CE), throughout the collective life of a related family of products, such as aircraft (product area CE), or throughout the need for a given type of mission, such as strike warfare (mission area CE).As discussed in  REF _Ref485793082 \r \h [3], regardless of the domains or sets of problems that individual CEs are focused upon, all CEs can be expected to have some essential common elements:a defined purpose for which the CE is intended to be used;the involvement of SMEs from all functional disciplines that are stakeholders in the domain or set of problems on which the CE is focused;availability of a set of interoperable models, simulations, tools, and data appropriate to the domain or problem set;systems for electronic collaboration over a distance for exchange of information, access to authoritative data, and execution of simulations;a systems architecture framework for the CE, derived from a common reference such as the CERSA;an agreed upon set of processes for configuration management and for Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A); an agreed upon set of standards, rules, and local conventions, to which all CE users and components adhere; andcoordinated policy, planning, and investment strategies to ensure continuing support of the CE.2.3 Distributed Product Descriptions (DPDs)As defined in  REF _Ref485789457 \r \h [1] and reiterated in  REF _Ref485794465 \r \h [4], a DPD is “a distributed collection of digital product-centric information that is interconnected via web technology into what appears (to the user) to be a single, logically unified product representation.”  The purpose of a DPD is to provide a common reference for IPPD.    DPDs provide a shared view of the product’s developmental state to all participants in the acquisition process throughout all phases of the acquisition process.  This allows simultaneous evaluation of the current product configuration from the perspective of each functional discipline.  Thus, for instance, product designers can measure the performance of a product at the same time that product manufacturers can evaluate the producibility of the product and logisticians can assess the supportability of the product.As discussed in  REF _Ref485810370 \r \h [5], standards for the exchange of DPD information among the participants in an acquisition program represents a particularly critical need.  Specifically, standardized DIFs are needed to facilitate the exchange of DPD data among different tools and databases.  A DIF provides a common, intermediate format by which categories of DPD information can be described.  DIFs are derived from a common data model, which describes the semantics and syntax of shared data.  These intermediate formats can be readily converted to any number of related output formats without loss or distortion of content using appropriate translation software.  Thus, the native data formats of DPD databases and development tools can be maintained, with the DIF specifying the format by which data is exchanged with other tools or databases.  Figure 2, adapted from the SBA Road Map  REF _Ref485789457 \r \h [1], shows the concept for the use of DPDs and DIFs with tools utilized by various functional disciplines in acquisition programs. Figure 2. Relationships among DPDs, DIFs and tools (adapted from the SBA Road Map).3. JSF Collaborative Environment Concepts3.1 JSF SBA Strategy During EMDThe JSF SBA strategy, including much of the JSF-specific information contained in this paper, may be found in the JSF Modeling and Simulation Support Plan  REF _Ref485743988 \r \h [6].  The JSF Program will require a comprehensive M&S capability to implement the SBA vision stated in subsection 2.1 and will establish a JSF M&S Toolset to support the implementation.  The JSF M&S Toolset will be used to support many JSF activities throughout the Engineering and Manufacturing Development (EMD) Phase.  The Toolset will be used to show the value-added of the JSF, to answer questions associated with the JSF force structure, and to provide insight into proposed changes on the JSF program driven by outside events and activities.  The M&S Toolset may be used by other programs who require similar capabilities to conduct strike warfare M&S.The primary uses of the M&S Toolset will be to:assist the Weapon System Contractor (WSC) in early and continuous operational and technical/design trade studies of the weapon system trade studies;assess compliance with the JORD and the performance-based Joint Model Specification (JMS) via the interaction of the operational and engineering toolsets;improve the planning and execution of developmental and operational testing;support warfighters in developing JSF CONOPS;improve warfighter skill proficiency through high-fidelity mission rehearsal using actual hardware and software components (as appropriate);allow inclusion of the JSF in CINC- and Service-sponsored Advanced Warfighting Experiments (AWEs) and Joint Force Exercises (JFXs);support logistics and supportability, training, mission management, and operational employment requirements;orient and educate interested parties on JSF concepts and capabilities;support decision-making regarding JSF force structure requirements; andsupport the implementation of timely, credible analyses regarding emergent issues.; andenable more direct and rapid translation of operational requirements into the systems engineering process tools for rapid prototyping, analysis, design, development, verification, and test.The top-level view of the JSF M&S Toolset, which alludes to the JSF CEs described in subsection 3.2, is depicted in Figure 3. The components of the M&S Toolset are described in more detail in section 4.3.2 JSF Collaborative EnvironmentsThere are four focus areas, listed in  REF _Ref485801705 \h Table 1, around which collaborative activities will be centered during JSF EMD.  The first threeAll of these focus areas will be supported by the Strike Warfare Collaborative Environment (SWCE), developed and maintained by the JSFPO.  Additionally, Tthe last will be supported by the Engineering and Manufacturing Collaborative Environment (EMCE), developed and maintained by the JSF WSC team.  Stakeholders in both CEs will have access to the JSF DPD, to JSF databases and to other authoritative resources via the JSF Resource Access System (RAS).4. The JSF Strike Warfare Collaborative Environment (SWCE)4.1 Design Concept for the JSF SWCEAlthough the JSF will be a multi-mission weapon system, and its mission effectiveness must be evaluated across the full spectrum of missions to which it is assigned, its primary mission will be strike warfare.  Similarly, its ability to perform its missions, and to contribute to the campaigns in which it will be involved, will be dependent on aspects of its total ownership cost (TOC) and its degree of supportability.  Thus, although its mission effectiveness,  cost,  and  supportability  will  be  analyzedTable  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 1. Focus areas for JSF collaborative activities during EMD.Focus AreaFocusMission effectiveness analysisEvaluation of the effectiveness with whichof the JSF willto perform its total set of missions; includes performance-oriented simulations primarily at the mission level, but also at the engagement and campaign levels.Supportability analysisSupportability requirements and capabilities of the JSF throughout its life cycle.Cost analysisDetermining the total ownership cost (TOC) of the JSF.Engineering and manufacturing analysisEngineering and manufacturing of the JSF by the contractor teamJSF WSC; includes detailed models and simulations, generally physics-based, and primarily at the engineering level.requirements management and traceability (cost, risk, and performance impacts); direct linkage to design and development tools, data products, and analysis of engineering and manufacturing processes as employed by the JSF WSC and cognizant JSFPO Integrated Product Team (IPT).during EMD by SMEs with skills focused in these three areas, these analyses cannot be performed independently of one another and without reference to the supporting engineering and manufacturing analysis.  In order to emphasize this linkage, while still acknowledging the JSF’s primary mission area:The JSF Strike Warfare Collaborative Environment is defined to be that Government-managed CE that is used to support the collaboration focus areas of mission effectiveness analysis, supportability analysis, and cost analysis, and engineering and manufacturing analysis.These three focus areas will be linked by more than just elements of the JSF DPD, with portions of the JSF SWCE SoM&S (described in section 4.3) supporting multiple focus areas.  Thus, the JSF SWCE can be thought of as including three overlapping collaboration focus areas, fed by a base of engineering level components, as depicted in Figure 4.The JSF SWCE SoM&S will support both government and contractor analysis of various system design options from several different perspectives.  From the perspective of mission effectiveness, they must collectively determine whether the modeled performance of the JSF aircraft and associated avionics and weapons systems meets the operational requirements defined in the JORD and the performance specifications contained in the JMS.  From the supportability perspective, they must be able to verify that system reliability goals are being met and acceptable sortie generation rates are being achieved.  From the costing perspective, they must continually evaluate the impact of design or operational use changes on JSF TOC.In addition to the SWCE SoM&S, there are other tools, as well as resources and infrastructure, that will contribute to the SWCE. These may be categorized by the bottom two “layers” shown in the CERSA in Figure 1.  For instance, collaboration tools (such as video teleconferencing systems, groupware, and whiteboarding tools) are expected to provide an effective, efficient means for distributed inter-functional Government/Industry teams to work toward common goals.  Resources such as approved processes (e.g., VV&A, security, configuration management) and M&S databases (e.g., the Authoritative Systems Data Base (ASDB), the Multi-spectral Data Base (MsDB), the Generic Composite Scenario (GCS), threat data, etc.) provide valuable reference material that can be reused across JSF program phases.  Supporting infrastructure elements, such as host computers, physical networks (e.g., the JSF Secure Network), and distributed operating systems can also be considered to be part of the JSF SWCE.  4.2 SWCE Relationship to the JSF DPD As shown previously in Figure 3, the JSF DPD is a key resource for both the SWCE and the EMCE, serving as a hub for the JSF IPPD process, and facilitating collaboration across the entire JSF enterprise.  The JSF DPD will contain the most authoritative information about the JSF.  As a minimum, it will include all of the JSF-specific information required as inputs by all of the components of the SWCE and EMCE SoM&S.A detailed description of the JSF DPD is beyond the scope of this paper.  For more information, see  REF _Ref485810474 \r \h [7].4.3 JSF Suite of Models & Simulations (SoM&S)The JSF Suite of Models and Simulations (JSF SoM&S) is defined to include those models and simulations used in the SWCE and the EMCE during JSF EMD. These tools are considered to be essential to JSF development by Government and Industry team members, and thus will be subject to Configuration Management (CM) and VV&A procedures.  The models and simulations from the JSF SoM&S used in the SWCE are defined to be the SWCE SoM&S.  The 2330 models and simulations currently included in the SWCE SoM&S are listed in  REF _Ref485805542 \h Table 2 (in alphabetical order of their acronyms).The components of the JSF SWCE SoM&S will be used to support the threefour SWCE collaboration focus areas of mission effectiveness analysis, supportability analysis, and cost analysis, and engineering and manufacturing analysis.  Some of the components are applicable to multiple focus areas.  Figure 5 depicts the relative contribution of each of the SWCE SoM&S components to the three SWCE collaboration focus areas.4.4 Databases and SWCE Boxed SetsUnderlying each component of the SoM&S are the databases required to execute the model or simulation and the tools necessary to support the development of the scenarios and data for each.  In many cases, the databases and tools are developed and made available to users by the model managers.  In other cases, the JSFPO will develop and manage the databases and tools that support JSFPO unique requirements.The authoritative systems data base (ASDB) is the JSFPO-accredited information repository that contains descriptions of systems that are represented in the JSF SWCE SoM&S.  The ASDB does not contain authoritative information that characterizes the JSF.  That information is contained in the JSF DPD.  The source of all characteristic data in the ASDB will be identified and dated.  The ASDB information will be accessible via the JSF Resource Access System (RAS) (see section 5).Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 2. Models and simulations currently included in the JSF SWCE SoM&S.AcronymNameTypeLevelCatModel ManagerDescription1ACQUIREEngE&MEO tool2AFMSS (MPS/JMPS)/ AR (CLOAR/On-Board)Air Force Mission Support System (Mission Planning System/Joint Mission Planning System)/Auto-router (Common Low Observable AutoRouter/Imbedded avionics auto-router)VMMEESC/ACMission management toolset13ASMAircraft Sustainability ModelCESALMIReadiness based spares model34BRAWLERBrawler*BrawlerCEMEAFSAAAir-to-air analysis45CALMConsolidated Air Load ManifestCESACEDSLoad optimization for airlift aircraft56CFAMCombat Forces Assessment ModelCCm$$$ME SAOASWeapons allocation model67COVART*Computational Vulnerability and Repair TimeCEngMEE&MASC/XRAVulnerability model78DIADSDigital Integrated Air Defense SystemC&VEMEAFFTC/412TWHi-fi IADS representation9DISAMSEngE&M810EADSIMExtended Air Defense SimulationVCMMEUSASMDCC2, C3, ISR, Attack Operations and TMD model.11ESAMS*Enhanced Surface-to-Air Missile SimulationVCEMEAFIWCHi-fidelity threat SAM representation102FASTGEN*Fast Shotline GeneratorCEngMEE&MASC/XRAVulnerability model13FLIR 92EngE&MEO tool124GIANTGPS Interference and Navigation ToolCMEngMEE&MSMC/CZ GPS interference model15HITRANEngE&MLaser propagation tool136JCCMJoint Common Cost ModelC$$$JSFPO147JCOREJoint Services Cost Oriented Resources Estimating ModelC$$$JSFPO158JIMMJoint Interim Mission ModelC&VCMME SAESC/CXJSF virtual environment and analysis tool169JOSTEJSF Operating and Support Technologies Evaluation ModelC$$$JSFPO20JVSJSF Virtual SimulatorVMMEJSFPOVirtual cockpit 1721LCOMLogistics Composite ModelCCm$$$ ME SAASCSimulation of aircraft support operations and resources.22LOTRANEngE&MAtmospheric model1823MIL AASPEM-II*Man-in-the-Loop Air-to-air System Performance Evaluation ModelC&VCEMEASCFRL/IFSDHi-fi M-I-L threat fighters24MODTRANEngE&MAtmospheric model1925MOSAICModeling System for the Advanced Investigation of CountermeasuresCEMEASC/ENMMSignature backgroundIR SAM modeling tool206RADGUNS*Radar-Directed Gun SimulationCEMEASC/ENMMRadar directed guns217RCHEMResidual Chemical Hazard Environment ModelCM&CmEngSA&MEE&MASC/XRAChemical exposure model228SHAZAMShazamN/AShazamC&VCEngMEE&MASC/XRAEndgame model29SPIRITSEngE&MAircraft IR signature tool2330THUNDERThunderThunderCCmME SAAFSAACampaign analysis toolV-virtual, C-constructive; 		ME-Mission Effectiveness, SA-Supportability, and $$$-Cost, E&M-Engineering & Manufacturing Analysis.Cm-Campaign, M-Mission; E-Engagement;  Eng-Engineering; 	* indicates a SURVIAC modelA SWCE boxed set is a configuration-managed item within the JSF M&S Toolset.  A boxed set consists of the executable code of the model or simulation, the underlying databases containing scenarios, system representations (threat and friendly), the terrain/atmospheric database (if applicable), supporting tools, and reference documentation (e.g., user's guide, reference manual, release notes, etc).  Other items (e.g., source code) may also be included in the boxed set.  The management of the boxed set (e.g., update, release, VV&A, etc.) for each component of the JSF M&S Toolset is discussed in detail in the JSF Configuration Management Plan  REF _Ref485743946 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [8].5. The JSF Resource Access System (RAS)The JSFPO intends to facilitate the sharing of JSF representations, and the results of the associated model, simulation and federation executions, with all stakeholders.  Accordingly, the DPD and contractor-developed reusable mappings, input data sets and software (i.e., simulations, Digital System Models (DSMs), translation software) will be made electronically accessible to authorized users via the JSF Resource Access System (RAS).  (The relationship of the JSF RAS to other components of JSF CEs is shown graphically in Figure 3.)  All JSF-associated authoritative databases (including appropriate terrain and atmospheric databases), scenarios and documentation will be accessible via the RAS.  Pointers to authoritative DSMs or other representations of threat and friendly systems will also be included.  Access to these authoritative non-JSF resources will be subject to the approval of the resource owners.The RAS will be a web-accessible application, or set of applications, to provide users with a means to access, explore and download DPD information.  It is the "virtual repository" that provides DPD information to users in a way that appears seamless and implements, for JSF, functionality similar to that envisioned for the DIRR in the SBA systems architecture (see Figure 1).  The RAS may consist of a commercial Product Data Manager system, augmented with additional functionality provided by other applications or standard web services as necessary to provide the services needed.The following user interface functions are considered appropriate for the RAS services:access controls, preferably using Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) technology;an information map, search tools and glossary to allow users to find and understand information;a presentation of the various JSF versions and variants represented in the DPD, and the ability to search and select among them;preferably, subscription and trigger mechanisms so users can elect to be alerted when information in specific data fields changes;parsing tools to allow user-tailored display and download;preferably, depictions showing the expected time to download a selected data set and, once underway, a representation of the progress of the download and expected time remaining.; andcommunication provisions to facilitate use of digital products and services by IPT members (i.e., interfaces to groupware, electronic mail systems, etc.).6. The JSF SWCE Management ProcessOne of the objectives of the JSFPO is to establish a collaborative development environment in which the JSFPO and the WSC are jointly responsible for the development of specific JSF M&S Toolset assets. To achieve this objective, several processes are required which will be collaboratively established, namely, configuration management, data and model improvement, and verification, validation and accreditation.  These processes are described in the paragraphs that follow.6.1 JSF M&S Toolset Configuration ManagementThe JSFPO has established and documented a configuration management (CM) process for modeling and simulation that will be used throughout EMD.  The three primary goals of the CM process are to:evolve tools and databases to support government and WSC needs;manage code and database distribution to JSF users; andcontrol configuration of the SWCE M&S Toolset through semi-annual Configuration Control Boards (CCBs) to prioritize and identify funding for model and database changes.The focus for the JSFPO will be on the configuration management of the SWCE Toolset, including data bases and model interfaces. The CM process will be the JSFPO’s mechanism for identifying and prioritizing changes to the SWCE in response to JSF requirements.  In accordance with the CM process, approved SWCE changes will be forwarded to the appropriate model manager/owner for execution since the JSFPO does not own the individual SWCE models. Along with the JSFPO, the WSC, model builder/developers and other stakeholders participate in the collaborative CM process.    However, the JSFPO’s CM program will not be applied to the DPD or the EMCE supplied by the WSC.  The WSC will establish a CM process for the tools for which the WSC is responsibleEMCE that will be available to the Government for review.6.2 JSF Data/Model Improvement ProgramA Data/Model Improvement Program (D/MIP) will be established within the JSFPO during EMD.  The D/MIP will be based upon an evolutionary improvement process and will address requirements to evolve tools and databases to support Government and weapon system contractor needs during EMD.The developmentevolution of the JSF M&S Toolset will be conducted using a spiral development approach.  The five phases of the spiral are: Design, Modify/Develop, Evaluate, Employ, and Assess.Each spiral is forecast to last approximately one year with the Evaluate phase aligned with an annual SWCE validation activity and the Employ phase aligned with a JSFPO-sponsored SWCE analysis or an Advanced Warfighting Experiment (e.g., JEFX-00, FBE-H, Millennium Challenge, etc.).  The JSF full mission simulators (FMSs)virtual simulator (JVS) at the simulation facilities will be used to support man-in-the-loop analysis and experimentation activities and areis included in this spiral development approach.6.3 Verification, Validation, and AccreditationVerification, Validation and Accreditation (VV&A) processes are used to develop a clear understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of the tools being used and the bounds within which results are credible.  VV&A forms a firm foundation for the development, test and evaluation, and training requirements for the Joint Strike Fighter when combined with:disciplined configuration management of both models and data, anda focused data and model improvement program which addresses areas of weakness which adversely impact the quality of analysis.The VV&A process endorsed by the JSFPO is based upon the VV&A Recommended Practices Guide  REF _Ref485873986 \r \h [9] published by the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office.Accreditation is a decision made by the JSFPO that a model or simulation is adequate for a given purpose.  The JSFPO has adopted the tailored accreditation approach developed by the Joint Accreditation Support Activity (JASA).  The JSFPO will apply the JASA methodology to assess the suitability of all components of the JSF M&S Toolset being used to support required analysis.  The JASA process that supports this accreditation decision is described in the JSF M&S Support Plan  REF _Ref485743988 \r \h [6].An Accreditation Report (AR) is the final product requireddelivered to the JSFPO to support the JSFPO’sits accreditation decision.  The JSFPO is the accrediting authority for all components of the M&S Toolset employed in the development of the JSF.  The AR gives the JSF Program Director the knowledge necessary to make an informed decision with regard to accreditation.  The JASA approach leads to a detailed understanding of the merits of the component for the specific questions of interest; however, if either the model code or the questions change, then the assessment must be revisited.7. SummaryThe Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) program is the U.S. Department of Defense’s focal point for defining an affordable next-generation strike aircraft weapon system for the Navy, Air Force, Marines, and U.S. allies.  During the EMD phase of acquisition, the JSF program will enhance its ability to represent the JSF in realistic synthetic environments.  To do this, The JSF SWCE will be developed and maintained by the JSFPO, and will be used during EMD to support JSF collaborative activities in three overlappingthe focus areas: of mission effectiveness analysis, supportability analysis, and cost analysis, and engineering and manufacturing analysis.The architecture of the JSF SWCE builds upon two key architectural concepts described in the SBA roadmap report: collaborative environments and the Distributed Product Description (DPD).  This paper has described the overall JSF SWCE design concept as presented in the JSF M&S Support Plan, the SWCE’s constituent Suite of Models and Simulations, its relationships to the JSF DPD and the JSF Resource Access System, and the management processes that the JSFPO has established to evolve and maintain it.8. ReferencesA Roadmap for Simulation Based Acquisition – Report of the Joint Simulation Based Acquisition Task Force, Acquisition Council Draft for Coordination, December 4, 1998.R. R. Lutz and J. F. Keane, “An Architecture for Simulation Based Acquisition,” 1999 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 1999.J. E. Coolahan, J. F. Keane, and C. H. Sinex, “SBA Collaborative Environment Concepts for Mission and Product Areas,” 2000 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 2000.Air Force Instruction 16-1002, “Modeling and Simulation Support to Acquisition,”  June 1, 2000.R. R. Lutz and J. E. Coolahan, “Developmental Concepts for Digital Distributed Product Descriptions,” 1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 1999.Modeling & Simulation Support Plan (MSSP), Joint Strike Fighter (JSF), Version 4.001, Joint Strike Fighter Program Office, July 6August 10, 2000. J. W. Hollenbach, “JSF Distributed Product Description,” 2000 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 2000.Configuration Management Plan for the JSF EMD MS&A Division, Joint Strike Fighter Program Office, May 2000.VV&A Recommended Practices Guide, Year 2000 Edition, Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, http://www.msiac.dmso.mil/vva/.Author BiographiesDR. JAMES E. COOLAHAN is the Assistant to the Director for Modeling and Simulation at the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory.  In his 28 years at JHU/APL, his technical activities have included modeling and simulation, test and evaluation, and the development of oceanographic data acquisition systems.  Dr. Coolahan is a member of the National Research Council Committee on Modeling and Simulation Enhancements for 21st Century Manufacturing and Acquisition, and, in 1998, provided leadership for the technical team supporting the Joint Simulation Based Acquisition Task Force.  In SISO, he is a past Vice-Chair of the SISO Test and Evaluation Forum, and has been elected to the Research, Development and Engineering Forum Program Review Panel.  Dr. Coolahan holds B.S. and M.S. degrees in aerospace engineering from the University of Notre Dame and the Catholic University of America, respectively, and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from the Johns Hopkins University and the University of Maryland, respectively.LIEUTENANT COLONEL ROBERT J. HARTNETT, JR., USAF, is the Chief of Modeling, Simulation, and Analysis for the Joint Strike Fighter Program.  LtCol Hartnett earned a BS degree in Computer Engineering from Tufts University, an MS in Systems Management from the Air Force Institute of Technology, and an MS in Management from Troy State University.  A career Acquisition Professional, he has over 16 years of military experience in a broad range of complex simulation systems.  LtCol Hartnett has worked as both engineer and program manager in complex modeling and simulation areas ranging from the Battlestaff Training aspects of major wargaming centers, to the detailed computer systems engineering of range threat emulators, as well as the connectivity and information dissemination issues for numerous C4I systems.  He also served his time in the Pentagon as a Program Element Monitor (PEM) for HQ USAF.  The Joint Strike Fighter is the first aircraft program in history to use modeling and simulation in such a deep and integrated fashion, and LtCol Hartnett’s combined Government and Industry team is the catalyst for major changes in DoD acquisition practices. [additional to be supplied]LIEUTENANT COLONEL (USAF, Ret.) FREDERIC T. (“FT”) CASE, is the JSF Project Manager at the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory (JHU/APL).  Lt Col Case joined the Senior Professional Staff at APL in 1997 after serving 22 years of active duty with the USAF.  During his career in the USAF, Lt Col Case accumulated over 1000 hours of mission-ready and operational flight test time in the fighter aircraft; he served as an operations research analyst at HQ USAF (the Pentagon) and at HQ CENTAF FORWARD during the Persian Gulf War.  He was a DARPA Program Manager of several M&S and C2 advanced technology programs.  Lt Col Case is a member of the Military Operations Research Society (MORS), the International Test & Evaluation Association (ITEA), and the Precision Strike Technology Society (PSTS).  He holds a B.S. degree in Mathematics from the Lowell Technological Institute and an M.S. degree in Systems Technology (C3I) from the Naval Postgraduate School.Figure 4. JSF SWCE overlapping collaboration focus areasFocus areas of JSF collaborative environments.A portion of the work reported herein was supported by the Joint Strike Fighter Joint Program Office under Contract N00024-98-D-8124, Task M4N01.  Approved for Ppublic release approval is pending.release.  Distribution is unlimited.Figure 5. JSF SWCE SoM&S component uses by SWCE collaboration focus area.Figure 3. JSF collaborative environment components and relationships.Figure 1. Top-level view of SBA systems architecture, with exploded view of the CERSA.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1. Top-level view of SBA systems architecture, with exploded view of the CERSA.