Using Template3 Applications to Enhance the JWARSLand Maneuver PlannerGregory P. LannonComputer Associates, Inc.5205 Leesburg Pike, Suite 1200Falls Church, VA 22041-3800(703) 824-4078langr02@ca.comDean A. DanielsonComputer Associates, Inc.5205 Leesburg Pike, Suite 1200Falls Church, VA   22041-3800(703) 824-4115dande03@ca.comLTC George F. Stone III, U.S. ArmyJoint Warfare System1555 Wilson Blvd, Suite 620Arlington, VA(703) 697-7189George.Stone@osd.pentagon.milCharles D. BurdickLockheed Martin Information SystemsJoint Warfare System1555 Wilson Blvd., Suite 620Arlington, VA 22209(703) 875-3030chuck.burdick@lmco.comKeywords:Command Decision Modeling (CDM), Command Decision Process (CDP), Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS), Foreign Ground Force Representation, Models and Simulations (M&S), Threat Modeling, Automated Maneuver Planning, and Joint Warfare System (JWARS)ABSTRACT:  One of the requirements for the Joint Warfare System (JWARS) is that it will provide a multi-sided and balanced representation of joint theater warfare.  In order to have this capability, JWARS must be able to model multiple countries’ command decision processes.Over the last two years, the National Ground Intelligence Center (NGIC) has funded an effort to develop, for select “template” armies, a set of threat conceptual models of ground force – brigade, division, and corps – commanders’ and their staffs’ Command Decision Processes (CDPs).  In the course of this work, the concept of Template3 was formulated.  In Template3 three basic building blocks (that represent, respectively, equipment, force structure, and Doctrine, Tactics, Techniques and Procedures (DTTP)) are built for the six “template” nations which have influenced the organization and doctrine of most of the world’s armies.  These three building blocks can then be interchanged as needed to construct a reasonable model for any given country’s army.  At the present time, an initial set of CDP-based, threat conceptual models has been developed for a division commander and staff for one of the “template” armies.JWARS is currently in the process of using this initial set of Template3 conceptual models to populate the knowledge bases of JWARS’ Automated Land Maneuver Planner which will encompass basic concepts of Command and Control (C2) that are common to all forces and then apply the unique aspects of a particular force based on Template3 and other resources such as NGIC’s Country Ratings, its Military Intelligence Database, and the Center for Army Analysis’ formation templates.  This work has demonstrated the potential of these CDP-based models for assisting analysts in developing a variety of robust, accurate, and flexible threat models that lead not only to more realistic behavior representations of foreign forces, but also better simulations.1.	BackgroundIn February 1995, The Secretary of Defense directed a major review of the capabilities and deficiencies of Modeling and Simulation (M&S) in support of the Department of Defense (DoD) force structure and system procurement decisions.  One of the results of this review was the conceptualization of the Joint Warfare System (JWARS) [2].JWARS is an analytic simulation development effort under the Office of the Secretary of Defense, Program Analysis and Evaluation (OSD/PA&E).  In Release 1 and 2, it is intended to replace the Tactical Warfare Simulation (TACWAR) and the Model for Intertheater Deployment by Air and Sea (MIDAS) simulations.  JWARS will replace more legacy simulations at Release 3 and support both deterministic and stochastic analyses,  while providing transparency into its internal operations.  The purpose of JWARS is to develop a balanced joint-force simulation of theater warfare that can be used for several purposes:  force assessment; planning and execution; system effectiveness; and trade-off analysis, concept, and doctrine development and assessment.  Users will include the Joint Staff, the military services, military Commanders-in-Chief, the OSD, and other DoD organizations [7 & 9].JWARS will represent some aspects of all of the levels of war (strategic, operational, and tactical), but will focus on the operational level of warfighting.  In particular, JWARS is required to represent and assist in defining the operational concepts of dominant maneuver, precision engagement, full-dimensional protection, and focused logistics of Joint Vision 2010, and must have the capability to represent multiple nations in multiple coalitions as well as neutral and opposing forces [2].However, in order to ensure that JWARS portrayal of opposing or threat forces is accurate, it is necessary to have a realistic model of the opposing forces’ Command Decision Process (CDP).  Over the last two years the National Ground Intelligence Center (NGIC) has been working on an effort to develop a library of descriptions of threat ground force CDPs [13].Known as Template3 (pronounced Template-Cubed) [14], this effort can be used to model how any given country will conduct itself in war based upon the following criteria:who supplies that particular country’s military equipment;who that country models its force structure after (i.e., the number of brigades and battalions in a division); andwhose Doctrine, Tactics, Techniques and Procedures (DTTP) that country most closely follows.Thus, via Template3, a manageable set of threat conceptual models can be created which will describe how most of the world’s armies fight. One of the primary advantages of Template3 is that each template country’s decision process is modeled in detail based upon NGIC approved source material and input from Subject Matter Experts.  Template3 not only models a particular nation’s decision process, it also details the critical data (decision factors) used and the criteria upon which those decisions are based.The intent of this paper is to describe the methodology being used by the JWARS and NGIC team to instantiate the JWARS’ Automated Land Maneuver Planner with a set of knowledge bases that accurately reflect a range of foreign DTTPs.  Specifically, in Section 2, we will describe Template3 and the underlying concept behind the NGIC’s efforts to develop a set of CDP-based, threat conceptual models.  In Section 3, we will describe the JWARS Automated Land Maneuver Planner.  In section 4, we will bring sections 2 and 3 together by describing how JWARS is developing several elements of its Maneuver Planner to take maximum advantage of Template3 data.  And in Section 5, we will conclude by describing how the work of the JWARS and NGIC team could possibly lead to a set of standards for building CDP-based conceptual models.2. Representation of Foreign Ground Forces through Template32.1	BackgroundIn December 1991, with the collapse of the Soviet Union, the bipolar world that had existed since 1945 came to an end.  This bipolar world – which was probably an historical anomaly – was quickly replaced by a multi-polar world that witnessed a growth and intensification of regional conflicts, shifting political alignments, and the rise of a host of new regional and transnational issues.This radical transformation of the world political system caught the M&S community by surprise.  Previous M&S threat models focused on representations derived almost exclusively from Soviet-based models.  The new geopolitical system that quickly emerged saw an almost breathtaking explosion of new potential threat nations and issues.  These new threats need to be represented in M&S, but at the same time it is unrealistic to expect analysts to develop a discrete set of threat conceptual models for each potential threat country’s military forces [13 & 14].2.2	ConceptIn response to this challenge, in late 1997, NGIC hypothesized that a set of generic representations of foreign ground forces or “templates” could be built based the assumption that there exists a small sub-set of “template” countries (about a half dozen) that have influenced most of the world’s armies by:their organization and doctrine and/ortheir equipment (i.e., tanks, infantry fighting vehicles, artillery, etc.) [14].As described in Tamucci et al. [13], an outside review of NGIC’s hypothesis was conducted and it was recommended that the assumption be modified to read “how a foreign country’s ground forces will fight can be characterized by three elements:who supplies that particular country’s military equipment;who that country models its force structure after (i.e., the number of brigades and battalions in a division); andwhose DTTP that country uses, in respect to when and where its senior leaders attended command and staff college.”Known as Template3, this concept allows a manageable set of threat conceptual models to be created that describe how most of the world’s armies fight [14].  Each Template3 element (equipment, force structure, and DTTP) can be thought of as a separate “building block,” and these blocks can be re-assembled to model the CDP of virtually any of the world’s armies.Through the use of these interchangeable “building blocks,” Template3 allows for more flexibility than traditional approaches by first understanding that there is diversity in the extent to which a given threat country adheres to the pattern of a “template” country.  For example, a threat country might adhere closely to a specific “template” country’s DTTP, but not adhere closely to the “template” country in regards to its force structure; perhaps because the threat country has a much larger military.  Secondly, Template3 recognizes that some nations, because of their unique history, their geopolitical and economic situation, or other factors, may have developed a totally new force structure, a revolutionary weapon system, a unique DTTP, or some combination [14].  These advantages of a Template3-derived representation can provide the simulation developer with authoritative and operationally valid threat representations.2.3	ExampleLet us say that we want to model the ground forces of Country X.  Using the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office’s Unit Order of Battle Data Access Tool, available via the Defense Intelligence Modeling and Simulation Resource Repository (DIMSRR) on the Internet address; http://diamsrr.dmso.mil, we learn that most of Country X’s equipment – along with the appropriate crew, squad, section, platoon, and company/team training packages – came from the U.S. and that Country X’s force structure is very similar to that of the U.S. Army.  In addition, we know that Country X’s officer corps is trained using manuals that are almost literal translations of those used by the former Soviet Union, and – from the late 1950s through the early 1980s – Country X often sent its “fast-burners” to various Soviet staff schools.  However, starting in the late 1980s, when Country X began to purchase equipment from the U.S., very few of its senior officers attended foreign staff schools.Thus, at the platoon and company/team level, Country X tends to fight like the U.S. Army and at the battalion, regiment/brigade, and division level, it tends to fight like the Soviet Army.  (But, simplistically speaking, if we could jump forward in time, say twenty or thirty years (e.g., the time it takes for an officer in Country X to go from lieutenant to general) and, assume that Country X continued its relationship with the U.S., one might expect to see Country X’s DTTP at the battalion level and above transition from Soviet to U.S. based.)Based on this knowledge, a discrete set of conceptual models for Country X can be quickly created by appropriately combing V&V’d conceptual models that describe:the Soviet Army’s, circa 1970, CDP at battalion, regiment, and division level together withhow a circa 1990 U.S. equipped force (at the platoon, and company/team level) fights (See Figure 1).JWARS Maneuver Planner 3.1	OverviewLand Command and Control (C2) planning is hierarchical and JWARS follows that paradigm.  JWARS Land C2 attempts to automatically decompose high-level, analyst-input Campaign Plans into multiple levels of subordinate commands and orders in accordance with the Uniform Joint Task List for Operations 5.3: Prepare Plans and Orders.  Subordinate plans are generated successively at each lower echelon and are based on the orders and guidance received from superiors, the subordinate unit’s perceived friendly and enemy situation, and its local knowledge base on how it operates under given circumstances (the Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for that type of unit).  The concept is that the Land Maneuver Planner at each echelon uses much the same processes as the real world commander (Mission, Enemy, Terrain, Troops, and Time) to build its plan.  However, the plans from each are not identical since each subordinate commander has different numbers and types of forces to employ, different terrain over which to operate, and a different view of the enemy.  The latter is not to imply that there is no Common Operational Picture (COP), but rather that unit commanders can each find themselves in a different relationship to that COP [8].3.2	Preparing Plans and OrdersOne of the most complex C2 tasks, and one that is still considered more of an art than a science, is the automated preparation of plans and orders, especially the selection and evaluation of friendly Courses of Action (COAs).  At the present time, there is no automated assessment of alternative friendly COAs in JWARS.  Instead, every unit narrowly interprets the orders sent to them and generates a plan based on the guidance it receives from its superiors and the limited set of information available in its local knowledge base.  The units make plans for themselves and their own subordinate units and subsequently issue their own orders.  This “top down” approach is very efficient from the point of view of the analyst running the model because it highest units to the lowest units based on only a few high level analyst inputs.  If the subordinate orders automatically selected by the unit – from the relatively small repertoire of combat maneuver sequences and maneuver templates currently available – is not sufficient or does not perform the task desired, the analyst can override them and input specific orders for particular units.  In an early JWARS scenario, approximately seventy high level orders input by the analyst generated over 1400 subsequent orders for subordinate units over the course of a multi-day battle.  This ratio of automatically generated orders to input orders will continue to increase as JWARS expands its number and types of units and increases the complexity of the operations that can be handled automatically.  The JWARS effort on the Land Maneuver Planner is focused on the efficient interpretation of orders from superiors; the operationally and tactically correct selection of a COA; the generation of a plan which implements that COA; and the translation of that plan into orders to subordinate combat, combat support, and combat service support units to produce realistic maneuvers.  The “inventing” of completely new plans is beyond the scope of JWARS.Operational Mission AnalysisOnce a JWARS unit has an order from its superior, it extracts the commander’s intent in terms of mission, objectives, guidance, rules of engagement, and other specific direction or constraints on the force.  Typical information includes attached units, resource consumption constraints, required sustainment levels, geographic areas of responsibility, and expected levels of available fire support and Close Air Support (CAS).Within JWARS, the orders are formatted to be easily interpreted by the computer and subsequently decomposed into more detailed data for subordinate units according to the SOP of the unit making the plan.  However, the analyst’s external view through the Graphical User Interface is much like a matrix operations order.  As a minimum, units are assigned areas of responsibility that they can equate to situation templates.  These doctrinal templates define operational actions, coordination measures, and formations in which subordinate unit timelines and objectives are stretched/warped to the local situation.  The result is a realistic set of subordinate orders adapted for the local situation without the need for analyst intervention.Planning GuidanceSubordinate unit plans are based on the mission that the superior must accomplish and subsequent subordinate orders are selected from within the guidelines/guidance provided by the superior unit.  The actions, which a unit may perform are described as sets of “Activity Sequences.”  “Activity Sequences” are sets of coordinated operational events used to accomplish a certain mission.  The Land Force Activity Sequences are divided into subsets of Maneuver and Support Sequences, but only the Maneuver Sequence frontal attack and delay are currently populated.  JWARS plans to expand the set of Maneuver Sequences to include more sophisticated operations such as single and double envelopment, pursuit, and turning movements.  From these Maneuver Sequences the Land Maneuver Planner will select its COA.  The goal in JWARS is to select a good COA.  There is no expectation of optimality given all the uncertainties and the limited time in which to plan in a simulation executing at 1000 times faster than real time.Maneuver Sequences are similar to Event Templates described in Intelligence Preparation of the Battlefield (IPB) documentation.  A generic example of one is shown in Figure 2.  Maneuver Sequences are combined with sets of Unit Formation Templates for unit subordinates to constitute the “raw material” of the various COAs.  Once selected, a Maneuver Sequence is translated into sets of orders to allow the subordinate combat and support units to conduct complex maneuver without step-by-step inputs from the analyst.Determine Operational End-StateOperational End-States are defined in the Unit Mission as a task and a purpose.  The task, as a minimum, involves an activity (attack, defend, move, retrograde, or assemble), a geographic location or an area where that activity is to be pursued (objective), and applicable time or other constraints.  An example would be “push the enemy back to Phase Line (PL) Alpha in less than ten days.”  The purpose is included to provide guidance on the “why” of the mission and to allow some interpretation of the means to accomplish the mission based on local conditions.  For example, the purpose may be to destroy all enemy forces in the area of operations rather than to simply ensure that the enemy force departs the area.  The first purpose demands the Land Maneuver Planner select an activity sequence that includes an assault by fire and/or maneuver on the enemy center of mass.  The second might be accomplished with a turning movement or a demonstration of force with little direct contact with the enemy. 3.51	Develop Friendly COAsEach unit type considered in JWARS (e.g. armor, mechanized infantry, motorized infantry, etc.), and each echelon will eventually have access to a set of doctrinally correct Maneuver Sequences that it can conduct.  These sequences become more complex at the higher echelons, but higher echelon sequences can be constructed of combinations of lower level Maneuver Sequences.  The execution of a sequence is coordinated using time protocols such as “at H-hour”, ”Not Earlier Than,” “Not Later Than,” “upon completion" (of an order), and “on order.” When fully implemented, the JWARS Maneuver Planner will be inserted at the operational echelons (generally a corps or division) to select a viable Course of Action from those available.  Divisions and other Corps subordinate units find their missions and objectives in their superior’s orders and then select feasible operations (maneuver sequences), which accommodate those assigned missions.  Typically, several sets of orders will be nested within a maneuver sequence.  Thus, if a corps selects a double envelopment, two of its subordinate divisions must each employ a single envelopment on the left and right flanks respectively, while another "holds" the front.  If one of the divisions conducts a single envelopment on the left flank, then one of its subordinate brigades will be conducting a frontal assault (with a limit of advance to fix the enemy in place) while at least one other brigade maneuvers for a flank attack.  The "nesting" of maneuvers within maneuvers continues until every unit has orders.3.52	Analyze and Compare COAsThe feasible COAs are each evaluated for selected strengths and weaknesses and scored according to a set of metrics assigned and weighted by the analyst.  This is where the Template3 knowledge bases particularly come into play.  They are coherent sets of procedures and criteria for selecting those procedures at each decision point.  The analyst selects the doctrine(s) to be used by the force (or this may be provided as validated data).  The comparison of the COAs then employs a weighting scheme using criteria unique to that doctrine.  Examples of specific criteria for maneuver selection include “chose fastest maneuver to objective,” ”bypass enemy strongpoints,” and “produce the best force ratios.”  For fire support the criteria might be the number of artillery units (or the throw weight) within range of the objective at the time of the initial attack.  The scoring will typically favor employing simple actions for forces with little technological and logistical support.  But for forces with the training and resources to conduct them, the selection of more complex (but potentially higher payoff) operations such as envelopment or a turning movement would score higher.  There may also be negative criteria such as “produces large numbers of expected casualties” or “involves maneuver in populated areas.”  Land warfare manuals such as Fort Leavenworth's, The Tactical Decision Making Process (ST-100-9) recognize that COA selection criteria have not been codified and the weighting schemes are dependent on the situation [12].  Consequently, JWARS plans to start with a small set of criteria and leave the relative weighting to the analyst.  The expectation is that these capabilities can be expanded as more data and better representations of unit and commander behavior become available. 3.53	Select or Modify COAsAs currently envisioned in JWARS, the COA with the highest weighted score will always be selected as the first choice.  However, it can also be rejected if it violates any unit doctrinal constraints or rules of engagement such as maneuvering into a neutral nation.  The availability of the Template3 data will significantly expand the options available to the analyst in defining feasible solutions to operational problems.4.	Employing Template3 in JWARSJWARS is developing several elements to take maximum advantage of Template3.  First, the knowledge base of each JWARS land unit will incorporate parts from each of the three aspects of Template3 applicable to it.  At the simplest level, this involves considering the type of equipment the unit has at its disposable.  While the effectiveness of the equipment in engaging opposing equipment is based on data from the Army Materiel Systems Analysis Activity (AMSAA), its effectiveness is modified by the NGIC Country scores to reflect the relative capabilities of each country's forces due to training, leadership, readiness, etc.  In addition, Template3, NGIC documents, and other intelligence community data determine allocation of the equipment within units and their DTTP against opposing forces under given conditions.  Thus they can be used to reflect the value which a force puts on particular weapon system when making allocations of fire and also consider the range at which fire is opened by various forces.Next the organization of the operational unit is reflected in its order of battle (how many of what types of subordinates does it have) and in its Formation Templates (where are these units placed with respect to one another on the battlespace).  JWARS is currently in the process of developing rules for the automated generation of unit formations to simplify the process of generating the large number of templates that could be employed (JWARS already has over 700).  These rules will be based on country specific doctrinal data such as is found in Template3.  For example, are the forces ranged in echelons and, if so, how many.  How does the force employ covering or screening forces, etc.Finally, the knowledge bases of each of the units are populated with the operations and maneuvers that are appropriate for that type of unit and its echelon.  Thus all divisions (echelon) have some common functions, but armor and infantry division attack and defense criteria will be different when assessing the favorableness of selecting a particular Maneuver Sequence such as frontal assault in the process of developing a COA.As shown in Figure 3, JWARS Maneuver Planners consider all aspects of the situation.  While a unit may have a preference for a determine and constrain its mission and its perceptions determine its assessment of the situation and the environment.5.	ConclusionsAn exciting new set of data is becoming available for use in simulations employing advanced forms of automated C2.  Via Template3, formatted sets of doctrine and selection criteria for operational decision making are provided for threat forces.  When employed in JWARS or other simulations using decision making based on perception and unit oriented behavior, Template3 data provides validated and authoritative sets of operational behaviors that can be employed in the automatic generation of realistic unit plans and orders.The cooperation between the Template3 and JWARS Maneuver Planner teams will not only lead to JWARS having a more realistic threat representation, it also will provide the necessary feedback on how to make Template3 conceptual models of command and control easier for software developers and engineers to understand and implement.  In addition, this prototype effort may also help to identify information and fidelity standards needed by the simulation community – specifically the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (http://sisostds.org/) Human Decision-Making and Behavior Representation Forum and the Army’s M&S Standards Category for Command Decision Modeling [11] – to represent the CDP. AcknowledgementsThe authors gratefully acknowledge the valuable feedback and assistance received on this paper from Ms. Kay Burnett of NGIC and Ms. Deborah Vakas of CACI, Inc.  Mr. Danielson’s and Mr. Lannon’s efforts were funded by NGIC.  In addition, the authors would like to thank the other members of Computer Associates’ CMMS team, both past and current: Mr. Barry Astrow, Mr. Steven Daskal, Mr. Paul Kelley, Mr. Everett Nelson, Ms. Mary Tamucci, and Mr. Don Timian.References [1]	Burdick, C.D., Burnett, S.K., Vakas, D., Kuhn, G., Halbert, G., and Schandua, J.: “Behavioral Impacts on Battlefield Performance in the Joint Warfare System (JWARS)”, Presentation 68th MORS Symposium, Working Group 23, 2000 [2]	Clements, D., Painter, R., and Lutz, R.:  “JWARS and the HLA”, Paper 98S-SIW-057, 1998 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1998. [3]	DMSO Information Paper, “Conceptual Models of the Mission Space”, ftp://ftp.dmso.mil/pub/documents/initiatives/cmms/cmms_information_paper_short.pdf, 1998. [4]	DMSO Information Paper, “Conceptual Models of the Mission Space”, ftp://ftp.dmso.mil/pub/documents/initiatives/cmms/98s_siw_infoprp.pdf/, 1998. [5]	DMSO Information Paper, “Conceptual Models of the Mission Space and Data Engineering Toolset”, ftp://ftp.dmso.mil/ pub/documents/initiatives/cmms/cmms_imc_paper_long.pdf, 1998. [6]	DoD 5000.59-P, DoD Modeling and Simulation Master Plan, http://www.dmso. mil/documents/policy/msmp/index.html/, 1995. [7]	Joint Warfare System (JWARS) Overview,   HYPERLINK http://www.dtic.mil/jwars/ http://www.dtic.mil/jwars/ June 18, 1999. [8]	JWARS Application Design (JAD) Packet Thread 5.5.1B, Exercise Land Command and Control. (Version 1.0), August 18, 1999. [9]	JWARS Joint Operational Requirement Document, http://www.dtic.mil/jwars/ pdflib/ord_27.pdf, 1998.[10]	Klein, H.A., Pongonis, A., and Klein, G.:  “Cultural Barriers to Multinational C2 Decision-Making”, Paper 2000 Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium, 2000 .[11]	McGlynn, L.E. and Timian, D.H., “Army Model and Simulation Standards – Tools in the SBA Kit Bag”, Paper 98F-SIW-265, 1998 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1998.[12]	The Tactical Decision-Making Process, (ST-100-9), U.S. Army Command and General Staff College (Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, 1992)[13]	Tamucci, M.S., Timian, D., and Burnett, S.K.:  “Conceptual Modeling of Foreign Command Decision Processes”, Paper 00S-SIW-019, 2000 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 2000.[14]	Tamucci, M.S., Timian, D., and Burnett, S.K.: “Generic Representation of Foreign Ground Forces” Paper 9TH-CGF-012, 9th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation, , 2000.[15]	Vitech Corporation (http://www.vtcorp. com/), CORE v2.0 Users Reference Guide, 1998.Author BiographiesGREGORY P. LANNON is an analyst for Computer Associates Federal Systems Group.  Before working at Computer Associates, Mr. Lannon developed databases, translated Russian military and technical materials, and assisted in the preparation of intelligence threat publications.  Currently he is supporting the Conceptual Model of the Mission Space efforts for the National Ground Intelligence Center.  Mr. Lannon has a Bachelor of Arts degree from the American University and a Master of Arts degree from the University of Wisconsin.DEAN A. DANIELSON is a member of Computer Associates Federal Systems Group.  Prior to joining Computer Associates.  Mr. Danielson served over 20 years in the U. S. Army.  While in the Army, he obtained significant experience in information warfare and communications.  He conceived and demonstrated the prototype of the Predator Unmanned Aerial Vehicle.  In addition Mr. Danielson was one of the original authors of Field Manual 100-6, Information Operations.  Mr. Danielson has a Master of Science degree in Telecommunication Systems Management from the Naval Postgraduate School and a Bachelor of Science degree from St. John’s University.CHARLES D. "CHUCK" BURDICK is a Senior Lockheed Martin Program Manager specializing in simulation.  He currently leads the JWARS Land Integrated Planning Team and is the JWARS Land Mission Space Analyst.  Mr. Burdick has over 20 years experience in the development and use of large-scale combat models.  Mr. Burdick has a Bachelor of Science in Research Psychology from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and a Masters of Science and Arts in Operations Research and Systems Analysis from George Washington University. He spent seven years on active duty as an Army Intelligence Officer and recently retired from the Army Reserve.LTC GEORGE F. STONE III received his doctorate in Industrial Engineering in 1996 from the University of Central Florida. He is currently the technical director for the Joint Warfare System.  He recently completed being Director of the Army's Warfighting Analysis and Integration Center.  He was the Deputy Project Manager at the JSIMS Joint Program Office.  LTC Stone has had numerous field artillery assignments, including two battery commands in Germany, and is a former Assistant Professor in the Systems Engineering Department at West Point.Figure 2.  A Division-Level Order for a JWARS Maneuver Sequence Automatically GeneratesSubordinate Orders to Brigades and then to Battalions to Execute Doctrinally Correct ManeuversFigure 1.  Template3Figure 3.  Factors Considered by JWARS Maneuver Planners