The Applicability of Atmospheric Forecast Data (Perceived Truth) That is Consistent with and Correlated with Atmospheric Instance Data (Ground Truth) for Simulations – A Future Piece of the Front-End Process to the SNE Conceptual Reference ModelDarrell L. LucasRonald D. HaynesFrederick N. TurcotteDouglas M. BrooksMicheal S. HunsuckerThomas N. WalkerDynamics Research Corporation735 Seibert Road, Suite 1Scott Air Force Base, IL 62225-1511(618) 744-9412, x119 HYPERLINK mailto:Darrell.Lucas@scott.af.mil Darrell.Lucas@scott.af.mil,  HYPERLINK "mailto:Ronald.Haynes@scott.af.mil" Ronald.Haynes@scott.af.mil Keywords:Authoritative Representation, Conceptual Reference Model, Forecasting, Decision-making, Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, DMSO, Ground Truth, Integrated Natural Environment Authoritative Representation Process, INEARP, Master Environmental Library, MEL, Modeling and Simulation Executive Agents, MSEA, Perceived Truth, Simulations, SNE, Synthetic Natural EnvironmentABSTRACT:  Models of military operations depend on interaction with environmental instance data (ground truth) to determine simulation outcomes.  A corollary to the need for the ground truth data is that some simulations also need forecast data (perceived truth).  Perceived truth data are needed when humans or human-behavior objects base decisions on perceptions of future battlefield conditions.  Normally, perceived truth must follow logically from a simulation’s ground truth and there are three basic methods that can be used to provide it.  One method uses a numerical weather prediction model to generate perceived truth, a second uses variations of ground truth, and the third uses climatology.The value of perceived truth in any simulation depends on the “mind-set” of the decision-maker (humans or human-behavior objects).  In some cases, forecasts have little value.  This can occur when the decision-maker wants to learn or train without serious complications introduced by weather.  This is a legitimate objective in some cases.  It can also occur when the decision-maker plans to fly every sortie possible in order to take out enemy targets as quickly as possible.  At those times operating effectiveness is important, but the cost of operating is not.  In other cases, forecasts can have great value.  This occurs when operating efficiency is important or desirable, or operating cost is a factor.  In some cases, no-skill persistence forecasts could be used to determine “what’s the worst I can do?” or perfect forecasts would answer the question “what’s the best I can do?”  Thus, it’s possible for the simulation user to ask for and use perceived truth data in ways contrary to those in which the environmentalist expects them to be used.  What's best for your simulation?  It depends…but you do have choices.1. IntroductionIn the real world, planes, tanks, ships, and satellites succeed or fail at their operational missions when they interact with Mother Nature (atmosphere, space, oceans, and terrain).  So, in planning and executing real world missions, operators make decisions based on the forecast state of the natural environment for the time and place when future events are planned to occur.  Real-world decision-makers would like precise knowledge of the future state of Mother Nature in order to make accurate decisions about how planned operations will be affected by conditions of the natural environment.  But, Mother Nature discloses herself only in real time.  Her state at the time a future event is planned is not known although it can be predicted with some skill.  Elaborate operational forecast systems provide decision-makers with accurate and realistic foreknowledge of future conditions.In the real world, forecasts are provided to decision-makers for operations, but Mother Nature provides the actual conditions that determine the effects on operations.  In the simulation world both must be provided. Simulations address requirements and a requirement has three components. [1]  The re-quirement is made up of a tasking (“take that hill”) under specified conditions (do it while it’s “wet and cold”) and meeting a standard (do it in “3 days” or do it with the “forces on hand”).  The environmental conditions (“wet and cold,” “hot and dusty,” etc.) in a simulation must fit the simulation scenario and are pre-determined.  The weather for the simulation is selected to meet the objectives of the simulation; it doesn’t “just happen.”  The atmospheric conditions, the "wet and cold" that were selected, are the instantiation of Ground Truth (GT), the simulation counterpart to Mother Nature.  They are used during the simulation to determine the outcomes of events that are sensitive to the natural environment.  And, just as in the real world, GT (“Mother Nature”) is disclosed only in real time in the simulation as environmentally sensitive events occur.Also, in some simulations, just as in the real world, decision-makers may base their plans and actions in part on the forecast (Perceived Truth) state of the natural environment.  In these cases, the simulation requires the Perceived Truth (PT) needed by the decision-makers.  This paper extends issues addressed in three previous SIW papers and places the Perceived Truth issue in context.The first paper [2] authored by Dr. Paul Birkel, presented at the 1998 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW), described the Synthetic Natural Environment (SNE) Conceptual Reference Model (Figure 1).  The Conceptual Reference Model (CRM) shows the relationships between environmental GT and the environment’s effects on Military System Models in a simulation.  The SNE is the environment ground truth instance data within which the military system models operate.  The SNE must depict a natural evolution of the atmosphere (without regard to changes brought on by battlefield events).  These GT instance data are essential to a simulation.  They are the inputs to environmental effect tools that determine the environment’s effects on mission space objects.  Without GT, environmental effects within the simulation can not be determined.The need for ground truth data sets varies from simulation to simulation.  Some need ground truth over short periods of time, others over long periods.  Some need ground truth at fine resolution, others at coarse.  So, the environmental community needs a process to provide ground truth data sets meeting a range of needs for ground truth.  This process is described in the second paper [3] by the current authors which addressed a standardized process to provide simulations with the instance data needed to populate the Environmental State shown in Figure 1.  It was described as a Front-End Process to the SNE CRM, since it provides in pre-run time the GT instance data meeting the conditions (the scenario) of the simulation.  This process, initiated by the Air and Space Modeling and Simulation Executive Agent (MSEA), has evolved into a Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) program known as the Integrated Natural Environment Authoritative Representation Process (INEARP). [4]This paper addresses some methods and issues involved in providing PT that accompanies GT.  This PT must be a credible evolution of the Ground Truth; i.e., there must be some correlation between the PT and the evolving Ground Truth or the PT will lack credibility.  Perceived Truth is an essential element of information for simulations involving decisions about future plans.  PT in simulations, like forecasts in the real world, involves an element of uncertainty.  This is very much in keeping with other aspects of simulations in which decisions are based on perceptions of truth.  Although some simulations will not need PT (they do not have decision-makers acting in the simulation), simulations that involve decision-making that include the environment need PT.  And just as simulations have a range of needs for ground truth, they also have a range of needs for perceived truth.  Some simulations may want perfect forecasts, some may want to use existing weather as an indicator of future conditions (the persistence forecast), and others will want a range of skill including the ability to vary the skill level.Therefore, simulations must be afforded a means of obtaining both GT and PT (when needed) that meets their needs.The third paper [5] authored by Dr. John Hummel, presented at the Spring 1998 SIW, addressed ways to simulate the forecasting of meteorological and oceanic conditions as part of the simulation planning cycle.  Dr. Hummel proposed several alternatives for providing forecasts (PT) for use by decision-makers in planning and executing simulation events.  The methodologies proposed in that paper are included below.  The authors evaluate these and alternative methods for providing PT for simulations and point out some of the paradoxes involved in using PT in simulation decision-making.  The authors have limited their discussion only to perceived truth techniques for the atmospheric data (although the concepts may be extensible to other domains).2. Methods for Obtaining Perceived Truth Environmental Data and Some Pros and ConsWhen a user describes the environmental scenario (the conditions) under which they wish to exercise their simulation, the INEARP will be able to generate the appropriate Authoritative Representation (the GT instance data) for the simulation.  It must also be able to generate corresponding PT forecasts or propose a methodology for the simulation to use in doing so.  Three basic methodologies exist that could be used to generate forecast conditions, although there are several variants within each methodology.  One is to use a GT database and numerical weather prediction (NWP) models similar to the process in the real world to generate PT.  A second is to use only GT in some way to generate PT.  The third way is to use climatological data.2.1 Using a Numerical Weather Prediction Model Pre-RuntimeThe first methodology, the use of GT and a numerical weather prediction model, is the baseline against which the production of PT will be evaluated since this is the way in which PT (real world forecasts) are generated for operational customers.  Depending on the NWP model used, the amount of information initially available, and other factors, the forecasts produced in this way will range from very skilled to not-very-skilled (comparable to ranges in real world skill).The INEARP described above is still in development.  However, it includes provisions for environmental data providers who will provide access to existing data, or generate new data.  The Master Environmental Library [MEL] will contain data sets built for other simulations.  Part of the INEARP process involves searching the MEL and locating and retrieving such data sets if the data meet a simulation’s requirements.  In these cases, there is likely to be no charge for the instance data.When PT must be generated, a NWP model can provide PT that is consistent and correlated with the GT.  That is, the PT will reflect a credible and logical evolution of the GT.  While this NWP-generated PT won’t be a perfect forecast, it will have skill at predicting the future GT.  It will be a credible basis for making decisions about future simulation events that are affected by the natural environment and it’s similar to the way forecasts are provided in the real world.  This approach has the advantage that it most nearly reflects what happens in the real world.  Data produced in this manner have the advantage of being in the form needed by day-to-day C4I systems.  There are times when this is important in a simulation.  However, there are some disadvantages to using a NWP model.  The model must be run for each period for which new forecasts are required.  In a 2-week simulation with forecasts updated every 12 hours, the NWP model must be run 28 times.  This would be time consuming and potentially expensive in a fee-for-service environment.  The NWP approach also generates large data sets.  For example, suppose, at each of the 28 forecast cycles in the example just used, data are needed at 3, 6, 12, 24, 48, 72 and 96 hours in the future.  This means 7 data sets are generated for each of the 28 model runs – a total of 196 data sets.  If the GT data consisted of environmental data each 3 hours for the period of the 2-week simulation, there would be 112 (eight per day) data sets.  So, in this example, the PT data sets are about 70% larger than the GT data sets.  This requires added communications to transmit the PT data as well as added computer storage at the simulation site.  There are times when these factors are important to a simulation.2.2 Using Ground TruthA second general method that could be used for obtaining PT is to “adjust” the simulation’s GT.  Environmental parameters already in the data base which will be used as GT at the appropriate simulation-time could be changed, in greater or lesser degree, and these altered data could be used as PT.  There actually are a number of variants when using GT as a basis for obtaining PT.  The simplest form of using GT to generate PT is to predict that the current conditions will continue (persist) into the future or that the environment at this time today will be the same at the same time tomorrow.  These are known as persistence forecasts.  Such forecasts have no skill, but in a stagnant (unchanging) situation, a persistence forecast can be accurate.  However, persistence is never accurate when the atmosphere is changing.  Other forms of using GT to obtain PT are to temporally advance or retard the evolution of GT, spatially rotate or skew GT, take the average of GT values several hours on either side of the desired forecast time, or simply to use future GT as a perfect forecast.  Each of these could be used in combination with others, and some of them are described in more detail in References 5, 6, and 7.The advantage to using GT as a source for PT is that this provides flexibility.  Current GT can be used as PT (the persistence forecast), zero-“adjustment” to future GT becomes the perfect forecast, and some-“adjustment” to future GT provides insight into the effects of varying degrees of forecast skill.  It also offers the advantage that it does not (normally) require additional data sets – the user simply looks in the existing GT data set, makes the “adjustment’ and extracts a value for PT.  This may be important to some simulators who are “communications- or “storage-challenged.”  Using GT to obtain PT is likely to cost less than using the NWP-based approach, since it does not normally require the generation/obtaining of additional data sets.  A disadvantage to using GT is that is does not provide data in the same way as is done in the real world.  Using GT to obtain PT, when it is done within a simulation system itself, may require additional computational overhead or extend run time.2.3 Using ClimatologyA third method of obtaining a forecast is to use some form of climatology for the area of interest.  For example, current GT values in a simulation could be linearly interpolated to climatological values over some chosen time period (e.g., 96 hours).  This technique assumes that climatological values for the parameters of interest are available or could be obtained.  Conditional Climatology tables could be developed showing the probabilities of occurrence of subsequent GT conditions given current GT.  This answers the question “What has happened in the past when the weather is like it is now?”  Which of those conditions would become PT would be consistent with their probable occurrence.  Another alternative would be to search historical records to find the atmospheric patterns most likely to occur and document the probability of subsequent events.  During a simulation, an existing GT pattern could be matched to one of these pre-identified patterns, and PT would be generated consistent with historical patterns.  Another method which is not strictly climatological, but is based on historical or established forecast skill, was evaluated in THUNDER, the Air Force’s stochastic, analytical simulation of campaign-level military operations.  In this approach, forecast skill is applied to future GT values to generate PT values.The advantage to having/using climatological values is that assessments can be made of expected future conditions when the time frame is beyond that normally available through the use of NWP models.  Although GT [because it’s already available] could be used to generate PT at some distant (in the simulation) time, it’s not realistic to have highly skilled, detailed forecasts far into the future.  However, the use of climatological values to provide assessments of the distant (in the simulation) future is realistic.  Decision-makers dealing with information about the distant future generally do not expect detailed information; they want general information about expected conditions.  These conditions are used for general planning, not detailed planning.  One disadvantage to using climatology is that it requires that the climatological values are available or can be created.  Creating these values can be expensive if they do not already exist.  Another disadvantage to using climatological values to create PT for short-term forecasts (say less than 96 hours) is that during some situations, it can be unrealistic.3. Other Requirements and Constraints That Affect the Choice of PT MethodologyThis paper addresses primarily the requirements of the Joint simulation programs now in development within DoD.  One of these programs is the Joint Warfare System (JWARS), a constructive (no humans-in-the-loop), analytic simulation operating primarily at a highly aggregated level simulating theater level events.  Another is the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS), a constructive training simulation initially operating at an aggregated level simulating operational level events.  The third is the Joint Modeling and Simulation System, a constructive simulation operating at the system and sub-system level.Legacy simulations (those already in being) were considered, but most such systems do not include the effects of the natural environment.  Interestingly, some legacy simulations that do not use the weather to determine effects require forecasts as input to the decision process.Whatever methods are used to obtain PT for use in a simulation, the resulting PT dataset(s) must meet certain constraints.  The PT must be realistic (i.e., credible).  When used in conjunction with a GT data set, it must be correlated with GT.  That is, the simulation users (warfighters as well as meteorologists) must see it as a logically possible evolution from current GT conditions and realistically reflecting future GT.  To have it otherwise destroys the credibility of PT and the entire process of using PT for decision-making purposes.Realistic forecasts (PT) can include “level of skill” forecasts, perfect forecasts, skilled-but-less-than-perfect forecasts, and persistence forecasts.  All reflect possible PT outcomes that have value in various simulations (as discussed later in this paper).  However, there is a problem defining “level of skill.”  Generally, this is thought of as forecast “accuracy.”  However, the definitions of this term are myriad.  Is it the ability to precisely forecast specific atmospheric parameters at some future time?  This is not generally possible.  So, does forecasting a parameter with a “level of skill” mean it can be predicted within plus or minus a certain amount or percentage?  Does this mean doing it with the same “level of skill” at 1 hour, 3 hours, 6 hours, 12 hours, 24 hours, or longer?  Or does it mean accurately predicting the onset of precipitation and amount?  Or, perhaps, the precise amounts and area affected by a heavy snowfall?  Does it mean “within a range,” or “within a certain amount of time?”  Does the term apply only to surface weather or to weather at other levels as well, and does the same “level of skill” apply at all the levels?  How do we deal with the fact that the “level of skill” at forecasting some parameters (e.g., temperature and wind) is better than the ability to accurately forecast others (e.g., moisture and ceilings)?  In fact, meteorological forecast skill IS normally provided in terms of skill.  Forecasts typically are said to be within certain ranges, for certain parameters, at certain forecast intervals.  The problem with specifying a “level of skill” is that there is no single “level of skill” standard that can be found.“Accuracy” is important in real world forecasts and a great deal of time and expense goes into making forecasts as “accurate” as possible.  In the simulation world, however, forecast accuracy is less important.  As long as PT used in simulations realistically represents real world “accuracy” at the time and place of interest (i.e., falls within real world ranges of skill), absolute accuracy is not critical.  Forecasts need only be realistic (albeit “realistic” carries some connotation of goodness/“accuracy”).  The point here is simply that while PT is important, the level of effort to obtain PT for use in some simulations is not as critical as in the real world and there needs to be options offered to the users.PT itself, just like the GT must be a realistic representation of the atmosphere for the time and location of interest.  Data values must be physically consistent and correlated--consistent in that cloud base height should not exceed the cloud top height.  Rain must not be predicted to fall from clear skies.  Correlated in that summer time values should not occur adjacent (temporally or spatially) to wintertime values.  Clear and dry conditions should not instantaneously give way to hurricane conditions.  The resolution of the data must be able to resolve the weather of interest.  (Note: The atmospheric PT data must also be consistent and correlated with PT from other environmental domains.  In short, if the “wind’s going to be high,” the “surf’s going to up” as well; if it’s going to rain, the ground is expected to get wet; etc.  Consistency and correlation is important, but beyond the scope of this paper.)Table 1 depicts the preceding simulation systems’ requirements and constraints for PT.  Table 2 shows how the various methods of obtaining PT meet the requirements.  Certain requirements for PT can be met only by using GT-based methods.  Others can be met only with a NWP-based approach.  And others can be met only with a climatology-based approach.Other requirements or constraints also affect the choices of methods for generating PT for a simulation.  They include requirements that multiple forecasts be available for use in a simulation, the need for forecasts of different lengths, and the need for forecasts of different skills needed to assess the value of improvements in forecasting skill.  There also are System Limitations affecting the ability to move large PT datasets (communications), the ability to store large PT datasets (mass storage), and the ability to minimize the input and output calls to data storage devices during simulation run time (by holding the datasets in resident memory).  This latter constraint is especially important to large, aggregated, event-based simulations intended to run at hundreds to thousands of time real time. Additional constraints involve the timeliness with which PT datasets must be generated, and the cost.4.  Some Obvious and Not-so-Obvious Pragmatic IssuesMeteorologists, by nature, want their products to have value.  They’d also like to be able to prove the value of using skilled forecasts or, better yet, of demonstrating the value of improved skill.  However, there are a number of non-meteorological factors at work in the real world and, as a consequence, in the simulation world that affect the value of PT, or even if PT has value.  Chief among the reasons for this is something we call the "PT Paradox.”  While not an original discovery by the authors of this paper, one of the authors has pointed up its critical importance in any study that assesses the value of PT.  (The paradox has significance in both the operational and the simulation worlds.)The PT Paradox states that improved forecast accuracy does not lead (necessarily) to improved mission effectiveness and that decreased forecast accuracy does not lead (necessarily) to decreased mission effectiveness.  This is a stunning thought.  How can this be, you ask?  This can occur when the warfighter is striving for maximum effectiveness, e.g., flying every sortie in order to "stop the enemy advance as soon as possible."  Warfighters are likely to behave this way when the enemy is very dangerous and it’s important to eliminate the threat quickly.  Under these conditions, the warfighter will maximize the sortie rate.  (“A sortie not flown is a sortie forever lost.” - anonymous)  A warfighter can kill the largest number of targets in the least possible time when they fly rather than stand down for predicted "bad" weather.  This is because mission effectiveness depends on GT, not on PT.  This approach will miss no opportunities, e.g., when the PT predicts bad “weather,” but GT is such that some openings occur in the “weather.”  And even when primary targets are obscured, successful attacks can be made on secondary or tertiary targets.  Over the course of a campaign, this strategy will destroy the largest number of targets in the shortest period of time.  However, it can be very inefficient and a very expensive strategy in terms of cost and sortie rate since it requires the maximum number of sorties – many unsuccessful sorties will be flown on bad (GT) weather days.  But, this strategy is effective and is absolutely independent of forecast accuracy. TABLE 1The Simulation Systems’ Requirements for Perceived Truth(Shading indicates a PT or PT-related requirement; X indicates a possible or limited requirement.) PTRequirementSimulationSystemRealistic (Credible)Specified Level(s) of SkillPerfectPersistenceReal World Level of SkillJWARSJSIMSXJMASS XXLegacy1XXXXX1.  Few legacy systems use the natural environment to determine effects on simulation objects.  Those that do, use few parameters.  Nonetheless, in the aggregate, legacy systems have requirements similar to those of JWARS, JSIMS, and JMASS.TABLE 2Assessment of How Well PT Methods Meet PT Requirements(Shading indicates PT Methodology meets PT Requirement; X means requirement is met to limited degree.)PT RequirementPT SolutionsRealistic (Credible)Specified Level(s) of SkillPerfectPersistenceReal World Level of SkillUse NWP ModelXUse GT     PersistenceXXX     PerfectXX     RealisticXXClimatologyXXXThe first corollary to the PT Paradox is that when efficiency matters, then forecasts (even imperfect ones) are important.  Effectiveness will suffer since it always takes longer to accomplish an objective.  Sometimes, the warfighter has limited resources and must be efficient for this reason.  When both effectiveness and efficiency are important, the warfighter may choose to wait to attack a large number of targets with the fewest number of resources.  Scheduling sorties when skilled forecasts indicate the chances for a successful attack are high can do this.  Fewer sorties will be flown on bad (GT) weather days; but over time, a large number of targets can be successfully attacked with fewer sorties.  Over a campaign, this strategy will destroy the targets with the fewest number of sorties.  It is an economical strategy in terms of cost and sortie rate, since it requires the fewest number of sorties – fewer unsuccessful sorties will be flown on bad weather days.  Its success does depend on the use of skilled forecasts, and improved forecast skill will improve results.This last observation leads to another paradox.  In some simulations, warfighters may be interested only in no skill PT and in perfect PT!  Why is this, you ask? Because these conditions provide answers to the questions “What’s the worst I can do?” and “What’s the best I can do?”  The answers to these questions frame the war.  If the warfighter knows these answers, then they have valuable information on which to plan and operate.   In some cases, operators (the warfighters) will simply want to use persistence as their PT.  Persistence forecasts reflect the unskilled/no-forecaster approach.  This is the worst-case condition.  But, because persistence forecasts do display some accuracy, decision-based events that use persistence will reflect “the worst that I can do.”  In other cases, the warfighter will want to use perfect forecasts as their PT.  This is the best-case condition, it provides perfect foresight and reflects “the best that I can do.”  Both these answers have value to the warfighter and may be as much information as they need.  In either of these cases, GT is all that is needed to obtain PT.  These cases are most likely to be used in constructive simulations that decide force structures, courses of action, or system acquisitions.In other cases, the warfighter may want to use something between “the worst that I can do” and “the best that I can do.”  These are conditions that more closely reflect the world as it really is--conditions in which battle staffs are being trained in decision-making and learn to rely on imperfect, but skilled forecasts (PT).  GT could be used to generate forecasts for such simulations, but the use of numerical weather prediction models to generate the PT better represents the real world.  Constructive training simulations are most likely to fall into this category.5.  SummaryPerceived Truth (like Ground Truth) does not have a one-size-fits-all solution.  For some simulations, deriving PT from GT is the overall best approach to providing forecast conditions.  This is true when simulation users have requirements for “realistic” forecasts, “level of skill” forecasts, persistence forecasts, and perfect forecasts.  Ground Truth provides the most reliable and rapid approach to providing any of these forecasts.  In all these cases, PT can be provided in a physically consistent, correlated way and with the least impact on communications, computer mass storage, and resident memory requirements.  The GT-based approach to generating PT is likely to be used in analytic simulations where a variety of environmental GT conditions (best, worst, and average) and associated PT (realistic, “accurate,” persistence, perfect) forecasts would be considered.Ground Truth, however, can not easily be used to replicate real world skill forecasts.  In the real world, environmental parameters are forecast with different skill even when valid at the same forecast time.  Only a state-of-the-art NWP model can replicate these conditions.  So, for any simulation wishing to reflect the look and feel of real world forecasts in its PT, a NWP model is the preferred solution.  This would be a likely case when a simulation involves meteorologists and operators participating jointly in a training simulation replicating the real world operating environment and using C4I.Climatology as a PT tool has its uses, too.  The further in the (simulation’s) future PT is desired, the more the PT should be shifted toward climatological values.  While real world level of skill can be demonstrated out to about 2 weeks, climatology becomes the likely PT tool beyond that point.  In fact, neither NWP nor GT should be used beyond about 2 weeks.  NWP should not be used because it has diminishing skill beyond that time.  GT should not be used because, although it has precise environmental information, its use would imply a level of skill not achievable in the real world.While the term forecast “accuracy” is often used in discussions of simulation PT, “accuracy” is not well defined.  Current real world forecast technology does not produce a set of forecast data values that all have the same accuracy (regardless of its definition).  Temperature and pressure, for example, are much more accurately forecast (by any measure) than moisture and clouds.  So, simply stated, “accuracy” requirements (e.g., approaches like saying 80% or 90% “accurate”) are meaningless terms.  The simulation and environmental provider communities must work together to develop a common set of terms by which they can specify “accuracy” requirements if “accuracy” or “level of skill” is to be a forecast requirement.6.  References[1] Commander of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Manual (CJCSM) 3500.04A, Universal Joint Task List, Version 3; 13 September 1996.[2] Birkel, Paul A., “SNE Conceptual Reference Model”, In Proceedings of the Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 1998, 98SSIW018.[3] Haynes, Ronald D., Lucas, D. L., Turcotte, F. N., “A Standardized Way To Obtain Tailored, Consistent Atmosphere, Ocean, and Space Natural Environment Instance Data for Simulations – A Front-End Process To The SNE Conceptual Reference Model,” in Proceedings of the Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 1999, 99S-SIW-201B.[4] Integrated Natural Environment Web Homepage at  HYPERLINK http://www.dmso.mil/home/ine/ http://www.dmso.mil/home/ine/.[5] Hummel, John R., “Simulating The Forecasting Of Meteorological And Oceanic Conditions As A Part Of The Planning Cycle In Simulated Command And Control,” in Proceedings of the Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March, 1998, 98S-SIW-069.[6] Birkel, Paul A., “Re: Comments on "Forecasts," in e-mail message of Thursday 10/8/1999 4:18 AM.[7] Blacksten, Harry, R., “BOGWOB – Weather Forecast Model,” Working Draft Power Point presentation, 9 March 2000.Author BiographiesDARRELL L. LUCAS, RONALD D. HAYNES, FREDERICK N. TURCOTTE, DOUGLAS M. BROOKS, MICHEAL S. HUNSUCKER, AND THOMAS N. WALKER are senior systems analysts/senior meteorologists for Dynamics Research Corporation (DRC).  They currently provide technical support and guidance to the Air and Space Natural Environment Modeling and Simulation Executive Agent. In this paper, the term decision-maker refers to either human or C2 human-behavior objects participating in a simulation. This paper does not deal with determining the expected effects of forecast information on mission space objects or on the decision-making process based on the anticipated effects.  This paper deals with methods to provide the forecast information itself without which forecast effects can not be determined. An authoritative representation of the atmosphere is the one at which interpolation to finer scales does not yield new information (of value to the simulation).  That is, interpolation to finer scale yields values of parameters appropriate for the simulation’s use. Skilled-but-less-than-perfect forecasts reflect the real world.  These forecasts have better skill than a persistence forecast (the minimum skill), but less skill than a perfect forecast. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  