Military System Interoperability:Opportunities and Challenges for Simulation InteroperabilityDr. Judith S. DahmannScientific AdvisorDirector of InteroperabilityAcquisition, Technology and LogisticsUS Department of DefenseandSenior Principal ScientistThe MITRE Corporation703.883.1636jdahmann@mitre.orgKeywords:Interoperability; System of Systems; Joint Distributed Engineering PlantAbstract:  In the United States and internationally, there is a marked increase in emphasis on military system interoperability.  Within the US, the need for interoperability among Service and Joint Systems to support CINC and Joint Task Force Operations has been recognized for some time.  Recent actions establishing interoperability as a key performance parameter for all new systems and requiring C4I support plans to establish the base for system of systems operations has highlighted this critical need.  Likewise, the need to establish the means to interoperate with coalition partners is also receiving added attention, to ensure the ability of the US to participate effective in multinational operations.   This paper examines the ways simulation supports system of system interoperability planning, assessment, testing and training, the lessons simulation interoperability can offer to military system interoperability, and the issues facing simulation in supporting system interoperability.  IntroductionInteroperability among military systems, plans and personnel has always been important to successful operations.  However, it is becoming increasingly critical as systems become more complex, different operations involve a variable set of participants and systems, including coalition partners, and the increasingly uncertain nature of both the threat and the military objectives mean that more than ever before, each operation has is own unique characteristics.  A desire for a future military capability which is flexible and agile, allowing for the ‘right mix’ of capabilities be rapidly brought to bear in each situation, puts an added demand on the interoperability at all levels.This emphasis on interoperability is reflected in added organizational attention to interoperability issues and new regulations institutionalizing interoperability considerations in the system acquisition process.  This has generated increased technical activity in the definition and specification of interoperable capabilities and in the assessment of those capabilities.  Simulation can be a important and useful tool to support system interoperability, but it is essential that the simulation development and application community proactively consider the direction and needs of the system interoperability users if simulation is to provide the timely and effective support it promises.What Is Interoperability?Interoperability, as defined in Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) Pub 1-02 [1], has two related but slightly differing definitions that depend on context of usage.  1. The ability of systems, units or forces to provide services to and accept services from other systems, units, or forces and to use the services exchanged to enable them to operate effectively together.2.  The condition achieved among communications-electronics systems or items of communications-electronics equipment when information or services can be exchanged directly and satisfactorily between them and/or their users.  The degree of interoperability should be defined when referring to specific cases.The first definition has also been adopted by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) for use by its member nations.  As the breadth of these definitions indicates, interoperability cuts across multiple aspects of military operations and support systems.  Often associated with information systems, or more broadly C4ISR systems, interoperability in fact extends across the battle management arena to encompass aspects of weapons and sensor systems, doctrine, future battle concepts and personnel -- the full range.  In fact, it beginning to be widely accepted that in Defense we are operating today in an increasingly interdependent ‘system of systems’ environment.  Successful operations depend upon the ability of different systems, often developed and fielded by different organizations, operated by personnel from different organizations (often from different nations) to work together under stress.Broad Organizational Emphasis on InteroperabilityIn the past year, organizational actions have been taken to put into place mechanisms to emphasize the importance of interoperability in the daily business of the Defense Department. In November 1999, the Office of the Secretary of Defense established a Director for Interoperability reporting to the Under Secretary of Defense (Acquisition, Technology and Logistics).   The mission is to provide a focus, working with C3I, the Joint Staff, CINCs, Services, Defense Agencies, and Coalition Forces, to enable the full range of military operations, through interoperability and coalition warfare initiatives.  Around the same time, a joint program office was formed to represent the CINCs in the Service command and control system commands.  Each system command (USAF Electronic Systems Command, USN Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command, and USA Communications Electronics Command) has established an in-residence, CINC’s Interoperability Program Office (CIPO) staffed by a mix of personnel from the three Service organizations.  These new organizations complement ongoing joint activities on interoperability: the Interoperability Joint Warfighting Capabilities Assessment (I-JWCA), and the Military Communications Electronics Board (MCEB).  I-JWCA, led by the J-3 staff, focuses Service/Agency responses to CINC interoperability issues.  The MCEB, led by the J-6, focuses C4 leadership across DoD on a broad range of issues including interoperability.  MCEB has working panels that monitor interoperability testing certification and related matters.   The Assistant Secretary of Defense (Command, Control, Computers and Intelligence) as the DoD Chief Information Officer is organized with responsibility for information assurance and interoperability for the C4I domain.  [2]While not a comprehensive list, taken together, this array of organizations is devoting increasing amounts of attention on interoperability across the Defense Department.Policy for Incorporating Interoperability into the System Acquisition ProcessRecently two DoD instructions have been reissued.  These now make explicit the consideration of interoperability at each stage of systems acquisition process.  In effect, they provide the mechanisms within the system acquisition process itself to ensure that as systems are conceived, developed, tested, and fielded, their ability to interoperate in a system of systems environment is addressed at each step along the way.CJCSI 3170.01A, “Requirements Generation System.”  This instruction requires all requirements documentation - regardless of acquisition category level – to conform with joint policy, technical architecture integrity, and interoperability standards.  In addition, Joint Forces Command is designated as the JCS Chairman’s advocate for joint warfare interoperability, and thus will play a critical review role in all systems requirements.  [3]CJCSI 6212.01B, “Compatibility, Interoperability, Integration and C4 Supportability Certification of Command, Control, Communications, Computers and Weapon Systems.”  In final drafting, this instruction specifies three interoperability certifications to be accomplished for every C4I system and weapons system that interfaces with a C4I system.  Additionally, it provides the process and format for developing interoperability Key Performance Parameters and Information Exchange Requirements for system requirements documentation.  [4]Based on these, interoperability is now a key performance parameter for all systems and the support for interoperability with and among C4I systems is an integral part of systems planning and development.  Defining interoperability tailored for each system and assessing this from requirements through test is now part of the standard acquisition process. The current standard acquisition process is shown in figure 1.  At each milestone review, interoperability must be satisfactorily addressed for the system acquisition to proceed.  This means that each system now needs to understand its role in the system of system it operates within, to define its requirements to meet that role and to assess whether it can meet those requirements as it moves through the process.  As systems begin to implement these revised instructions, requirers and developers, as well as testers are examining new ways to constructively participate.  The role for modeling and simulation is part of this examination.   Modeling and simulation offers potential, and is already being applied by different programs across the stages of the acquisition process.  This role is being extended to include support for interoperability.  In the following sections, the role of M&S at each stage of the acquisition process is summarized as found in the current DoD Acquisition Deskbook.  Ways that M&S could be extended to support system interoperability at each stage are discussed citing some current examples.Needs AssessmentM&S current supports the initial stages of a system acquisition by providing tools to identify missing or limited capabilities that are needs and to assess the validity of the system requirements and the viability of system design to address those requirements:Milestone 0 application focuses on mission need.  These activities include Mission Area Assessments (MAA) and Mission Need Analyses (MNA).  From these, a Mission Need Statement (MNS) is created.  Potential M&S applications include engineering level system performanceFigure 1:  Acquisition Process – 5000.2models, engagement and higher level models to evaluate alternative tactics, and campaign and higher level models to examine the outcomes as a result of total system contribution.  Additional applications include human interactions to assess decision-making and virtual prototyping to demonstrate potential utility. [5]What it would mean to use simulation to address interoperability at this stage of the acquisition process?  In a number of areas, the Services and JFCOM have established man-in-the-loop simulation environments in which current systems are employed against new and changing threat situations.  By allowing users to  ‘experience’ the situation virtually, the shortfalls of the current systems can be surfaced and allowing users to experience’ the situation virtually can identify the need for new or different capabilities.  In many ways, many of the current training exercises, which are driven by simulations (Joint Theater Level Simulation or the Joint Training Confederation) are serving this purpose with respect to interoperability.  Specific needs for better systems interoperability have been identified by the CINCS as part of the exercise After Action Reports.  JFCOM in the Millennium Challenge experiment series is explicitly looking at interoperability needs for future operational situations and among concepts of operations among the participants in Joint operationsS.Concept EvaluationAt the concepts analysis stage, M&S support the examination of options for approaches to addressing systems requirements:Phase 0:  Concept Exploration.  This phase focuses on the development of alternative concepts and the advantages and disadvantages of each.  Activities during this phase include cost /performance tradeoffs, the definition of operational requirements, the setting of realistic but aggressive cost objectives , and development of the operational requirements document (ORD),  which leads to draft system specifications and the TEMP.  Many of the same models employed during the previous phase are re-used.  Engineering models project performance and trade-offs.  Engagement and mission/battle level models determine mission effectiveness and support cost/performance tradeoffs and ORD development.  Theater and campaign level models evaluate conflict outcomes in support of the same documents.  Human interactive simulations are used to develop tactics; and virtual simulations evaluate concepts, technologies, and tactics in realistic synthetic environments.  Throughout this phase, M&S supports the implementation of the Cost as an Independent Variable (CAIV) concept, early risk reduction, and establishment of consistent measures of effectiveness (MOEs) and measures of performance (MOPs). [6]Use of simulation to assess interoperability at this stage of the process may take several forms.  Simulations like NETWARS, provide tools to examine new operational concepts or new systems capabilities from the perspective of communications loading, providing input into the concept exploration about the viability of new approaches.  To use NETWARS to support this it is necessary to develop a concept of interfaces among systems to implement the approach and the extent of cross system data exchange is a key part of this process.  In an initiative entitled “Multi-tier Simulation of Executable Architecture views (MSEAV), executable implementations of operational architectures are being linked to both systems models and force on force simulations to identify implications on systems and operational effectiveness of operational concepts [7]. Finally, man-in-the-loop simulation environments like those described in the preceding section, can be explicitly used to examine new concepts of operations or new systems capabilities from an interoperability perspective. System DesignAs the acquisition proceeds, M&S provides the tools to support design assessment both in engineering technical terms and in terms of operations.Phase I:  Program Definition and Risk Reduction.  During this phase, the program gains definition and the alternative concept assessments are refined.  Critical technologies are demonstrated and prototyping is conducted.  M&S applications include hardware/software -in-the-loop (HWIL/SWIL), computer-aided design/manufacturing (CAD/CAM), engineering and mission level models expanding to include interoperability analyses, and continued theater/campaign level support of the cost/performance studies and the ORD.  Human in the loop simulations can be applied to evaluate the developing human-machine interface, and virtual prototyping can include actual prototype hardware, software, and possible linking of simulations on a virtual battlefield.  These simulations can be used to support early operational assessments (EOA), and to assist in source selection.  M&S continues to support risk reduction with added emphasis on technical solutions and system integration. [8]Simulation environments are natural for examining interoperability at the design stage.  By representing a system design in software, it may be possible to identify early in the development process dependencies that need to be considered in the systems other than the new system under design.  In the NATO/PfP Interoperability and Reuse Study (NIREUS) [8] is examining requirements for a simulation environment to support multi-nation cooperation in the area of manned and unmanned landings on aircraft through the development of a an open, HLA-based  simulation testbed, to evaluate system designs and concepts of operation in this potentially dangerous military operation. Engineering and Manufacturing DevelopmentAs the system acquisition moves towards production, M&S provides the tools to address issues system implementation, including possible effects of manufacturing considerations which might effect system design and consequently impact operational effects.Phase II:  Engineering and Manufacturing Development (EMD):  M&S supports the transition from design to initial production and testing.  The engineering level models are heavily used for performance analysis, test planning and test support.  The model-test-model process is used to optimize testing and resources and further refine the hardware.  Theater, campaign, battle, and mission models are updated with the latest parameters and continue to support high-level conflict resolution and MOE consistency.  Virtual factories are used to define production schedules and physical configuration.  Virtual simulations are used to develop training systems for operators and conduct test rehearsal.  Combinations of engineering, engagement, mission, campaign, and HWIL will augment developmental and operational testing commensurate with the level of verification, validation and accreditation (VV&A) performed.  M&S serves as a tool for continued risk reduction through detailed design development and test planning. [10]The Joint Strike Fighter (JSF), Virtual Strike Warfare Environment (VSWE) 7 federation is a good example of this type of simulation capability developed to support a weapons system development.  VSWE7 was tested over the summer 2000 to prepare for use in the JSF EMD.  Comprised of a suite of simulations operating over HLA, it brings together authoritative representations of key threat systems in a multi-spectral environment for assessing the weapons system ability to conduct key operational missions.  This environment provides a vehicle to examining the interoperability requirements of the JSF as they have been expressed in the program C4ISR plan, and can be used by both the government and the JSF contractor as a common environment for system development and assessment.	Operational DeploymentFinally, as a system is produced and deployed simulation continues to support testing and training, as well as a basis for assessment of system upgrades and enhancements.Phase III:  Production, Fielding/Deployment, and Operational Support:  M&S supports continued testing, design changes and enhancements, training, logistics, maintenance, and the need for updates to the system.  The model-test-model process is continued to refine models and improve systems.  Real data is applied to all levels of simulation for continued validation.  High level models are used for training commanders and battle staffs, and virtual simulations employed as training devices for operational crews, tactics development and evaluating new threats. [11]As systems are deployed there is the ongoing need to ensure that these systems work with the other systems it will be operating with in the battlespace environment.  System upgrades will be taking place at different times for different purposes in multiple systems concurrently.  Unless the means to test these systems as a system is readily available and applied, the risk that interoperability problems will adversely impact battle space results is increasing as the number and interdependencies among systems increases.  The Army with the Army Battlefield Command and Control System (ABCS) Integration Facility at Fort Hood and the Navy with the Distributed Engineer Plant (DEP) [12] have both established facilities to support this process.  Both utilize simulation in their integration support infrastructure.  The Joint Distributed Engineering Plant (JDEP) [13] envisions a similar capability for Joint Systems.Challenges for Simulation to Support System InteroperabilityThe acquisition community is now facing, in a more serious way, the need for a new technical strategy to address the interoperability issues emphasized in these new regulations, and in doing this, poses challenges to the simulation community to support them.   In the remainder of this paper, considerations for the simulation community are raised as we look at the interoperability needs of system acquisition and the current practice of simulation support to acquisition.  We examine what makes the use of simulation difficult today and what could be done to increase the extent of effective use of simulation to support system interoperability.On the positive side, the simulation community, at least among certain enclaves, has a lot of experience with system of systems development and with the practical issues of creating interoperable systems or federations of simulations. Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) protocols, the Aggregate Level Simulation Protocol (ALSP), and now the High Level Architecture for Simulation (HLA) provide technical framework for designing systems of systems for simulations.  The concept of HLA object models offers flexibility in the development of simulation systems.  The federation development and execution process (FEDEP) [14] provides a basic systems engineering process for simulation systems development and application. These all benefit the simulation community when it comes to creating simulation systems to address interoperability, and have prepared the simulation community to address many of the systems of systems issues facing the developers and users of interoperating systems.  Although many of the basic tools to support interoperability with simulation may be currently available, it is knowing that these tools exist and what you do with the them and the simulations themselves which effects the utility of simulation to any community.  The majority of the considerations identified address the way these tools and simulations are used to be of benefit to interoperability.“Ready or Not, Here I Come” System developers are now required to address interoperability and they can’t wait for the simulation community to develop a the simulation support systems to assist them in their tasks.  In this and other operational system users of simulation, it will be increasingly important that simulation support capabilities can be created or assembled rapidly and responsively and can be deployed cost effectively and in a timely fashion to meet their needs.  Because it will necessarily take time and resources to develop these tools, it will be incumbent upon the simulation support providers to anticipate opportunities and efficiently create the support environments so they are there when they are needed.  Because the requirements for interoperability assessments are clear, many of the targets of opportunity have been identified.“Complexity Conundrum”Systems of systems are complex to design, build, configure and test. Their developers will look for tools and support environments that simplify these tasks.  Unfortunately, as the simulation community well knows, systems of simulations can be complex in and of themselves and, by design, the complexity of any system of systems will be reflected in simulations of that system.  To make simulation systems of practical use to the system interoperability examiner, it will be important for the simulation support tools to manage their complexity in a way to provide clean interfaces to the system interoperability user, maximizing the simulations utility without burdening the user with its complexity.  In some cases, given the needs of the applications it might be possible to employ simulations with more abstracted, or simplified, representations, and satisfy the need of the user.“Data, Data, Data”As in all real simulation applications, the long pole in the tent is data, and interoperability is no different in this respect.  What may be different however, is that the system acquisition and interoperability community has been working to develop data and data support environments and frameworks to support interoperability.  These include structured approaches to operational and system architecture descriptions in the C4ISR framework [15], information exchange requirements (IERs), data models (e.g. CADM/ACCIS) and data specification repositories (e.g. SHADE XML repository, JCAPS[16]).  Most of these are well underway and are consuming a great deal of attention of the interoperability community.  If simulation is to be used (and be there when they are needed….) the data developed to be used in simulation applications needs to be incorporated into the interoperability process.  Some of these, in particular the architecture specifications, apply to the ‘conceptual model development’ step in the Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) process, a step in the process which has chronically been the most difficult for federation developers.  Some, particularly the IERs and the data models, pertain to the development of the federation object model (FOM) specifications. These both contribute to a definition of what the simulations need to be able to represent to be useful to addressing a particular interoperability issue.  The simulation community needs to be familiar with these architecture definition and description methods, tools and data specifications, to use them to the degree possible in supporting the simulation data requirements, and to recommend they be augmented where needed to apply simulations to interoperability assessment.  They also need to be ready to defend the value added of any augmentation to these capabilities, to demonstrate the utility of simulation to the process.	“Is It Real or Is It…..?”Particularly with command and control systems, or other software intensive systems, it may be true that it is harder to simulate a capability than it is to build and try it.  In these cases, it may be better to use the actual system software in the simulation environment, running on commercial hardware (which it is already doing in more and more cases in its fielded form) and incorporate it into the simulation operational environment.  This was done for a number of the federates in the Ship Self Defense (SSD) Federation developed by the Navy PEO-TAD.  This type of federate could then be used in federations to provide a early development “digital” or “brassboard” environment for new capabilities which will need to interface with existing systems.  They could also serve as pretest environments for early versions of those new capabilities, or, as in the SSD federations, environments to examine effects of upgrades of systems, on the overall mission effectiveness or performance of other members of the system of systems.  These may offer steps to the use of “DEP or JDEP-like” capabilities in which actual systems are tested prior to deployment with a number of dissimilar systems.  This will not replace actual system integration but could provide a more cost effective, portable tool for incremental testing and hence more cost effective use of valuable systems integration time.	“If It is Not Right, We will Know Soon Enough”Finally, with simulation to support interoperability, there is the time worn issue of the validity of the simulation representations.  Naturally, doing interoperability assessments with simulation system representations, which differ in important ways from the systems themselves, will not be of much benefit.  Particularly if the simulation activity is part of a work up to system integration, these differences will show up when systems assessed in the simulation environment fail to interoperate in the same way with their live system counterparts. However, as experience has shown, confidence building or ‘validation’ is not always easy to do (complexity conundrum redux), but it is nonetheless important, and one reason that system developers shy away from using it when there is any promise of live system based activities.  This behooves the simulation community to identify system representations found to be valid for different types of interoperability applications and to make it easy to access and reuse these in multiple applications that include the system.  This is particularly true of threat systems.“SoS Boxset”:  A Concept for the Way AheadHaving raised these issues, the paper concludes with the discussion of a concept for addressing at least some of these through a concept of operations for providing responsive and effective simulation support for systems of systems interoperability.   Interoperability by its very nature does not lend itself to a system by system approach.  Systems need to be examined as they work together; that is the whole point of interoperability.  It then seems logical to support interoperability in a given domain or mission area by creating a shared, reference environment for the systems of systems which interoperate within and support mission effectiveness with that area, rather than creating a new environment each time you need to assess interoperability of any one of the systems in that area.  By creating and building confidence in these environments, and reusing them, the return on the investment required to build and sustain them will be exploited by multiple uses and users.  They will also gain in credibility with added user investment and attention.  Further, by commonality in the environments used across systems in a system of systems; unanticipated differences in results can be more easily traced to common sources.  This concept of ‘boxsets’ is analogous to the common practice in many consumer product areas of creating for the customer a ‘basket’ or packaged set of interrelated items as a ‘product in and of itself.  This relieves the customer of the need to select and purchase items individually and arrange them in an attractive or useful way.  Mail order ‘fruit and cheese’ baskets are one common example of this, as are children’s craft sets or “boxed sets” of books or recordings (hence, the term ‘boxset’).   While it is entirely possible to create these for yourself, the convenience of the prepackaged sets makes them very appealing.  In some cases these ‘boxed sets’ may cost more to the consumer that the items themselves to cover the cost of labor.  In many cases, due to volume alone, these may actually cost each consumer less than doing themselves, with the assurance that the combinations of items included in the set have satisfied other customers in the past.Applying this concept here, SoS support environments are viewed as “box sets” that would include federations of simulations and support tools, the federation object model (FOM) and other implementation details required to operate and augment the simulations.  These federations would be ‘outfitted’ with operational scenarios, environmental databases, and performance characterizations based on their uses over time.  These would be a flavor of what has been called ‘persistent federations’, with these other support components designed for use across as system of systems by multiple users in government and industry.The Joint Strike Fight Virtual Strike Warfare Environment (VSWE), described above, is an example of what a ‘boxset’ for a particular mission area might look like.  The concept of operations in mind here is that VSWE would be augmented and reused by other strike warfare systems or credible representation of key C4ISR assets which contribute to the strike weapons systems mission planning and execution, to assess their interoperability.  Further, this environment could be used by organizations like JFCOM as the base case for future strike warfare experiments.  Who would ‘own’ and configuration manage these ‘boxsets’?  How would they be funded?  Who would develop, maintain and operate them?  These are all business model questions that would need to be addressed.  As the Department starts to looks more seriously at managing at a systems of systems level, with Joint Mission Area Managers or Mission Capability Managers, tools such as this would be natural and logical virtual operational support environments to support new requirements assessment, concept exploration, system design, development and deployment.References[1] Joint Doctrine Division, J-7, Joint Staff, "DOD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms," Joint Publication 1-02[2] Quinlan, Robin and Gordon Tillery, “M&S and Weapons Systems Interoperability, - Applying a Robust Capability to a Critical Need”, SIW, March 2000[3] CJCSI 3170.01A,  Requirements Generation System[4] CJCSI 6212.01B, Compatibility, Interoperability, Integration and C4 Supportability Certification of Command, Control, Communications, Computers and Weapon Systems[5]  Acquisition Deskbook, V3.2 Release, December 15,1999[6]  Acquisition Deskbook, V3.2 Release, December 15,1999[7] Hamrick, Mike and Tom Pawlowski, “Technical Approach for Multi-tier Simulation of Executable Architectures: The Underlying Technology for a Command Post Configuration Tool”, MITRE Product MP 00W0000131V00S000R00, June 2000. [8] Acquisition Deskbook, V3.2 Release, December 15,1999[9] Hurwitz, Myles and Richard Reading, “NATO HLA Federation for Study of Air Vehicle Landings on Ships”, SIW, March 2000.[10] Acquisition Deskbook, V3.2 Release, December 15,1999[11] Acquisition Deskbook, V3.2 Release, December 15,1999[12] Navy DEP: www.nswc.navy.mil/dep[13] Joint Engineering Task Force, “Final Report,” pp. 9-10 Appendix B, November 15, 1999[14] Defense Modeling and Simulation Office “Federation Development and Execution Process,” Version 1.5, 8 December 1999[15] Department of Defense, Command, Control, Communications, Computer, Intelligence, Surveillance,and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) Architecture Framework Version 2.0, The Department of Defense, Washington , D.C., 1997,  HYPERLINK http://www.c3i.osd.mil/org/cio/i3/AWG_Digital_Library/pdfdocs/fw.pdf http://www.c3i.osd.mil/org/cio/i3/AWG_Digital_Library/pdfdocs/fw.pdf .[16] Joint C4ISR Architecture Framework Planning/Analysis System (JCAPS),      HYPERLINK http://www.if.afrl.af.mil/programs/jcaps http://www.if.afrl.af.mil/programs/jcaps/Author BiographyDr. Judith Dahmann is as a principal senior scientist at the MITRE Corporation and the Scientific Advisor to Dr. Garber, Director of Interoperability for the US Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics.  In this capacity, Dr. Dahmann provides technical review, assessment and recommendations on interoperability plans, issues and initiatives, including the application of emerging commercial technologies throughout the system acquisition cycle, approaches to interoperability measurement and assessment, and opportunities for coalition partnerships to collaboratively develop common technical approaches to interoperability.  Her current emphasis is on the development of a technical strategy to support information sharing across battle management systems to support consistency in the operational and tactical views available to users at different places in the battlespace.  Prior to this, Dr. Dahmann was the Chief Scientist for the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office for the US Director of Defense Research and Engineering,  a position she held from 1995 to April 2000.  In her role as Chief Scientist, Dr. Dahmann led the development of the High Level Architecture, a general-purpose software architecture for the development and interoperation of simulations, now an IEEE Standard (IEEE 1516).