The Tactical Simulation Interface Unit (TSIU) ProgramJohn R. AndersonGene L. HardinColeman Research Corporation6820 Moquin DriveHuntsville, Alabama  35806256-922-6000 HYPERLINK mailto:john_anderson@mail.crc.com john_anderson@mail.crc.com   HYPERLINK mailto:gene_hardin@mail.crc.com gene_hardin@mail.crc.comTonya McCree AndersonU.S. Army Space and Missile Defense CommandHuntsville, Alabama  35806256-955-1775 HYPERLINK mailto:andersont@smdc.army.mil andersont@smdc.army.milKeywords:Individual, Collective, Multi-Echelon Staff TrainingArmy Battle Command System StimulationLegacy, Digitized, Joint C4I System StimulationABSTRACT:  The purpose of this paper is to describe the real-world experience and lessons learned during the past six years of supporting simulation to C4I interoperability in training and analysis applications using the Tactical Simulation Interface Unit (TSIU).  Information is included on the original motivation for the TSIU, how the TSIU has evolved, current capabilities, and planned upgrades.  Several selected projects are reviewed to illustrate TSIU application in support of the warfighter, combat developer and material developer.  The TSIU High Level Architecture implementation approach is described, and TSIU participation in on-going community simulation-to-C4I system integration and command and control Federation Object Model efforts is discussed.  The paper concludes with a discussion of potential future capabilities including enhanced DII COE compliance and increased reuse of common components, Joint Common Data Base integration, and tactical systems interoperability support.1.  Introduction.The Tactical Simulation Interface Unit (TSIU) Program began in the spring of 1995, and the TSIU has been used in over sixty different exercises and events during the past six years.  These applications have included analysis, experimentation, and training events, but the primary focus of the TSIU program has always been to provide a sustainment training capability for the warfighter by providing a low cost, low footprint, leave behind capability to integrate their Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I)  systems into a simulated environment.  TSIU training applications have ranged from individual operator training through collective and multi-echelon staff training for Battalion through CINC level, and the TSIU has been used to stimulate fifteen different C4I systems including Army, Other Service and Joint systems.  This paper summarizes the history of the program, describes current and planned capabilities, and reviews selected applications and the associated experiences and lessons learned from a real-world “muddy boots” perspective.  2.  Background.  The concept for the TSIU and its initial capabilities were developed to support the Space and Missile Defense Command (SMDC).  In the fall of 1994, GEN Sullivan, CSA, asked the Commander of SMDC to develop a prototype Tactical Operations Center (TOC) that would integrate the four pillars of Theater Missile Defense (TMD).  The resulting TOC was developed in Colorado Springs by Army Space Command (ARSPACE) and called the Force Projection TOC or FP TOC.  The mission of the FP TOC was to integrate and focus the activities of Active Defense, Attack Operations, Passive Defense and overall TMD Battle Management.  The FP TOC included numerous Command and Control (C2) Systems to provide battlefield status and sensor information as well as direct coordination with Army and Joint Force attack capabilities.  The FP TOC integrated numerous fielded and prototype Army and Joint C2 Workstations to meet these requirements. As the FP TOC was being developed, the Battle Integration Center (BIC), later renamed the Space and Missile Defense Battle Lab (SMDBL), located in Huntsville Alabama, was given the responsibility to provide a demonstration and training environment for the FP TOC.  This training environment needed to provide several capabilities:The ability to test technical CONOPS to include internal C2 workstations and TOC connectivity.The ability to conduct individual operator training on current and prototype C2 workstations.The ability to conduct collective staff training with an interactive simulation environment.The ability to demonstrate FP TOC capability in stand-alone events and CINC exercises.The approach taken to accomplish this mission was to capitalize on the versatility of the DIS standard and develop a C2 interface that would allow for direct workstation stimulation in order to embed the FP TOC within the virtual battlefield.  The DIS environment would provide excellent flexibility to tailor the set of sensor, maneuver, intelligence and attack simulations to meet a variety of FP TOC support requirements.  The TSIU would provide the C2 interface.  The TSIU would receive perceived information from the simulations via DIS, would translate the simulation-based information into tactical messages, and would route these messages to the appropriate C2 workstations.Several major principles have guided TSIU programdevelopment.  First, the TSIU would not require any change/addition to C2 workstation software.  The intent was to leave the C2 workstations and processes alone and require the TSIU to interface with these systems through the appropriate message and physical interface.  Second, the DIS-based simulations should provide a standard set of information to the TSIU that then could be used to provide the tactical message information.  This would keep the simulations from having to keep up with the evolving C2 tactical message world and focus on enhancing systems and processes within the simulation.  It would be the responsibility of the TSIU Program to keep up with these enhancements.  Finally, the intent of the TSIU effort was to provide a low cost, sustainment-training capability to the warfighter.  This  “scrimmage” capability would allow operators and staffs to prepare for the major training and exercise events.    Since that time the capabilities developed to support this initial set of requirements have grown to support multiple customers and activities.  Currently the TSIU is being used at thirteen separate locations to support efforts ranging from ARCENT quarterly staff training events to Digitized Battle Staff Training Support of the Joint Contingency Force Advanced Warfighting Experiment (JCF AWE).  Figure 1 highlights TSIU event and activity support.  Several of these efforts will be discussed in Paragraph 4, Applications.3.  TSIU Current CapabilitiesThe TSIU reads simulation (sensor based) Signal/ Transmitter (S/T) Protocol Data Units (PDUs) from a DIS-based simulation network, translates this information into tactical message(s) and routes the tactical message(s) via a variety of transmission means to designated C2 workstations.  Tactical message protocols supported include: USMTF, TIBS (TIMF, TDIMF), TRAP/TDDS (TACELINT, SENSOREP), FDL, TADIL-A, OTH-Gold, SCDL Variant (MTI), VMF and JVMF.  The TSIU can currently generate over 90 different tactical messages.  The TSIU does not directly read entity or aggregate PDU information.  It does not provide truth data to the C2 workstations.  A sensor must identify and report (for enemy forces) or a command & control entity must report (for friendly forces) via the S/T PDU in order for tactical messages to be forwarded to the C2 workstation.  If an entity does not come within sensor range, no S/T PDU is generated and the entity is not displayed on the C2 workstation.  The TSIU is written in Ada 83, is government owned and can be hosted on a variety of Sun workstations such as a Sun Ultra 2 or Sun Ultra 5.  Figure 2 provides a summary of tactical message protocols and tactical workstations that are currently supported by the TSIU.  A TSIU training course is available that can be conducted in several modes to include on-site support. General technical support is available during normal duty hours.  4.  ApplicationsThe TSIU has been involved in a wide variety of exercise, training and advanced concept endeavors.  These effortsinclude supporting individual operator training at theBattalion level through staff collective training at Echelons Above Corps (EAC) level.  Several representative efforts have been identified and will be discussed in more detail.  The intent for choosing these activities is to show TSIU applicability to Training, Exercise and Military Operations (TEMO), Advanced Concepts and Requirements (ACR) and Research Development and Acquisition (RDA) requirements. These efforts include: the Division Advanced Warfighting Experiment (DAWE) support, Contingency Operations support, Digitized Battle Staff Trainer (DBST) support, PEO Aviation support and finally 3rd U.S. Army (ARCENT) support.4.1 Division Advanced Warfighting Experiment (DAWE) Support.TSIU applicability to Advanced Concepts and Requirements was demonstrated during the DAWE 97 at Ft Hood Texas.  The U.S. Army Space Command (ARSPACE) had developed a concept that would notify units of in-bound Theater Ballistic Missiles (TBM) through the use of an Early Warning Pager system.  In order to support the examination of this concept during the DAWE the established simulation architecture would need to be enhanced to provide Early Warning tactical messages to the appropriate tactical workstations (in this case the Maneuver Control System (MCS)).  The primary simulation model to be used to drive exercise requirements was Corps Battle Simulation (CBS), which did not represent the TBM events with sufficient fidelity to support the analysis of alternative early warning systems.  However, an SMDC developed interface between CBS and the Extended Air Defense Simulation (EADSIM) called the Run Time Manager (RTM) was used to enable the use of the high fidelity Air Defense Artillery (ADA) and TMD representations within EADSIM.  EADSIM simulated the space-based sensor and the red and blue TBM/ADA force structure and provided early warning data to the TSIU via the DIS local area network (LAN).  The TSIU provided Theater Information Broadcast system (TIBS) and Tactical and Related Applications (TRAP) Data Distribution System (TDDS) to the Air Defense System Integrator (ADSI) and to a specially modified MCS (see Figure 3).  The MCS, which tracks blue force status and locations, was able to determine if the TBM events posed a threat to any deployed forces.  Units found within the predicted impact ellipse were notified via SATCOM through to the respective NBC officer Early Warning Pager.  This early warning distribution system showed significant improvement over the traditional distribution means and a similar system was subsequently deployed and currently supports our forces in Kuwait.Contingency Operations Support.The 32nd Army Air and Missile Defense Command (AAMDC) was formed to provide EAC Theater Missile Defense (TMD) expertise to the warfighting CINCs.  In March of 1998 the 32nd AAMDC was asked to support Operation Desert Thunder in the CENTCOM Area of Responsibility (AOR).  The 32nd AAMDC had just recently received their equipment from ARSPACE and was in the process of completing individual operator training when the request for support was received.  Once deployed in theater the 32nd AAMDC requested assistance from the SMDBL to support continued individualoperator and collective staff training. The intent was to use the current, real world Intelligence Preparation of the Battlefield (IPB) products to train and maintain readiness while deployed and also minimize the number of required on-site support personnel.  The simulation architecture used to support this requirement included EAGLE and ModSAF, which provided red and blue ground forces, and EADSIM, which provided red TBMs and TBM infrastructure, red and blue air, and blue ADA units and space based sensors.  The TSIU provided the appropriate tactical message information to support training.  The TSIU along with EAGLE, ModSAF and EADSIM were connected to the DIS LAN in Huntsville Alabama, shown in Figure 4.  What made this effort unique was the real world, updated daily, IPB driven scenarios and the fact that the simulation and C4I stimulation capability remained in Huntsville while the training audience was in Kuwait.  On-site simulation/stimulation support consisted of two workstations and three personnel to support 24-hour operations.  The SIPRNET was used to provide secure communications between locations.  This effort received attention from the Chief of Staff of the Army, GEN Reimer, who called the concept and what it’s doing “absolutely right”.Digitized Battle Staff Trainer Support (DBST).The intent of the National Simulation Center (NSC) and STRICOM sponsored Digitized Battle Staff Trainer (DBST) effort is to provide a low cost, training capability to Brigade and Battalion staffs.  The DBST architecture is flexible based on the training objectives of the units involved.  A typical DBST simulation architecture includes JANUS, EADSIM, and FIRESIM simulations and the TSIU and PC Interface Unit (PIU) systems to provide the interfaces to C4I systems.  JANUS provides maneuver forces, EADSIM provides air, TBM, sensors, and blue force status reporting, and FIRESIM provides fire support capabilities.  The PIU provides interfaces to fire support systems including the Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data System (AFATDS).  When additional fidelity is needed, STORM and TACSIM are included in the simulation architecture.  One of the more recent DBST efforts was support to the Joint Contingency Force Advanced Warfighting Experiment (JCF AWE).  The DBST team had the responsibility of both providing training to the soldiers at Ft Drum during a series of ramp-up events and providing the simulation architecture for the experiment itself scheduled for September 2000 at Ft Polk.  During this effort the Army fielded Army Battle Command System  (ABCS) version 6.0 to the 10th Mountain Division at Ft Drum.  The TSIU and PIU had the responsibility of providing stimulation to the brigade and battalion Command and Control (C2) Workstations (see Figure 5).  This requirement was made more difficult due to the fact that ABCS 6.0 was a change from primarily tactical message driven C2 workstations to Data Base driven C2 workstations.  Also the latest ABCS 6.0 software changes were arriving frequently from the Central Technical Support Facility (CTSF) at Ft Hood.  TSIU upgrades to support this effort included the implementation of USMTF 2000 and JVMF tactical messages and bit-oriented message processing.  The frequent changes to the ABCS system also resulted in on-site software changes to the TSIU.  Despite these challenges the DBST team was able to provide C2 workstation stimulation to allow individual and collective staff training to occur.  This effort continues with the delivery of subsequent ABCS versions.PEO Aviation SupportThe utility of the TSIU to the material development community was demonstrated by a recently completed effort for PEO Aviation.  In this effort, the TSIU was used with the Simulation Warfighting Parsing System (SWaPS) to support the interoperability of simulated systems played within the Interactive Tactical Engagement Management System (ITEMS) simulation, live aviation command posts, and Human-in-the-Loop (HIL) simulators.  This effort was started in 1997, with the implementation of a set of Variable Message Format (VMF) aviation messages in SWaPS and the implementation of an interface between the TSIU and Appliqué.  SWaPS was subsequently updated to support Joint VMF (JVMF) aviation messages, and a demonstration was planned in which the S3 (Operations) within a UH-60 C2 Aircraft would monitor a synthetic battle and direct simulated reconnaissance and attack Apache and Comanche aircraft from his Force XXI Brigade and Below (FBCB2) workstation.  ITEMS, SWaPS, and the TSIU were integrated on a DIS LAN, ITEMS and SWaPS exchanged digital messages in accordance with AWC-IDM (a proprietary aviation digital message format), and SWaPS and the TSIU exchanged tactical message data embedded within Signal PDUs in accordance with an interoperability specification.  The TSIU exchanged tactical messages with the FBCB2 via multicast.  Although the capability was not exercised, the simulated systems within ITEMS could also interoperate with other simulations that implement the AWC-IDM Digital Messages, including Commanche and Apache simulators and simulations such as ATCOM.  The demonstration scenario included Maneuver, Attack Operations, and Intel threads, and required the exchange of the JVMF aviation messages listed in Figure 6. Potential applications of this capability by PEO Aviation include:The evaluation of concepts for enhancements to existing aviation systems, such as the integration of the FBCB2 Embedded Battle Command (EBC) into the Apache and Comanche aircraft.The evaluation of aviation tactical message requirements for improved interoperability of aviation systems with other digitized command and control systems. The development and testing of command and control concepts and tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs) for aviation units with the enhanced systems and digital messaging capabilities. 4.5 3rd U.S. Army (ARCENT) Support. TSIU program involvement with warfighter training support to the 3rd U.S. Army (ARCENT) was driven by their receipt of a new Tactical Operations Center (TOC), called Lucky Main, in the winter of 1998.  ARCENT required a low cost, low footprint, leave behind, sustainment training capability that could provide a technical checkout of the new TOC, and support individual and staff collective training.  The SMDBL was given the mission to provide this capability.  Lucky Main requirements included not only Army C2 system stimulation but also Joint C2 system, such as the Global Command and Control System (GCCS).  New tactical messages that were developed to provide GCCS stimulation included OTH-Gold (JUNIT) and TADIL-A (Air picture).  Due to funding constraints and ARCENT’s desire to train and leave the entire simulation suite behind, the initial simulation architecture was limited to EADSIM and the TSIU.  Maneuver units, air, TBMs and sensors were played in EADSIM.  The TSIU provided the C2 workstation feeds to drive Lucky Main training at Ft McPherson and to stimulate the 513th Military Intelligence Brigade Analysis Control Element (ACE) stationed at Ft. Gordon Georgia.  This simulation architecture was used to provide training to three Lucky Main staff exercises in 1999 and 2000.  ARCENT is currently upgrading their simulation capability to include Joint Combined Arms Tactical Simulation (JCATS) to provide higher fidelity interactive maneuver unit capabilities for supporting ARCENT training.  TSIU support to ARCENT activities is shown in Figure 7.The TSIU was also used to support ARCENT in Operation Lucky Sentinel.  Lucky Sentinel is a CENTCOM sponsored, Joint and Coalition force exercise that occurs annually in the spring at Camp Doha in Kuwait.  The primary simulation driver for this event is the Joint Theater Level Simulation (JTLS).  The Joint Warfighting Center (JWFC) has primary responsibility for Lucky Sentinel simulation support execution.  For Lucky Sentinel, ARCENT desired the same degree of C2 workstation stimulation it has received during their quarterly training exercises at home station. As shown in the simulation architecture in Figure 8, information was passed between JTLS and EADSIM using HLA while the TSIU and EADSIM exchanged information using the DIS LAN.  TSIU C2 workstation stimulation included the Combined Operations and Intelligence Center (COIC), ARCENT ACE, CENTCOM TMD Cell, 1st Marine Expeditionary Force (MEF), 1st Cavalry Division, 9th Air Force Air Operations Center (AOC) and the XVIII Airborne Battlefield Coordination Detachment (BCD).5.  Lessons Learned    During the past several years and through the myriad of efforts and events that have been supported, the SMDBL and CRC have developed some lessons learned when applying the science of simulations and C2 stimulation to the art of training.  We don’t pretend to have discovered any new principles or profound insights but rather have confirmed the prudent application of common sense when participating in this arena.  Understand Warfighter Requirements.  This may well be the most difficult action to satisfy.  The warfighter can often articulate his overall training objectives or describe in general terms how his C2 processes work or how he would like to train, but generally either does not fully understand nor have the time to explain this in detail.  The key to this requirement is to get the warfighter to describe his command and control processes, with as much fidelity as possible.  Who and what generates the information?  Who controls the sources of this information generation capability?  Is the information processed?  Who processes the initial information?  How long does it take?  How is the information transmitted?  What formats?  What tactical boxes receive this information?  What do you do with the information?  These are the type questions that need to be asked in order to develop the appropriate simulation architecture along with the appropriate C2 stimulation.  Oftentimes the training audience does not know the answers to these questions.Provide Tailored Simulation/C2 Stimulation Capability.  Frequently when asked to describe his requirements a user will respond that his requirement is to “use Model X.”  This is not an accurate statement of his requirement, but instead reflects what has been done in the past.  This emphasizes the need for the exercise support team to understand the warfighter objectives and processes.  Given a good understanding of how the C2 processes work and what components need to be portrayed, the exercise support team can establish a set of candidate simulation/stimulation architectures.  The selection of the best candidate is an iterative process that must consider constraints such as model availability, funding, available equipment, and available personnel.  The options and the team recommend-ations are presented to the warfighter with an assessment of the tradeoffs and potential consequences/impacts on training objectives.  A good example of this is the use of a Stealth  display to portray a UAV instead of a high fidelity UAV sensor model.  The first option is much less expensive than the latter option.  The decision depends on objectives: do you want to examine sensor package performance or are you looking at UAV divert procedures between the Air Operations Center (AOC) and an Army Deep Operations Coordination Cell (DOCC).  Crawl, Walk, Run.  Before you can begin staff collective training the C2 workstation operators must understand and be able to operate their systems.  Before the operator can do this the C2 systems along with their internal and external connectivity must be working properly.  Too often we have seen the attempt to run prior to crawling.  Today’s C2 systems and processes are very complicated.  Time to conduct technical checkout of these systems is essential especially when new versions of application software are being fielded.  The ability for the simulation environment to generate test messages without the activation of the simulations or a data log greatly assists in the procedure.  Over time the TSIU developed the capability to manually generate and transmit tactical messages in order to assist in this effort.Operator Understanding.  Even when the technical systems are all working well the operator sometimes does not understand his system.  Typically, individual sustainment training is not conducted with a frequency that allows the operator to maintain proficiency with his system.  Everything can be done correctly in the simulation and stimulation world, and when the box does not “light up,” the simulation environment will be blamed first.  We have overcome this condition by developing internal C2 workstation expertise to check out the C2 system to determine the cause of the problem.  The cause of failure is often determined to be missing or improperly configured software or the failure to initialize/set-up the system correctly.  Without on-site C4I system expertise, the probability of overall training success is greatly diminished.Functional Threads.  Once an understanding of the warfighter C2 processes and workstations is determined, functional or thread diagrams are produced.  Thread diagrams augment the simulation architecture diagrams and are intended to provide a guide to the simulations, interfaces and the tactical workstation interactions.  The thread diagrams list what systems and message information the simulations will provide, what tactical messages the interface will provide and finally which C2 boxes will receive what tactical messages.  The thread diagrams are normally broken down into specific areas such as Early Warning, Intelligence, Blue Force Tracking, Red Force Tracking, and Air threads.  Thread diagrams can be tailored to meet specific training objectives such as Battle Damage Assessment or Fire Support Operations.  Figure 9 provides an example of a thread diagram for Early Warning.  These diagrams are used to assign responsibilities and ensure the correct technical handshakes between simulations, interfaces and the tactical C2 workstations.  Thread diagrams are also used to define communications and connectivity responsibilities between simulation and tactical communications organizations.Train and Maintain Current Situational Awareness.  During our support to the 32nd AAMDC they had to ensure that the C2 workstations being stimulated were not connected to their “real-world” situational awareness boxes.  When the first simulated red TBM launch showed up on their C2 boxes, there was great concern that this activity would be perceived as a real-world event.  We must be able to train operators and staffs while deployed.  We cannot afford duplicate boxes to conduct training while we maintain situational awareness.  Significant enhancements to the C4I systems will be required before this issue can be resolved.  6.  Current Development  The TSIU was originally developed in Ada, was DIS compliant, and supported mostly simulation to tactical communications.  When the requirement to upgrade the TSIU to be HLA compliant was levied, a decision was made to combine this upgrade with other pre-planned improvements such as the implementation of a more robust two-way communications framework, the addition of a comprehensive GUI, and support for reuse of DII COE and other common components.  The resulting Enhanced TSIU (ETSIU) is currently being developed as a series of builds during FY 2000 and 2001.  An object oriented development approach utilizing Rational CASE tools is being used to re-implement the TSIU in C++.  The ETSIU will have a JAVA-based GUI to ensure future ETSIU maintainability and expandability, as well as the flexibility to run on multiple platforms.  A Federation Object Model (FOM) agile HLA interface is being implemented using the Object Model Neutral Interface (OMNi) COTS product.  OMNi provides HLA integration and FOM mapping capabilities to allow the ETSIU to seamlessly integrate with a variety of HLA federations as needed for future exercises.  The ETSIU will support two-way communications between live and simulated forces, comprehensive message and database communications formats, manual communications injection/ control, multiple information parsing/ formatting/ delivery options, and data collection for After Action Review (AAR) support.  The TSIU program is also participating in ongoing C4I reference FOM and Simulation to C4I integration efforts within the community.  In 1999, the Deputy Under Secretary of the Army (Operations Research) and Director of Information Systems for Command, Control, Communications and Computers chartered a Simulation to C4I Interoperability (SIMCI) Integrated Product Team (IPT) to provide recommendations on Army level policy to the Army Model and Simulation Executive Council (AMSEC) for improving interoperability between the Models and Simulations (M&S) and C4I Domains (see Reference 1). The TSIU program is one of the participants in the Common Components Consortium sponsored in FY 2000 by the SIMCI IPT to assess reuse within simulations and simulation-C4I interface systems of common components, including the DII COE and Army Common components developed for use within C4I systems in accordance with the Joint Technical Architecture (JTA) (see Reference 2).  The initial focus of the consortium is to assess the utility and value-added of the DII COE Message Processor (CMP) within simulations and simulation-C4I interface systems to format and parse tactical messages.  The consortium members will integrate CMP into their systems, provide feedback to the IPT concerning its utility, and identify enhancements to the CMP Application Programming Interface (API) to facilitate utilization within the M&S domain.  References 3-5 provide discussions of some of the key concepts that are being addressed by the consortium.  One of the primary challenges for the ETSIU development effort is to continue to support the interoperability of legacy DIS simulations and C4I systems (e.g., ABCS 4.3) and also to support HLA-based exercises and the evolving next generation C4I systems (e.g., ABCS 6.x).  This requires support for multiple tactical message and protocol versions, multiple delivery means, and many other differences including fixed vs. dynamic addressing and network management schemes, message-based communications vs. database synchroniz-ation, and increasing sophistication in security measures and access constraints.  Requirements management is also an ETSIU development challenge as a result of the requirements volatility introduced by the evolving and dynamic nature of the next-generation C4I systems. Build 1 of the ETSIU, completed in May 2000, was focused on the architecture and its underlying infrastructure, the GUI, the DIS and HLA simulation interfaces, and a limited set of tactical messages.  The primary focus of Build 2, currently under development, is to extend the supported tactical message set to meet the TSIU Digital Battle Staff Trainer (DBST) application requirements.  The Build 2 ETSIU SOM (see Figure 10) includes non-persistent HLA interactions that support a variety of Maneuver, Intelligence, Air Defense, Fire Support, and Combat Service Support tactical messages for legacy and evolving C4I systems.  The ETSIU also provides the ability to interoperate with DIS simulations using pseudo messages that correspond to these HLA interactions.  Additional SOM interactions and objects as well as additional tactical message protocols, tactical messages, and other tactical communications mechanisms (e.g., database synchronization and updates) will be added in subsequent builds, and parallel DIS capabilities will continue to be provided.  The ETSIU architecture (Figure 11) and GUI are designed to define, configure, integrate/test, and execute and monitor scenarios consisting of simulation architectures, tactical architectures, and communications threads. ETSIU communications threads define live/ simulated communications originators and recipients, input and output formats, data mapping/translation requirements, and delivery means.  Scenarios can be archived, edited, and reused to minimize configuration and setup time for future applications.  The ETSIU will be able to import and use tactical data products (address books, UTO, etc.) during scenario development, and it will interact with the ABCS 6.x Command and Control Registry (C2R) and Distributed Computing Environment (DCE) to support dynamic host addressing.  The ETSIU will provide the capability for the operator to generate and control the transmission of individual messages (or sequences of messages) and data for testing or for insertion into analytical or training exercises.  ETSIU inputs and outputs will be recorded to support playback and AAR.  When complete, the ETSIU will provide the capability to support interoperability of legacy and evolving C4I systems with tactical wargaming and planning as well as training and analytical simulations, in DIS or HLA based exercises, providing robust training and analysis experiment and exercise support capabilities.7.  Potential Development Potential enhancements that have not been allocated to an ETSIU build are identified, evaluated, prioritized, and tracked as candidate Preplanned Product Improvements (PPI).  Some of the potential enhancements that are under evaluation for the ETSIU include the implementation of database initialization and synchronization/updates for the Joint Common Data Base (JCDB) and other Battlefield Functional Area (BFA) databases (e.g., ASAS Database (ASCDB)), pursuit of enhanced DII COE compliance, and implementation of tactical communications trans-lations to support the interoperability of legacy and new generations of C4I systems as well as the interoperability of C4I systems across the services and in Joint and Combined operations.  Other potential enhancements have been identified but do not yet have ongoing evaluations or prototype activities. Some of these ETSIU PPI candidates include:The expansion of the SOM to support transmission and receipt of digital orders using a type of Battle Management Language (e.g., Command and Control Simulation Interface Language (CCSIL), BML, or C2DIFF), possibly with voice-to-digital translation.The exchange and execution of exercise control commands and data such as start, stop, pause, exercise time, exercise time advance rate, and live/simulation participant status.The implementation of the capability to support training events that include the identification and tracing/reporting of information operations effects.Support for alternative communications sources/ destinations (e.g., the tactical internet) and means (e.g., XML).Increased capabilities to support communications with deployed units using tactical communications equipment.Support for transmission of intelligence sensor data including audio, video, radar, and infrared data to C4I systems.Support for injection of the effects of communications latencies and degradation.  8.  SummaryThe purpose of this paper was to provide insight into the history, applications, and future plans for the TSIU program.  The TSIU origin in support of FP TOC operations was discussed, the guiding development principles and goals were summarized, and selected applications and the resulting C2 stimulation lessons learned were reviewed.  The TSIU provides a low cost, leave behind sustainment training capability which has been successfully used to meet a variety of exercise, experiments and training activities over the past six years.  The lessons learned from these activities are continually applied to new efforts including the ongoing ETSIU development.  The ETSIU will provide the warfighter with a more robust, user friendly, flexible and capable product.9.  References [1]	Simulation to C4I Interoperability Integrated Product Team,  HYPERLINK http://www.simci.org http://www.simci.org, 2000.[2]	Joint Technical Architecture, Version 3.1, Defense Information Systems Agency,  HYPERLINK http://www-jta.itsi.disa.mil http://www-jta.itsi.disa.mil, 31 March 2000.[3]	Newcomb, M., Gustafson J., and Nguyen, P.:   “The WARSIM 2000 C4I Interface”, Paper 99F-SIW-036, 1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1999. [4] 	Hieb, M.R. Timian, D.H., Glass, J., and Staver, M.J.:  “Using Standard C4I Components to Interface to Simulations”, Paper 98F-SIW-035, 1999 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1999.[5] 	Hieb, M.R. and Staver, M.J.:  “The Army’s Approach to Modeling and Simulation Standards for C4I Interfaces”, Paper 98F-SIW-259, 1998 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1998.Author BiographiesJohn Anderson is the Program Manager for the TSIU Program at Coleman Research Corporation.  He retired as a LTC after twenty years active duty with the U.S. Army.  He spent most of his Army career working in Brigade and below assignments.  His focus for the past six years has been on advanced operator and staff training technologies.  He has a Master’s Degree in Operations Research from Georgia Tech and a Master’s in Business Administration from the Florida Institute of Technology.Gene Hardin is the Software Development Manager for the TSIU Program at Coleman Research Corporation.  He has over 25 years of experience with DOD and NASA software applications and software intensive systems, with emphasis on software development and Software Process Improvement (SPI), Independent Software Verification and Validation (IV&V), Software Quality Assurance and testing, and simulation Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A).  He has a Masters Degree in Mathematics from the University of Tennessee.  Tonya McCree Anderson is an Operations Research Analyst in the Exercise and Training Division of the Space and Missile Defense Battle Lab (SMDBL) in Huntsville, Alabama.  She is currently a member of the TSIU software development team with 11 years of experience in Simulation and Modeling.  Ms. Anderson has an extensive background in using and/or integrating SMDBL’s computer simulations for both analytical and training functions.  Ms. Anderson has a Bachelor of Science degree in Computer Science from Alabama A&M University and is near completion of a Master of Science degree in Management with a concentration in Acquisition from the Florida Institute of Technology. EMBED Word.Picture.8   EMBED Word.Picture.8  