JCMMS: Domain Knowledge for Developing Military ModelsKen PorterScience Applications International Corporation12479 Research Parkway Orlando, FL 32826407-306-3186porterk@saic.comABSTRACT:  Developed as part of the Joint Simulation System program, the Joint Conceptual Model of the Mission Space (JCMMS) is an extensive library of domain knowledge that supports the implementation and validation of military mission space models.  It contains over 1,900 Formalized Data Products covering nearly all aspects of joint, land, air, sea, amphibious, and intelligence operations.  The JCMMS is available today, on-line at  HYPERLINK http://cmms.jsims.mil http://cmms.jsims.mil.This paper provides an overview of the JCMMS for simulation engineers and researchers.  The JCMMS development approach is explained to help users understand its strengths and weaknesses.  The acquired knowledge is documented in structured, text-based Formalized Data Products that describe the key modeling characteristics of organizations, processes, information items, communications, equipment, equipment interactions, the physical environment, and the civil environment.In developing the JCMMS, lessons were learned about conceptual modeling tools and techniques, and managing collaboration across more than a dozen diverse programs. The paper concludes with a glimpse of future work including integration with other M&S knowledge repositories.Keywords:JCMMS, CMMS, conceptual model, knowledge acquisition, formalized data product, reuse.JCMMS, The JSIMS Contribution To The CMMSThe Joint Conceptual Model of the Mission Space (JCMMS) is an extensive set of conceptual models developed by the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS), in coordination with the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) Conceptual Model of the Mission Space (CMMS).  This paper describes the JCMMS contents, process, and lessons learned.BackgroundThe primary purpose of JSIMS is to support ready forces by providing realistic, joint, military training for all types of missions. JSIMS connects to both command, control, communications, computers, and intelligence (C4I) functions and field equipment while supporting Joint, Service, and other agency training, education, doctrine development and mission rehearsal activities.[1]The JCMMS provides authoritative descriptions of the joint mission space for subsequent development and representation in JSIMS.[2]  In the terminology of the JSIMS Enterprise (the multiple-program team of JSIMS developers), these descriptions are called “conceptual models” of the mission space.  This is consistent with Objective 1-2 of the Department of Defense (DoD) Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Master Plan, which states:‘Develop a conceptual model of the mission space for each DoD mission area to provide a common basis for development of consistent and authoritative M&S representations.’[3]The mission space is the total of all missions an organization may be expected to perform.  The joint mission space encompasses all aspects of modern warfare. Conceptual models provide the domain knowledge for implementing simulated entities in software.  The JCMMS consists mainly of domain knowledge documents, called Formalized Data Products (FDPs) by the JSIMS Enterprise.  FDPs describe domain topics of interest for simulation design and implementation.  “Because JSIMS development is based on mission space knowledge captured in the JCMMS, a requirement to represent a part of the mission space in JSIMS implies a corresponding requirement for the JCMMS to describe that part of the mission space.  It follows that the JCMMS will describe all aspects of the mission space to be represented in JSIMS, including organizations, processes, information flow, and equipment /material.”[4]  According to the JCMMS development plan, its conceptual modeling scope includes:War and military operations other than war at the strategic, operational, and tactical levels.All phases of a unified action (mobilization, deployment, employment, sustainment, and redeployment).U.S. allied, and coalition forces, opposing forces, and neutral forces, military and non-military, in the Joint area of operations/interest.[2]The JCMMS goal of representing the mission space in a format independent of its implementation supports JSIMS object oriented software process,[5] and promotes reuse.  The goal of this paper is to promote the reuse of JCMMS products and process lessons learned.ApproachCharacteristics of the JCMMS development approach are an integrated product team, coordination with DMSO objectives, document based FDPs, and focus on interactions that cross developer boundaries.Integrated Product Team.  The current JCMMS was developed by a JSIMS Integrated Product Team (IPT) comprised of nine development agents and a dozen executive agents.  This diverse IPT was necessary to ensure adequate and authoritative representation of the entire joint mission space.  IPT responsibilities were organized by program domains.  “For the development of JSIMS, the mission space has been divided into areas of responsibility called ‘domains.’ JCMMS development domains are constituted by Service responsibilities, not geospatial boundaries. Associated with each domain is a JSIMS Executive Agent (EA) who is responsible for providing conceptual models of that domain. For example, the US Army is the JSIMS EA for the Land domain. In practice, the JSIMS EAs typically delegate the conceptual modeling task to a JSIMS Development Agent (DA).”[1]  The DA typically contracts a multi-company team to perform knowledge acquisition.  These Service and contractual responsibilities of the EAs and DAs were the basis for coordination within the JCMMS IPT.DMSO Coordination.  An important reuse consideration is for FDPs to be independent of the implementation.  While the first priority for each DA was to meet their own program knowledge acquisition (KA) needs in a cost effective manner, several measures were taken to promote reuse.  JCMMS products comply with CMMS standards and support its objectives, as summarized by DMSO: “CMMS is:  A disciplined procedure by which the simulation developer is systematically informed about the real world problem to be synthesized.  A set of information standards the simulation subject matter expert employs to communicate with and obtains feedback from the military operations subject matter expert.  The real world, military operations basis for subsequent, simulation-specific analysis, design, and implementation, and eventually verification, validation, and accreditation/certification.  A singular means for establishing re-use opportunities in the eventual simulation implementation by identifying commonality in the relevant real world activities.  And A library of re-usable conceptual models for simulation development.”[6]Formalized Data Products.  The JCMMS FDPs:Establish a base of mission space knowledge for developing JSIMS,Support JSIMS Enterprise object-oriented analysis and design, andProvide a basis for Verification, Validation and Accreditation of JSIMS.The term FDP is derived from the DMSO CMMS Technical Framework, which defines formalized data as ‘structured text descriptions with supporting diagrams.’  An FDP is a structured text description, with supporting diagrams, of a specific mission space concept.[2]Cross Development Agent Interactions.  Interactions between entities in the battlespace, such as shooting, sensing, and communicating, drive the information flow to high-level commanders.  Accurate descriptions of real-world battlespace interactions are needed to develop accurate training simulations.  While a DA’s internal development process ensures the accuracy of their descriptions from their Service perspective, it was anticipated that interactions that crossed the boundaries of DA conceptual modeling responsibilities would require coordination at the IPT level.The emphasis of the JCMMS developers, at the IPT level, was to promote the consistency and comprehensiveness of “cross-DA” interactions (XDIs) in the battlespace.  Consistency is the degree to which the various descriptions in JCMMS are in agreement or logical coherence among themselves.  Comprehensiveness is the degree to which the JCMMS describes all the Joint mission space needed for JSIMS intended uses.DAs implement their conceptual modeling to meet program prerogatives, satisfying their simulation engineers for their part of the battlespace.  At the IPT level, it was only necessary to focus on the seams between DA areas of responsibility, i.e., the cross-DA interactions, to ensure modeling integrity for the whole JCMMS.  For example, the Air DA and Land DA each have a part in describing close air support (CAS) operations.  While each DA describes their part, they must coordinate details to ensure the whole CAS operation is portrayed and mutual interactions are clear.  Development ProcessThe JCMMS development process had three parts: formalizing domain knowledge, integrating FDPs into a common conceptual model, and validating the conceptual model.  This was documented in the JCMMS Development Plan,[2] which is analogous to a software development plan as a tool to manage the development process.  Figure 2 shows a summary flow chart of the development process.Formalizing Domain KnowledgeA rule of thumb for partitioning development was the Service that owned an equipment item or organization would create the conceptual models (FDPs) for that equipment item or organization.  This rule arises from the collaborative agreements between the Services for JSIMS development.  The details necessary to coordinate development across the JSIMS Enterprise were defined in a document called the JSIMS Breakout Analysis Spreadsheet (JBASS).[7]  The JBASS (Figure 2, top) delineated which EA or DA was responsible for knowledge acquisition, conceptual modeling, code implementation, and validation of each battlespace entity and interaction.  Development was organized into three primary builds, with related topics synchronized by builds in the JBASS.  A companion JBASS Resolution Brief outlined the degree of fidelity (modeled complexity) and resolution (granularity) planned for each type of model.  In some cases, simpler models in early builds were replaced by more complex or automated ones in later builds.  Although it was a necessary planning step, creating the JBASS proved challenging even for a highly skilled team of military and simulation experts.The main effort was to acquire and document the domain knowledge needed for JSIMS development (Figure 2, top process rectangle).  For the JCMMS IPT, this domain knowledge formalization was performed largely by subject matter experts (SMEs), most of whom were former military officers, and supported by M&S engineers.  The SMEs gathered documentation from authoritative sources based on service or agency inputs, domain research, and their own experience.  The Universal Joint Task List[8] and Service specific tasks lists[9,10,11] provided a basis for understanding tasks to be trained using JSIMS, which helped identify the topics for JCMMS modeling.  Then SMEs wrote structured documents describing the simulation relevant aspects of those topics. The development artifacts were the FDPs and a list of the cross-DA interactions (XDIs).  At the end of each build, authors cross-reviewed and coordinated their descriptions to eliminate potential gaps in describing the mission space that might otherwise occur at the “seams” of the domains.  Then the DAs each made lists of cross-DA references for each FDP that were summed into a comprehensive IPT master XDI List.  At the end of three builds, the XDI List had over 6,000 cross-DA interactions and was still growing.FDP IntegrationIt was recognized early on that making a cohesive conceptual model would require IPT-level focus on the “seams” at the edges of the DA domains.  As with integration of software, this was expected to require some iteration and adjustments. To facilitate FDP integration (Figure 2, 2nd box under I&D Contractor), the FDP standard templates have tables for XDI reference information.  For example, in the real world an intelligence group sends a message to a Land group.  The Intel DA’s FDP describes generating and transmitting a defined message, and the Land DA’s FDP describes receiving and processing or reacting to that message.  Integration of FDPs is a review of defined interactions to ensure they are consistent and complete across the two FDPs involved in that interaction.JCMMS integration was based on the master XDI List. XDI information was reviewed in the FDPs.  Comments on potential discrepancies were compiled into reports for each authoring DA, who then responded with either clarifications or remediation plans for those FDPs.Several other steps taken to ensure consistency were also considered part of the JCMMS integration effort.  The XDIs were reviewed at the end of each build by the DA authors in an series of one-on-one meetings that spanned 3 or 4 days.  They updated the XDI List, and coordinated parts of related FDPs to ensure the mission space was described consistently and completely.JCMMS ValidationJCMMS validation was part of an overall approach to validate JSIMS, as described in the JSIMS Validation Plan.  The concept was to validate the JCMMS, then Figure 2.  JCMMS Development Process.validate the JSIMS implementation based on the validated JCMMS.  There has been an increasing emphasis on validation of training simulations, and the JSIMS two step validation is a relatively formal approach.  Like the JCMMS development process, validation was performed at both Service and Joint levels, in accordance with the DoD VV&A recommended practices.[12]Figure 3.1.  FDP Domain TopicsThe Joint Warfighting Center (JWFC), as Joint EA, orchestrated a review of the FDPs across Services at the major command level.  FDPs were validated at the end of each build (Figure 2, process box under JWFC).  Like other efforts at the IPT level, validation and verification focused on cross-DA interactions.JCMMS ContentsThe JCMMS baseline[13] contains 1,903 descriptive FDPs and a master XDI List.  Domain experts and modelers from several dozen participating JSIMS EAs and DAs collaborated for three years to create it.  This considerable investment in conceptual modeling produced a wealth of reusable domain knowledge for modeling and simulation engineers. Domain TopicsThe descriptive FDPs cover the span of US military command and control, from the National Command Authorities to individual fighting units.  As shown in Figure 3.1, FDP topics include:Processes for planning, communicating, executing, monitoring, and assessing military operations with emphasis on the upper echelon and joint task force levels.  There are 571 Process FDPs.Organizations of the four services from weapon teams through major commands to the CINC level.  There are 557 Organization FDPs.Equipment used to sense, destroy, defend, communicate, and supply, including weapon systems from small arms to heavy armor, bombs to bombers, and torpedoes to carrier battle groups.  There are 545 Equipment FDPs.Information items and flows between commanders, subordinates, liaisons, and intelligence agencies.  There are 198 Information Item FDPs, 24 Communication FDPs, and 1 Liaison FDP.Descriptions of common battlespace interactions: sensors and signatures, weapons and damage, communications, and logistics.  There are 4 Common Equipment Interaction FDPs.Definition of the civil environment and natural environment factors affecting military operations.  The are 2 Civil Environment FDPs and 1 Natural Environmental Factors FDP.Many FDPs are organized into topical sets, with several descriptive FDPs bundled to describe the organization, processes, and equipment of a battlespace element.  Metadata is data about data, such as the length of a data record.  A Metadata FDP is used to bundle one or more descriptive FDPs into a set, containing their common metadata such as author and version history.  There are 806 Metadata FDPs, in addition to the 1,903 descriptive FDPs..XDI ListThe XDI List is a key part of the JCMMS.  Each descriptive FDP template has certain elements tagged as XDI-related.  This XDI information is contained in tables within the FDPs and also recorded in an external list.  The master XDI List is a compilation of all the XDIs from the FDP tables.  The XDI List baseline contains 5,159 interactions:2,113 equipment-to-equipment interactions, consisting of:755 detection interactions.614 damage interactions.304 communications interactions.416 logistics interactions.2,193 process input-output interactions.792 messages.132 organizational (assigned-to, suborganization-of) relationships.About 40% of the FDPs contain XDIs.  Since the definition of XDIs is based on program modeling responsibilities, not physical battlespace domains, the number of XDIs in the JCMMS composite model is a function of the number of DAs and their sizes.  The JCMMS IPT had nine authoring DAs with 2 to 55 people each, with the Land DA (WARSIM) producing about half the FDPs.[14]  Virtually all the equipment items have common battlespace XDIs, mainly sensors and weapons.DeploymentThe JCMMS is deployed as documents for internal program use, and through on-line repositories.  The CMMS Toolset is used to host the JCMMS repository in its current form.  (At the time of this writing, it was planned for the JCMMS to become part of the new DMSO Modeling and Simulation Information Analysis Center (MSIAC).[15])FDP DocumentsJCMMS knowledge is most commonly deployed as softcopy documents, shared among the development team.  Local shared drives and e-mail lists provide easy distribution.  Softcopy of FDP tables can be readily translated into spreadsheets for analysis.  FDB as Interim RepositoryThe first on-line repository, called the Functional Description of the Battlespace (FDB),  was established by the US Army Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation Command to support conceptual modeling by the Warfighters’ Simulation (WARSIM) program (the JSIMS Land DA).[16]  When JCMMS development began, the FDB repository was extended to support JCMMS development with web-based KA development tools.  The FDB supports document posting, review comments databases and e-mail reflectors, and on-line document configuration management, status, and distribution.  These capabilities were customized to suit the JCMMS development process, which proved to be a highly effective re-use of this WARSIM program resource.  Because about half of the JCMMS FDPs were authored by WARSIM, shared use of the FDB avoided duplicate document storage and distribution costs to the Government. JCMMS On-LineAs the JCMMS effort matured, the CMMS Toolset[17] became available and the JCMMS was one of its first users.  The CMMS Toolset is designed to support a complete on-line development cycle, with specialized capabilities for developers, examiners, sponsors, and users.  Domain knowledge may be searched, analyzed, and downloaded.  The analysis tools allow users to sift thorough large sets of domain knowledge in ways important for simulation development.  These include cross-domain interaction analysis and traversing behavioral threads and organizational hierarchies through the knowledge base.The CMMS Toolset provides excellent support for document-based FDPs in the “native” library.  It can search the contents of all the FDPs, about a gigabyte of documents, in a few seconds.  More complex searching provides filtering to focus on characteristics of key terms in the FDP knowledge base.  Searches are transacted through a web site, providing a ranked lists of hyperlinks to the most relevant FDP documents.  This web-based deployment of the JCMMS provides easy access to authoritative domain knowledge for JSIMS and other registered M&S developers.  Lessons LearnedProduct and Process LessonsSeveral product and process techniques proved helpful in developing the JCMMS.Object Oriented vs. Document-based Conceptual Modeling.  At the start of the JSIMS Enterprise there was strong interest in an object oriented (OO) approach for JCMMS development.  An OO modeling tool was selected and guidelines were developed for creating models in Unified Modeling Language (UML) format.  However, DAs that started KA before the JSIMS Enterprise was established already had their own document-based KA standards.  Some thought SMEs might find OO modeling more difficult than writing structured documents.  These schedule and legacy considerations caused the IPT to forego the OO approach in favor of a document-based approach.  FDP standard templates were developed to describe organizations, processes, information, communications and equipment.  The EAs and DAs collaborated to develop five FDP standard templates, starting from existing KA formats to minimize the impact on their current processes.  KA Documents.  Documents with text and graphics served well to capture the formalized knowledge.  Although the FDP standard templates also allow multimedia elements to be included, only text and graphics were used.  The FDPs were easy for SMEs to create and for engineers to read and analyze.The JCMMS FDP templates provided structure with sufficient flexibility to serve the needs of JSIMS Enterprise and DA development processes.  FDP standard templates were designed to accommodate variations in conceptual modeling techniques by different DAs.  An illustrative example was the Metadata template.[2]  Some DAs tracked FDP metadata, such as configuration information and revision history, on an individual FDP basis.  Other DAs tracked configuration in groups, with one set of metadata for several related FDPs.  Keeping the metadata separate from domain descriptive data provided the flexibility to accommodate programs contributing FDPs individually or in configured sets.In the Process template,[2] a process could be described in either a single or dual thread.  Land processes were already using a format with separate sections for planning and execution sub-processes.  The JCMMS Process template accommodated this by formalizing a process as a set of steps, or several sub-processes each with its own set of steps.  Process inputs and outputs are described at either the process or step level.  However, the cross-DA inputs and outputs are always included in the formalized I/O tables to support IPT-wide domain knowledge integration.Initially the FDP templates included information about the XDIs, such as references for other-DA process inputs and outputs, within the documents.  This proved too unwieldy, since initially many XDIs involved documents that had not yet been created by the other DA involved.  Changing the process to maintain explicit XDI cross-references in a separate database made XDI updates much less complicated.Standards and Tools.  While documents work well for human-to-human information transfer, even minor format excursions may impede automated processing.   An example is the phrase “See below” in an FDP table instead of a cross-reference ID – easy for people to interpret but not meaningful when translated into database form.  The Knowledge Acquisition Tool (KAT) developed by Dynamics Research Corporation is a tool that helps SMEs create FDPs.[18]  The KAT implements template rules to create documents that are fully compliant with standards.  KAT FDPs are free of formatting errors, making them easily processed.  The Air and Space DA adopted the KAT to be their primary FDP development tool.  But as with all prototype tools, legacy process factors impacted user acceptance.  KAT capabilities such as automated field entry and error checking require FDP data to be entered into the tool prior to new FDP production.  For some DAs, the cost of back-filling this data exceeded the immediate benefits by the time KAT was fielded.Emphasis on Command and Control.  Since JSIMS will be used primarily for staff training at upper echelons, where information management is a key skill, the JCMMS must provide thorough coverage of command and control (C2) topics.  There are several benefits from this emphasis.  A minor C2 flaw is likely to be observed by the training audience, so accuracy of C2 modeling is critical.  Also, the emphasis on C2 was cost-effective for educating simulation engineers about the joint operations domain.  Engineers with physics backgrounds readily understand physics-based equipment interactions, but often have little or no background in the military mission space.  The JCMMS IPT emphasis on C2 helps M&S engineers understand the critical control, support, and information relationships that must be represented.It was fortunate that standards for organizations, processes, information, and communications were sufficient to describe C2 topics.  These standards were quickly defined and served JCMMS development well without changes.  But it proved difficult to get consensus on the details of equipment FDP templates.  Rather than having a specific FDP template for all equipment, there was a process for developing templates for equipment as needed and sharing these common representation templates among DAs.  This process was hardly used, since DAs had different notions of the resolution, fidelity, and specific characteristics needed in their equipment FDPs.Representing Equipment InteractionsA JCMMS goal was to document all significant interactions in the battlespace.  Documenting these discretely worked well for information flow and C2 relationships, but proved unwieldy for equipment interactions.  Since most battlefield equipment can sense, shoot, and communicate, trying to formalize these as individual equipment item-to-item interactions becomes a non-scalable combinatorial explosion of reference linkages.[1]  Instead, the JCMMS generically describes each basic type of equipment interaction in a common interaction FDP, which are simply referenced by the equipment FDPs that participate in the interaction.  Each equipment FDP provides specific parameters to fully describe the interaction, such as sensor signatures and weapon ranges.  By decoupling the myriad of equipment item-to-item cross-references into a centralized reference scheme, the equipment interaction modeling scale factor was reduced from factorial order to a linear, workable solution.   Collaboration LessonsCollaboration in a large multi-program IPT environment required flexible timing, minimal intrusion into internal processes, review at multiple levels, and ITP development metadata standards.Formal Build Process.  At the IPT level, JCMMS development was partitioned into formal builds, synchronized with JSIMS development needs.  Each JSIMS Enterprise build was sub-divided within the JCMMS IPT into micro-builds to further partition the effort. The finer intervals could synchronize better with DA internal milestones and programmatic changes. Cross-DA Interactions.  The JSIMS Enterprise was a kind of federated development effort, and it was essential to have a mutual understanding of responsibilities.  The JCMMS IPT decided to focus IPT-level collaboration in conceptual modeling almost exclusively on cross-DA interactions (XDIs).  This ensured adequate linkage at DA boundaries, but had minimal impact on DA internal development processes.  Multi-level Review.  A helpful element of the product review process was its hierarchy of Service and cross-DA validation and verification efforts.  Review responsibilities were federated based on the principle of cross-DA interactions, with each EA providing Service V&V, then the JSIMS Enterprise V&V team reviewing mainly the cross-Service and joint associations (i.e., the XDIs).  This provided thorough review of the FDPs from both DA domain and composite JCMMS perspectives.  Standards for Multi-Program Process Collaboration.  In addition to templates for the document-based FDPs, we found it necessary to standardize formats for exchanging and tracking development metadata such as review comments, configuration changes, and cross-DA interaction data.  The JSIMS Enterprise standard office suite (Microsoft Office 97[19]) has great collaboration capabilities, but collaboration inevitably required a standard format.  In contrast to the FDP formats developed by IPT teams, office suite collaboration formats were usually established by the initial creator of that data.  One significant exception to ad-hoc collaboration formats was the development of a common IPT process data tracking mechanism.  FDP metadata, review comments, and IPT process status were initially tracked separately.  By the end of the second build, these were merged into a single IPT master document.  We found a database best suited for keeping the master data, but spreadsheet are the lingua franca for management data.  It was highly effective to use MS Office 97 automatic translation between database and spreadsheet formats to distribute, revise, collect, and collate the FDP development data.  Future WorkDeploying the JCMMS Common DatabaseAs previously discussed, the initial JCMMS repository did not fully utilize the capabilities of the CMMS Toolset.  However, prototype efforts demonstrated the feasibility of converting the FDPs into a Toolset database.  Deploying the JCMMS in the latest version of the CMMS Toolset will provide several benefits to the M&S community.  “When fully deployed the CMMS Toolset will greatly facilitate the effective and efficient development and reuse of MSM [mission space model] data that reflects the warfighters view of the mission space.  Moreover, the CMMS can inform the simulation developer as to valid and authoritative model specifications and present a schema for MSM construction.  Ultimately, however, the CMMS will only be as valuable or reliable as the MSMs that it consists of.”[20]The CMMS Toolset promotes developing those high quality models.  Its analytic tools can be used to integrate document-based FDPs in a formal manner, similar to integrating UML-based models within a commercial CASE tool.  Expanded Domain TopicsWhile the JCMMS IPT created nearly all the FDPs originally envisioned and more, there is still work to be done.  JSIMS follow-on Full Operational Capability (FOC) development is anticipated to expand the JCMMS into greater command and control automation, special operations, transportation and logistics, and operations other than war.AcknowledgementsThis paper describes the work of many people.  Special thanks goes to Peter Berggren (Science Applications International Corporation - SAIC), and Lt. Col. Harry Conley (USAF) the first co-Leads of the JCMMS IPT.  Subsequent JCMMS IPT leadership was provided by LTC George Stone (US Army), LCDR Manuel Ordonez (US Navy), Steve Risner, and Bob Cook (both SAIC), and Jack Howell (MATCOM2).  David Blanchard (SAIC) provided technical leadership and coordination along with the author.  JCMMS development was coordinated by the leads from the participating JSIMS DAs and EAs: from the National Air and Space Model program Paul Driscoll (Paragon Technologies, Inc.), Larry O’Brien, Cliff Krieger, and Dave Payne (Dynamics Research Corporation - DRC); from the JSIMS-Maritime program Calvin Thomas; from the US Marine Corps effort Jeff Barron and Sarah Johnson (MITRE); from the WARSIM 2000 program LTC Phil May and MAJ Frank Rhinesmith (both US Army), Lee Lacy, Harry Rothmann, Dan Sagan and Ed Kersey (all DRC); from the WARSIM Intelligence Module program Ed Jacques and Bruce Galloway (Veridian); from the Defense Intelligence Agency effort Mark Edmundson and Lt. Col. Craig Goheen (USAF); from the National Reconnaissance Office effort Basil Skordinski; from the National Security Agency effort David Wing (SAIC), from DMSO Jack Sheehan and Furman Haddix (ARL – UT Austin), Mike Loesekann (SAIC), Tom Johnson, Bob Might, and Mike Metz (all Innovative Management Concepts, Inc.); from the JSIMS Joint Program Office, Anita Zabek, Joe Noble, and Hugh Kelley (all MITRE); and from US Joint Forces  Command, Joint Warfighting Center, Rick Corn, Skip Driggs, Lavonne Barnett, Dan Baltrus, and Buzz Geiger (all Cubic Corporation).  Extraordinary effort by the dozens of additional domain experts and conceptual modelers in these programs was essential in creating the JCMMS.  May their efforts help tomorrow’s warfighters train as they fight, using JSIMS and other advanced simulations built from these conceptual models.References[1] Joint Simulation System: “System Design Description (SSDD) For Joint Simulation System (JSIMS)”, 9 June 2000.[2] Joint Simulation System: “Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) Joint Conceptual Model Of The Mission Space (JCMMS) Development Plan (JDP)” DAL No. DE08, Version 2.0, 12 February 1999.[3] Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Technology: “Department Of Defense Modeling And Simulation (M&S) Master Plan,” October 1995. ( HYPERLINK "http://www.dmso.mil/documents/policy/msmp/" http://www.dmso.mil/documents/policy/msmp/)[4] S. Risner, K. Porter, L. Lacy, L. O’Brien, and G. Kollmorgen: “Conceptual Modeling in the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS)” (paper 98F-SIW-147), Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 14-18, 1998.[5] F. Haddix, J. Sheehan, and P. Texel: “Just-In-Time Use of Knowledge Products for Simulation Developers” (paper 99S-SIW-183), Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 14-19, 1999.[6] J. Sheehan, T. Prosser, H. Conley, G. Stone, K. Yentz, and J. Morrow: “Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS): Basic Concepts, Advanced Techniques, and Pragmatic Examples” (paper 98S-SIW-127), Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 9-13, 1998.[7]  Joint Simulation System: “JSIMS Breakout Analysis Spreadsheet” version 0.4.[8] Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff: “Universal Joint Task List,” CJSCM 3500.04A ver. 3.0, 13 September 1996.[9] Naval Doctrine Command: “Naval Tactical Task List”, Version 1.1, 30 September 1996.[10] U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command: “DA PAM 11-XX, Army Universal Task List,” 14 March 1996.[11] U.S. Air Force: “U.S. Air Force Task List at the Tactical Level of War,” 4 April 1997.[12] U.S. Department of Defense: “DoD Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) Recommended Practices Guide (RPG),” DMSO home page, November 1996.[13] Joint Simulation System, JCMMS Integrated Product Team: “JCMMS 990908,” version 1.01, 08 September 1999.[14] D. Sagan, D. Kersey, and P. May: “Conceptual Modeling Lessons Learned from WARSIM 2000” (paper 00S-SIW-052), Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 26-31, 2000.[15] Modeling and Simulation Information Analysis Center (MSIAC) located on the web at  HYPERLINK "http://www.dmso.mil/portals/msiac.html" http://www.dmso.mil/portals/msiac.html[16] B. Pettitt, F. Rhinesmith, and W. Milks:” The Functional Description Of The Battlespace” (paper 97S-SIW-075), Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 3-7, 1997.[17] T. Johnson: “Mission Space Model Development, Reuse and the Conceptual Models of the Mission Space Toolset”  (paper 98S-SIW-155), Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 9-13, 1998. [18] C. Tuttle, L. Lacy, B. Levine, L. O’Brien, and J. Sheehan: “Knowledge Acquisition Tool - Supporting the Development of a Knowledge Base” (paper 8TH-CGF-021), 8th CGF-BR Proceedings, May 11-13, 1999.[19] Office 97 is a copyrighted product of the Microsoft Corporation, One Microsoft Way, Redmond, Washington 98052-6399 U.S.A. [20] T. Johnson and R. Might: “Requirements Analysis, Mission Space Models, and the CMMS: What’s This All About?” M&S Journal Online, vol. 1 issue 1, Fall 1999 ( HYPERLINK http://www.msiac.dmso.mil/journal/cmms11.html http://www.msiac.dmso.mil/journal/cmms11.html). Author BiographyKEN PORTER is a Senior Systems Software Engineer with Science Applications International Corporation, Space and Defense Group in Orlando, FL.  He served as process lead, coordinating conceptual modeling and integration for the JCMMS IPT, as part of the JSIMS Integration and Development Contractor team lead by TRW.  Prior to JSIMS, Mr. Porter was with Lockheed Martin on the WARSIM program, and led cognitive modeling R&D for command and control automation.  He has 20 years experience developing hardware, software, and systems solutions for U.S. Government customers, with R&D experience in artificial intelligence applications for design, diagnosis, and behavior modeling.