Applied Information Warfare Within A Simulation InfrastructurePatrick H. GetchellElizabeth T. ParkARINC, Incorporated2551 Riva RoadAnnapolis, MD  21401410-266-4528pgetchel@arinc.combpark@arinc.comKeywords:Information Operations, Information Warfare, C4ISR, Intelligence,Distributed Simulation, Training ABSTRACT: The integration of Information Warfare (IW) into modern warfare strategies and processes is well underway. In order to provide the warfighter with the ability to train, assess, and develop courses of action, the modeling and simulation community must provide for the representation of IW and its effects. Past and present models and simulations allow for the insertion of sensors into the battlespace, yet there is little exploitable information. It is also possible to incorporate jamming platforms, Special Forces teams and precision guided munitions that can all target the opponent's communications infrastructure. However, there is typically no affect on the behavior of the opponent as a result of these activities since there is typically no simulated reliance on an effective information infrastructure.This paper will discuss in detail the IW components of the Virtual IO Range, developed for and experimented with during Joint Expeditionary Forces Experiment 2000. We will describe the components and their interactions that provided a realistic representation of offensive IW and the resulting affect on the behavior of the opponent in a large-scale, distributed simulation environment. The focus of this paper will be on the techniques employed and results achieved (positive and negative) in order to provide a baseline for future development in this critical area.1. OverviewThe purpose of this development effort was to create a mechanism by which Information Warfare (IW) could be played out in a more realistic manner within an existing simulation architecture. A cooperative effort to develop the Virtual Information Operations (IO) Range to enhance the infrastructure for the Air Force Command and Control Training and Innovation Group (AFC2TIG) was established and funded to support Joint Expeditionary Force Experiment (JEFX) 2000. The specific component of the Virtual IO Range that allow for IW controller insertion of IW effects is emphasized in this paper: the Information Warfare Effects Generator (IWEG). The key elements that had to be addressed in order to achieve incorporation of IW in an effective and efficient manner are discussed below.First, we identified a threat model that was reliant on command and control information for proper and coordinated operations. The CATT model (Command and Control Warfare [C2W] Analysis and Targeting Tool) model from the Air Force Information Warfare Center (AFIWC) has this functionality. This model represents a portion of the surface-to-air missile (SAM) component of the integrated air defense system (IADS). While there are other models that can perform this function, this model was selected based on its level of fidelity and reliance upon command and control information.Second, we defined the association between the logical unit-to-unit communications paths used in CATT and the physical infrastructure of nodes and links in the underlying scenario. Only nodes that are recognized as potential targets within the combat scenario (Basic Encyclopedia, or BE, numbered sites) are used so that the health of the communications infrastructure is tied to activity within the rest of the scenario.Third, we designed the mechanics to track the status of nodes and associated links within the modeled physical communications infrastructure based on events within the rest of the experiment, and provided for representative changes to the communications paths to occur. This is accomplished by monitoring damage inflicted to the physical communications infrastructure. A change within the infrastructure (elimination of link or node) results in re-defining the physical communication path associated with the logical link, or link between units.Fourth, we incorporated the means to affect the unit to unit communications connectivity represented in CATT by allowing an IW controller to disable a link or node within the physical communications infrastructure. CATT entities were modified to be able to receive messages that a logical link has been disabled so that appropriate behavior could be modeled. This is accomplished using Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) Protocol Data Units (PDUs). Although the effects of any IO capability that would disable a link or node can be injected into the communications infrastructure, tools are provided to help the controller adjudicate the effects of a jamming engagement to gauge its effectiveness.Lastly, we allowed for generating observable, exploitable data when appropriate, and to reflect a change of the information flow between entities within CATT. Indications of communications routed over Radio Frequency (RF) links are published on the experiment Local Area Network (LAN) via DIS PDUs. The Rivet Joint Mission Trainer (RJMT) is capable of receiving and processing those PDUs for appropriate reflection within its intelligence products. Our goal was to allow for threat behavioral modification due to the effects of IW to be observable through the proper collection of intelligence information, when appropriate. 2. ArchitectureThe overall architecture for JEFX 2000 is extensive and contains live, virtual and constructive components scattered across the United States, interconnected via leased lines, commercial systems, command and control systems, and other means. This infrastructure is not within the scope of this paper so we will focus on the components associated with this specific effort. Figure 2.1 illustrates the major components associated with this effort and their connectivity.Figure 2.1 - IO Modeling and Simulation Architecture2.1 AWSIM and JQUADThe Air Warfare Simulation (AWSIM) provides the air platforms. J-QUAD (a composite of models including JOISIM, Joint Operations Information SIMulation; JCAS, Joint Combat Assessment; JECEWSI, Joint Electronic Combat Electronic Warfare Simulation; and JNETS, Joint NETwork Simulation) provides weapons effects analysis. AWSIM is the cornerstone of the current confederation of models used by the Air Force in training exercises and technical experiments. AWSIM generates all air sorties, according to the Air Tasking Order (ATO) generated by the Air Operations Center (AOC). AWSIM aircraft are tasked with specific missions, and for this discussion we will focus on missions that target fixed facilities related to communications and the IADS.An aircraft that is tasked to engage a particular target is given very specific targeting information. This usually includes the BE (Basic Encyclopedia) reference number of the target and one or more DMPIs (Desired Mean Point of Impact). When the mission drops its payload on a target, the JCAS model within J-QUAD adjudicates the results of the strike and updates its database for that particular BE and the associated DMPIs. JCAS maintains the damage status of fixed and semi-fixed facilities on the land and some of the mobile land systems as well.2.2 RJMTThe Rivet Joint Mission Trainer serves as the key intelligence platform within this cooperative effort. The RJMT training device provides mission-level training for a Rivet Joint crew, but can also interoperate within a distributed simulation environment. The RJMT is currently a DIS-based training device that can detect Emissions PDUs from radar models as well as voice and data communications PDUs that are active in the RF spectrum. The RJMT receives Emissions PDUs from CATT when radars are activated. The RJMT also receives and exploits voice and data communications generated by IWEG when it is determined that there is an RF segment on the active communications path.The Rivet Joint Mission Trainer replicates the collection and processing operations, as well as the analysis and reporting processes, with the result that the intelligence consumer in the training audience receives a very realistic representation of intelligence products. The primary means of real-time and near-real-time reporting are through the Tactical Information Broadcast Service (TIBS) and the Voice Product Net (VPN).2.3 TIBS and VPNTIBS is used to transmit and receive intelligence information in a broadcast format. TIBS is similar in format to TADIL (TActical Digital Information Link) but is enhanced with additional intelligence data elements not typically provided by TADIL producers. Rivet Joint models and simulations have been used in major military exercises and experiments for the last several years and the real-world TIBS product is provided to the customer in one or more of the following of four ways:Serial feed to specific TIBS displays,LAN feed to specific TIBS displays,Line of sight radio broadcast to receiver systems, orSatellite uplink and downlink to receiver systems.Since the product received at each TIBS terminal is identical to the real-world broadcast, in fact it often uses real-world live satellite channels, the exercise and test bits are set for each track that is generated. This helps to eliminate confusion on the broadcast network.The Voice Product Net (VPN) is a secure voice channel that enables intelligence personnel to have classified discussions and share intelligence information over a voice network. For exercises and experiments, the VPN is set as a specified channel on the DIS-based radio network. Real-time tactical intelligence information can be passed between intelligence partners and to the AOC.2.4 CATT The CATT model from the AFIWC is a semi-automated system representing a portion of the IADS. The Air Defense Operations Center (ADOC) is the main element for command and control of the lower echelon units. Early Warning (EW) targeting information is fed from the EW radar to the ADOC and then is forwarded onto the firing battalions across the logical communications paths. This communication typically takes place internally to the model, but can also be represented by DIS PDUs. CATT generates Signal PDUs to represent unit to unit communications. The IWEG system generates the associated transmitter PDUs to allow the signal PDUs to be observable by the RJMT (or any other capable simulation on the main DIS LAN) when it determines that the associated physical communications path contains RF segments.2.5 Information Warfare Effects GeneratorThe IWEG system is composed of two controller workstations: the IWEG station for the IW controller, and the Communications Environment Manager (CEM) workstation for a communications analyst/controller. Both are fully integrated with an Oilstock based mapping package, and interoperate with a common database.2.5.1 Integrated Communications DatabaseThe integrated communications database is the foundation of this effort. As mentioned earlier, it was necessary to construct a means to relate the logical communications paths used by CATT with a physical infrastructure. This database provides that connection.The integrated communications database maintains all the information about the communication infrastructure. This single relational database has coherent, near-real-time data on units, command and control hierarchy, facilities or nodes (BE and DMPI level), communication links between nodes, active and alternate communication paths between units, equipment at nodes, etc.Additionally, the database stores and maintains the current physical state of all nodes and links. This information is derived from JCAS ground truth bomb damage at each target that is determined at the DMPI level. In addition to bomb damage, nodes and links can be degraded or disabled by other, less destructive effects. The results of Information Attack are also maintained in the database and can be reviewed and updated as necessary.2.5.2 Communications Environment ManagerThe Communications Environment Manager is the control station where initial assessment of bomb damage takes place and adjudication of the effects of damage. A controller/analyst evaluates the data coming in from JCAS indicating physical damage at each facility or node. Based on the damage assessment on the communications capabilities at the nodes, associated links may be considered incapable of passing information and will be taken down. Or, if the communications capability of the entire node is disabled, the node will be taken down. Either of these actions may have an affect on the physical paths over which CATT communications occur. The user interface has been tailored to provide the operator with a variety of choices for viewing the communications environment, depending on his requirements. The CEM operator also has a toolkit available for communications scenario development. 2.5.3 IW Effects GeneratorThe IW Effects Generator is the control station that allows an IW Controller to disable communications links or nodes based on actions that are not adequately represented in the simulation. For example, an offensive IW mission might be to manually break into the computer hub at a communications switching facility. A virus might be inserted into the computer network, disabling it until the technicians are able to isolate the virus, remove it and reboot the systems. This scenario can not be effectively represented in the current suite of models used in major military exercises and experiments, though the need to exercise this particular effect certainly exists. With the IW Effects Generator, the communications node described above can be partially or entirely disabled for any period of time without traceablity to any given process or military capability. The IWEG system allows for the impact of such a mission to be noticeable. Reaction of the target to the loss of a link or node, such as the use of alternative radio communications will occur and be observable if the alternative route is defined within the database. Node and link disable is accomplished easily using tailored graphical user interfaces. The IW Effects Generator incorporates tools specifically designed to help controllers perform communications jamming engagement adjudication. Jamming effectiveness is predicted using geometry, and physics of a particular engagement. The controller can also keep track of tasking and protected frequencies. 3. ProcessesWith the overall architecture and the interactions identified, the individual processes will be described in the following paragraphs. 3.1 Database PreparationThe integrated communications database is the core component. As with all other modeling and simulation activities, a solid and coherent database, one that is coordinated with the other models and simulations and with the players' target sets, is the single most significant component in the exercise, experiment, or training event. Failure to establish and maintain a coherent database constitutes potential failure of the experiment, or at least inconsistent results from what the player audience expects, anticipates, or is attempting to achieve. The completeness and coherency of our database was the critical element in our project and was therefore afforded the most attention.3.1.1 Data ImportBecause the data typically used in scenario preparation comes from a variety of sources in a variety of formats, the tools have been designed to be able to import many different formats. The data used within the Integrated Communications Database begins with the game truth databases of facilities and infrastructure. We use this baseline because those facilities have associated BE numbers and can be targeted for physical destruction. For JEFX 2000, this is the database defining the fictional CALIFON scenario. This scenario includes definition of the physical communications networks as described by connectivity between nodes over a variety of media. 3.1.2 Route PlanningUsing the physical networks that have been established for the experiment linking nodes together through a wide range of communications media, a number of specific routes are planned for each unit to communicate up-echelon and down-echelon. The route planning tool contains algorithms to evaluate the communications paths available between units and to select the most cost-effective means available. During route planning, it is possible to change the "cost" of a particular transmission medium to achieve a desirable path or to eliminate paths that are somewhat less than logical or realistic. 3.2 BDA Input and AnalysisOnce the experiment is in process, it is necessary to import Battle Damage Assessment (BDA) data for analysis. The integrated communications database receives a download disc or file from J-QUAD periodically that contains the current status of all selected communications nodes at the DMPI level. The CEM evaluates the download and provides a list of facilities whose status has changed since the last update. This list is displayed by BE number.The analyst uses a set of screens on the CEM to view the BE and associated DMPI health and thus evaluates the damage at each facility and makes an educated determination as to the ability of that facility to communicate over any of its links. If it is determined that a particular link has been disabled by physical damage to the facility, the analyst will disable that link. In a similar manner, the analyst can disable an entire facility, taking the node out of service for all links. This process could be automated partially or fully if desired. 3.3 Integration of Information AttackThe IW Effects Generator is also a controller workstation and can be used to evaluate potential effectiveness of an IW capability and accomplish disabling a link or node within the physical communications infrastructure. The results of the non-lethal attacks on a link or node are sent to the communications environment manager to determine the resultant impact on the communications infrastructure and IADS communications – just as in the case of bomb damage. When the active communications route is determined to be disabled due to an IW action, and no other alternative routes are available, the IWEG system generates a unique IW Detonate PDU for the associated units within CATT. Many other effects of Information Warfare can be represented without specifically linking an effect with a particular capability or platform. As described earlier a computer virus, perhaps a SOF team, maybe a new electronic tool to disrupt a communications switches. With the IW Effects Generator, the controller can affect the communications flow at any given node, providing the observable effect of driving communications through a different path, perhaps onto RF, or denying the information flow entirely until repairs were made.3.4 Intelligence Reflection of IWThroughout the communications infrastructure there are segments of communications routes that will be based on radio. These might be single channel radios between two units close to each other, or they might be high capacity microwave transmitters carrying volumes of data over long distances.Whenever the CEM determines that the current path for any of the unit to unit communications in our experiment includes a RF segment, the IWEG system will generate the appropriate transmitter and signal PDUs from the transmitting node's location, based on information received from CATT. These RF emissions will be observable and exploitable by the RJMT and any other system in the network with that capability. This will allow for the effects of an IW campaign have to have a measurable result.In most experiments and exercises, BDA is available to assess the degree of physical damage sustained by a node or other battlefield element. The intelligence reporting of this BDA is usually derived from a simulated imagery source that was able to observe the facility and report on its physical state. However, it is not typical that the behavior of the communications infrastructure changes as a result of that damage. Now, when the node is damaged or destroyed, the actual communications path is altered and the unit is forced to transmit information in the RF spectrum (one of the goals of the initial strike packages in any major campaign). This can be reflected through simulated intelligence capabilities.4.0 SummaryThe need to train for the planning and execution of information warfare missions within computer assisted exercises is critical to prepare the warfighter for the battlefield of the future. The development of the IWEG system and Virtual IO Range has great potential for meeting this need. This capability can be extended to support exercises and can be integrated with other simulations. Continued development of the IWEG system is necessary to implement additional IW capabilities and provide for levels of degradation, and increased behavioral fidelity of the IADS and entities other than IADS are necessary to allow for broader play of IW. The cooperative effort between CATT, the Rivet Joint Mission Trainer, and the IWEG will be demonstrated during JEFX 2000.Author BiographiesPATRICK GETCHELL is a Senior Systems Analyst with ARINC, Incorporated and provides technical and operational consulting and support to a variety of Air Force and Joint Service personnel during large-scale military training exercises and experiments. His background includes 12 operational years in the Air Force intelligence community and 10 years in industry developing training devices and mentoring military personnel in the application of Intelligence and Information Warfare.ELIZABETH PARK is a Principal Engineer with ARINC, Incorporated.  She received her BS in Physics from Lehigh University and her MS in Physics from the Johns-Hopkins University. She has provided systems engineering, modeling and simulation, and training and exercise support to the Intelligence and Information Warfare communities for 16 years.ICDCEMIWEGIO Control CONTROLVPNTIBSDisplayCATTRJMTJQUADAWSIMDIS LAN