Mission-Oriented Conceptual Modeling Framework for Distributed Mission TrainingRobert M. ChapmanIIT Research Institute, AB Technologies GroupAir Combat CommandDistributed Mission Training Team204 Dodd Blvd, Suite 224Langley Air Force Base, VA 23665757-764-6965bob.chapman@langley.af.milKeywordsDistributed Mission Training, HLA, Conceptual Models, Simulators, VV&AABSTRACT: This paper outlines the conceptual modeling framework useful for defining user requirements for the Air Force Distributed Mission Training (DMT) federation.  DMT is an example of a complex synthetic system which links high fidelity flight simulators and, command and control elements with several simulations to produce a common synthetic battlespace.  DMT will be used for mission training and, eventually, mission rehearsal.  High Level Architecture (HLA) will be used to create the first DMT federation, the “Air Superiority Federation,” that will link operational F-15C, F-16C and AWACS units.  The HLA federation development process (FEDEP) is a 6-step effort.  The first two steps of the FEDEP are oriented to creating a federation conceptual model based on users’ requirements and the domain of the intended application.  (The remaining four steps are oriented to the technical implementation of the federation.)  Currently, there are few tools and methodologies that allow one to define user requirements in a manner that can be used to create a conceptual model that can be mapped into a schematic model such as a federation object model.  This paper describes the current efforts used by the Air Combat Command DMT team to define mission-oriented user requirements.  These efforts are based on two perspectives.  The first is a systems perspective that is oriented to mission tasks.  The second is a cognitive perspective that is oriented to how humans think, learn and interact.  Sources for using these perspectives have been the result of researching methodologies found in previous SISO papers on fidelity and conceptual modeling; modeling and simulation (M&S) theories and tools from the academic community; and the Defense Modeling and Simulation Organization.1. Introduction1.1 Purpose and RationaleThe purpose of this paper is to examine some of the factors that should be considered in developing user requirements for a conceptual model that supports a complex synthetic system such as High Level Architecture (HLA) federation.  Specifically, it focuses on those aspects of conceptual modeling that must be addressed as one observes a real world system and attempts to create an abstract representation of that system.  The rationale for examining these conceptual modeling factors is to support the establishment of the Air Combat Command (ACC) Distributed Mission Training (DMT) federation.  DMT will provide Air Force warfighters with team training and mission rehearsal capabilities using advanced simulators, simulations, and real-world systems networked together to form a distributed synthetic battlefield.  Currently there are two active DMT sites, Langley AFB and Eglin AFB.  In 2002 other sites will be active and at this point the DMT Air Superiority federation will be established.  1.2 Background Information on DMTTraining for contemporary military operations is becoming increasingly difficult.  Some of the difficulty can be attributed to the increasing complexity of weapons delivery and mission employment operations of combat systems, especially fighter, bomber and ISR aircraft.  This difficulty is compounded by the need to employ these various aircraft together in composite force packages that, in turn, implies a need for composite force training opportunities.  (See Figure 1.)However, as the need for improved training grows, the resources and venues to support such training are being increasingly constrained by environmental, safety and security issues.  While live-fly training opportunities will always be the primary method of training ACC combat units, DMT can provide critical augmentation to traditional combat readiness training.  But no matter how good this simulator is, it can never replicate the physiological or psychological stress experienced in actual flight.  Nevertheless, a high fidelity, immersive simulator can provide learning capabilities impossible to achieve when using real aircraft and weapons.  For example, even with unlimited resources, it would not be practical for pilots to train with real air-to-air missiles against real adversaries. Therefore, the primary use of DMT will be to mitigate existing and emerging limitations to the requirement of providing realistic mission training and rehearsal.  While DMT will be used for traditional simulator functions, such as emergency procedure and instrument training, the primary use will be in the area of team and inter-team mission training and rehearsal.DMT will provide warfighters with team training and mission rehearsal capabilities in a common synthetic battlespace.  The DMT synthetic battlespace will be formed by networking virtual (high fidelity flight or mission simulators), live (ground radar displays), and constructive (computer generated forces in wargaming simulations) components.  The DMT network will be created incrementally, initially focusing on team training.  Mission rehearsal, which imposes more stringent technical requirements, will be developed later.  Figure 2 provides a general depiction of the DMT Network.  Primary components of the network are unit Mission Training Centers.  The Distributed Warfighting Center is a support activity.  F-15C and AWACS Missions Training Centers (MTCs) will be the first DMT constituents, followed by the first F-16C MTC in 2002.  MTCs will house the unit’s simulators or mission training system, briefing and debriefing systems, threat stations and simulations, and the infrastructure needed for local and wide area networking [1]. Figure 3 depicts the F-15C MTC.  The central feature of the MTC is four high-fidelity cockpits with full 360( visual systems.  Other major components include 4 instructor operator stations, 4 medium-fidelity threat stations, 2 briefing/debriefing stations, a separate mission observation center, and a weapons director station.  A brief description of these components follows.High Fidelity F-15C Cockpits – The cockpits are high fidelity representations of the actual aircraft cockpit.  Performance of the aircraft, its sensors, and weapons are also simulated to a high fidelity.  A 360-degree, high-resolution visual display can support dynamic visual air combat.  Instructor Operating Stations (IOS) – The IOS provides the ability to monitor the simulations, all displays, and instrument indications of each cockpit independently or together. It will also include the ability to simultaneously operate local and long haul network devices and monitor training activity.Threat Server and Stations – The threat server will house simulations that provide airborne and surface threats, both preprogrammed and interactive.  Threat stations are medium fidelity cockpits that will allow instructors to fly adversary aircraft in a local or distributed training event. Brief/Debrief/Mission Observation Center (B/DB/MOC) – The brief/debrief capability will be able to display a “God’s eye” view of the battlespace or the view from selected cockpits.  The system will include the ability to observe sensor outputs, including radar or visual displays.  Larger audiences may view training events in the MOC, a separate observation center that may be run during ongoing missions. AWACS/GCI Station – A weapons director station will be provided so that locally based air weapons officers can control flights.  It has the capability to emulate either GCI (Ground Control Intercept) or AWACS displays. Each MTC will be capable of conducting stand-alone events or participating in distributed events with other MTCs.  Team training will include both stand-alone and distributed events.  Mission rehearsal will normally be distributed.  The DMT network will accommodate multiple, simultaneous stand-alone and distributed events.  As the DMT network expands, many MTCs can be linked together to large-scale, distributed events such as expeditionary force training or rehearsal.Currently the network includes two F15C and one AWACS sites.  By 2001 additional F15C sites will be added as well as the first F16 site.  A network suitable for mission rehearsal will be established as other fighter, bomber, and command and control units join the DMT network. 2. DMT and Modeling and Simulation DMT is an ambitious undertaking for the Air Force.  ACC committed to the program for two primary reasons.  The first is that, as explained previously, there is a near-universal acknowledgment that training for contemporary military operations can’t be accommodated in existing training venues because of safety, environmental, fiscal and operational constraints.  The second reason is that demonstrated improvements in simulator and simulation technologies have progressed to the point where simulators are perceived as operationally useful to experienced combat pilots.2.1 The Need for Modeling User Requirements When ACC committed to DMT, it was an act of faith, believing that technology and necessity would later fill in the details and supporting framework.  For example, large scale, High Level Architecture (HLA) implementations for real-time systems had not been demonstrated when the first DMT contract was specified.  Part of this detail and framework currently being pursued are the user requirements necessary to create the DMT conceptual model.  The detail provided by a conceptual model is especially needed for several related aspects of DMT, as described below.  HLA Federation Development – The HLA federation development process (FEDEP) is a 6-step effort.  The first two steps of the FEDEP are oriented to creating a federation conceptual model based on users’ requirements and the domain of the intended application.  The remaining four steps are oriented to the technical implementation of the federation.  While DMT is using a modified FEDEP, the need still exists to create a master conceptual model of the federation. Articulating Operational Requirements for DMT – Traditionally ACC simulators have been used for practicing emergency and instrument procedures.  Some rudimentary battlespace representations were included in a few simulators but these were oriented to individual weapons operations and procedures.  A dynamic battlespace useful for team training and mission rehearsal is a new attribute for fighter simulators.  A conceptual model is needed to insure that combat crews are being exposed to a credible representation of the battlespace.Accreditation of DMT Events – ACC anticipates that in the near future some annual combat training events will be accomplished using stand-alone and distributed DMT events.  A conceptual model is needed as the basis for verification, validation and accreditation of DMT.2.2 Relationship between Modeling and SimulationThe practice of modeling and simulation is relatively new activity that is still in the early, formative stages of exploring and defining its methods, theories and tools.  Today, one can find many uses of the words “modeling” and “simulation.”  Although common vernacular tends to use “model” and “simulation” interchangeably and sometimes together, simulation has a meaning distinct from models.Simulations are not replications of real world systems but restricted representation of selected aspects of the real system.  Creating a simulation (or federation) requires an understanding of the real system’s parameters and interactions.  These factors are then limited and approximated, creating a distillation of the original system that contains the features and behaviors of interest.  Although not rigorously defined, the notion of “conceptual modeling” is generally accepted as the process that accomplishes this initial translation of reality.  2.3 Conceptual Modeling Conceptual models describe how a real system, including inputs, outputs, and external environments, is abstractly represented.  For simple systems and simulations, the process of translating a real system into a digital representation may be apparent.  Figure 4 emphasizes that, ideally, modeling is an activity that is distinct from simulation.  The framework for conceptual modeling of simple systems is primarily oriented to abstracting the real world.  With complex systems and simulations, the framework for conceptual modeling relies not only on abstracting the real world system but can also be heavily influenced by the expected use of the simulation.  Recently, a third type of simulation-based application, the complex synthetic system, has received a significant amount of interest.  A complex synthetic system is composed of several complex simulations and virtual devices, often operating in tightly integrated networks.  An example of a complex synthetic system is ACC DMT federation.  2.3 Modeling for Complex Synthetic SystemsConceptual models provide the first abstraction of the real world domain and are descriptions of system objects and their relationships.   Conceptual models, which are implementation independent, can be used to create schematic models.  Schematic models, in contrast, are implementation dependent because they become the foundation for writing simulation code.  Because schematic models lead quickly to code, Figure 5 depicts a more realistic relationship between modeling and simulation than was depicted in Figure 4.  Conceptual models do not depend on the expected implementation [4]. They describe objects and relationships, including internal representations, logic and algorithms, and explicitly recognize assumptions and limitations [1].  Conceptual models are viewed in various ways.  Most modeling and simulation developers describe conceptual models in relation to the purpose of a simulation.  Modeling and simulation analysts emphasize problem formulation.  Many have listed the benefits or necessity of a conceptual model.  In summary, these various observations on conceptual models can be generalized as being applicable to three aspects of model engineering: Architecture –coding a simulation system, collecting initial supporting data, prescribing data/object formats and relationships, etc.Credibility/Acceptance – describing fidelity, VV&A, and convincing the user about the suitability of the simulation application.Collaboration – provides a common framework for simulation project activity and development. 2.4 Current State of ModelingOne of the reasons that the terms “model” and “simulation” are often confused may be because their respective states of development are unequal.  The practice of simulation development and implementation is supported by a well-developed set of formalisms and heuristics.  As a result, simulation developers or users can find numerous resources to support their undertakings. In contrast, the theoretical foundation of modeling is very sparse.  Nearly all modeling and simulation texts and references state that a simulation-supported activity must begin with a conceptual model of the system being simulated.  A few provide general guidelines or suggested content.  None of them, however, provide a theoretical basis for how one proceeds in creating a valid, abstract representation of reality.  Why, then, has modeling and simulation been so successful, if the modeling part of the profession is retarded when compared to the simulation part?  In general, one could state that, for several reasons, it didn’t matter.  In some cases, the system being modeled was so simple (at the desired level of representation) that the act of modeling was trivial.  Similarly, some simulation developers have also been domain experts and therefore did not need the support of formalisms or heuristics for creating models to support their simulation development.  Another possible reason is that sometimes an accurate representation of the real-world system was not needed.  In the past, this was sometimes true for “training” simulations, in which outcome was less important than being exposed to a “process.”  Finally, another reason why the need for developing a modeling frameworks may not have been as energetically pursued as simulation frameworks is an aversion to advertising one’s failures.  As simulation implementations increase in complexity, the need for a conceptual model increases in geometric proportion.  At some level of simulation complexity, it is likely that the conceptual modeling effort becomes more extensive than the simulation development effort.  I suspect that those large M&S-related activities that have collapsed in the past have been the result, in part, of the lack of an adequate conceptual modeling framework to support their transition from concept to digital implementation.  Unfortunately, the factors that in the past mitigated the lack of a firm modeling framework are lessening.  The real-world systems being simulated are more complex.  Even simple systems are simulated at increasingly higher detail.  In addition, because the simulation tools are becoming more powerful, the simulation developer is becoming more specialized, which reduces the ability of a domain expert to engage in development or implementation.  The power of simulation implementations to address relevant problems has also expanded the utility of M&S activities.  As the use of simulations expands, there is an increasingly strong emphasis on accurate representations.  Potentially, however, the most compelling need for a conceptual modeling framework is the emergence of complex synthetic systems that are made possible by contemporary interconnection technologies such as the U.S. Department of Defense High Level Architecture (HLA) standard.  Using HLA, it is relatively simple (at least when compared to creating a massive, monolithic implementation) to connect several simulations and live and/or virtual components to synthesize an M&S implementation that creates a complex, immersive environment.  With the ability to create large distributed simulations, the need for a conceptual modeling framework is even more important.  Typically, the HLA federation development process (FEDEP) brings together many individuals from several diverse groups: domain experts, developers, users, technicians, etc.  But without a common landscape from which to navigate, the FEDEP can turn into a lost, wandering journey.  A conceptual modeling framework can help provide a common perspective by providing a bridge from reality to simulation.  3. Conceptual Modeling FrameworkAlthough the establishment of a well-founded modeling framework is urgently needed, the supporting efforts are still embryonic.  Much more effort must be expended before a solid foundation of modeling theory and application can be established.  However, current efforts suggest that the resulting foundation will need to accommodate modeling and simulation factors depicted in Figure 6.3.1 Characteristics and Attributes of a Conceptual ModelSeveral important modeling and simulation relationships can be used to describe the characteristics and attributes of conceptual modeling.  From the dependence of modeling to the referents of domain and application, one can derive characteristics of a conceptual model.  Similarly, the need to link a conceptual model to a specific implementation (often by way of schematic models) serves as the basis for the attributes. As explained previously, modeling is distinct from simulation.  It should also precede simulation and serve as the beginning of a structured simulation effort.  (This can be interpreted as the basis for “model engineering.”)  In the case where the simulation(s) already exist, modeling is focused on details of implementation.  The interplay between domain and application helps establish two characteristics of a modeling process.Reflective – Modeling should be reflective, linked “back” to the real-world domain being modeled. Projective – Modeling should be projective, linked forward to its intended application.Sooner or later a conceptual model must be documented.  The subject of conceptual modeling documentation however, is not addressed in many textbooks or guides.  Pace [4] has reviewed many examples of conceptual models.  He recommends that conceptual models include such factors as objects, states, and relationships.  Furthermore, he suggests that this information be presented in complementary, orthogonal views (e.g., functional, data, and behavioral).  The need to declare specific descriptions of objects, etc. is required because eventually someone will have to implement these factors in a simulation, HLA federation or other application.  The need to have complementary views points to the requirement for an integrated approach.  Therefore, a conceptual model should have the following attributes (as depicted in figure 7):Integrated – A conceptual model should link the domain and application characteristics into a common framework. Specific – Conceptual models should declare specific object and interactions sufficient for a simulation developer, analyst or federation architect to create a complete, implementation-dependent version of the model.  3.2 Perspectives for ModelingAlthough the characteristics and attributes described above describe what a conceptual model should look like, they don’t provide a methodology for creating a conceptual model.  Such a methodology requires a firm theoretical foundation as well as a set of heuristics that can be applied to a relevant set of real-world M&S modeling problems.  The basis for both theory and utility may be found by synthesizing two related perspectives.  3.3 Systems Perspective The existing, sizeable body of systems theory provides the first perspective.  A respectable amount of effort has been done in this area.  Figure 8 depicts how the systems perspective applies to the description of the domain space and intended use of the simulation.  This systems perspective is useful in two respects.  First, it enables a modeler to begin the process of describing how the domain “works.”  To create a simulation, one must distill the objects and relationships of some portion of the real world (domain).  This is the most common and understood facet of conceptual modeling.  The other most readily accepted notion of conceptual modeling is considering the end product of a simulation activity.  A simulation used for supporting an analytical effort, for example, must produce results that are relevant to the problem.  Similarly, a training simulation must also have the ability to generate outputs that are valuable to the training problem.  This projective property of the system perspective can be generalized to the concept of measuring system performance.  In conceptual modeling, system performance is not inherent to domain object and relationship description.  It must be separately examined and defined.  (Although not further considered in this paper, the a priori consideration of performance lies at the heart of difficulty in establishing a common reference for simulation fidelity.) In addition, systems theory provides a number of important concepts that should be contained in a conceptual modeling framework.  Two of the most important are listed below.  (The concept of state will be discussed in the cognitive perspective.)Decomposability – A system is a closed, approximately hierarchical construct that can be decomposed into its smaller, interacting components (objects/relationships).  Input/Output – A system is defined by how a set of inputs to a system produces a corresponding set of outputs (performance).  3.4 Cognitive PerspectiveThe second perspective, which is based on current and emerging knowledge of human cognition, is not so much a distinct viewpoint as it is a bridging function or filter.   This bridging function can provide a way to create an abstraction of the real system that is consistent with the user’s expected use of the simulation.  In many respects, the object-oriented view of systems theory is a cognitive theory because the decomposition of reality into discrete entities and events is an act of human creativity.  However, on-going research in the cognitive sciences indicates that the computational theory of the mind is more than a metaphor but also describes, in detail, how the mind works.  The basic concept is that the mind, like a computer, has short- and long-term memory (RAM and file structure) and uses stored rules (program algorithms) to manipulate symbols.  The most compelling evidence for substantiating these is in the field of psycholinguistics.  Pinker [17], in particular has demonstrated that the way the mind learns and uses language is based on memory and rules.  In systems theory, they would be called objects and relationships.  His work is useful in suggesting a framework for developing a semantics, morphology and syntax of modeling.  Many of the concepts are similar to those found in systems theory.  Semantics, the meaning of words, is similar to objects.  Syntax, rules for using words, is similar to interactions and relationships.Psycholinguistics seems to be far removed form simulation.  Yet the way humans learn words leads directly to understanding how they interact with the world.  Pinker [16,17] has shown that the human mind modifies previously defined objects and relationships (semantics and syntax) as adaptive behavior to changes in the environment.  The notion of morphology, changes in objects and relationships, offers a richer interpretation of system state change than is found in traditional system theory.  (In systems theory, state change is initiated by an event, a specific set of inputs.)  This in turn, also offers a better way to categorize behavior of humans in a specific domain.  Many simulations treat human performance as task-based behavior.  The adaptive morphology of human behavior is an area that is currently receiving more attention in the M&S community.  Therefore, it should also be included in a conceptual modeling framework.The other way the cognitive theories can be applied to conceptual modeling is in the interfaces that must be created to the using the simulation system.  The area of human/computer interface offers some well understood approaches but often they are not applied as rigorously as they should be.  Often the reason is that during a simulation development project, the users interface requirements aren’t as well defined as simulation performance requirements.A conceptual model can offer some remedy by defining who the users are and describe how they interact with the simulation system itself (application).  How one defines a user is as important as how one describes the domain.  Furthermore, the different phases of use must also be accommodated.  Most M&S practitioners describe modeling as being independent of the implementation method (simulation).  The same practitioners, however, recognize that modeling is not done without considering the how the user interacts with the simulation.  Use goes beyond the actual running of simulation.  It includes such activities as configuration management, data preparation, post processing, etc.  Similarly, a simulation user includes more people than the analyst, trainer, or operator.  A conceptual model must accommodate their interactions with the simulation application before, during, and after the event. One area that requires more investigation is the immersive simulation.    This is especially true for those M&S activities that are described as “training” or “mission rehearsal.”  The term “immersiveness” is often used to describe some of these applications but there is no common definition and its meaning is ambiguous.  (It’s not even found in most dictionaries.)  Furthermore, little is known about the validity of the learning that takes place using these applications.  For example, no one has scientifically measured pilot behavior to determine if pilots fly simulators differently than real aircraft.  DMT Mission Essential CapabilitiesAir Force TaskPrimary SecondaryAir and Space SuperiorityPerform Offensive Counterair (1.1.1.1)Perform Defensive Counterair (1.1.1.2)Precision EngagementLethal Precision Engagement (2.1.1)Combat Search and Rescue (2.3.1)Information SuperioritySurveillance (3.1.1.1.2)Reconnaissance (3.1.1.13)Electronic Warfare (3.1.1.2.1.1.2)Physical Attack (3.1.1.2.1.1.5)Global AttackPerform Strategic Attack (4.1)Interdict of Enemy Land Power (4.2.1)Conduct Close Air Support (4.2.1.2)Agile Combat SupportGlobal MobilityTrain AEF Forces (5.4.2)Command and ControlExecute Military Operations (7.4)In conclusion, while a systems perspective is essential to formulating a conceptual model, a cognitive perspective is also required.  Together they can provide a more complete description of what a simulation should do and how it should be used.  4. Comments on Existing Efforts Recently, there has been an effort by many, including the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO), to explain, structure, and conduct conceptual modeling.  But it is too early to state that a clear vision exists for how to establish a theory and methodology for conceptual modeling.  However, some of the activities that the Air Force is pursuing in support of DMT are congruent with some of the comments presented in this paper. For DMT, the system perspective is expressed as a mission essential capability.  DMT mission essential capabilities are based on tasks found in the Air Force Task List [15].  They are divided into primary and secondary capabilities.  These mission essential capabilities are being progressively decomposed into mission essential objects and relationships.  For example, attacking an adversary’s air defense network is an activity conducted under the primary capability of Offensive Counterair (OCA).  It includes a number of objects, aircraft, missiles, etc. that exist in a complex set of relationships.  In one experiment, Tasmanian Devil, these objects and relationships were used to create the conceptual model and Federation Object Model for a prototype HLA federation.In the cognitive domain on-going research is showing that pilots executing dynamic missions such as OCA have a clear, sophisticated awareness of cognitive state change.  They use a specific vocabulary to describe transitions between cognitive states.  They also categorize states and even apply the concept of team or group cognition.  Other efforts in the cognitive domain are demonstrating how important the post-event interfaces are.  But as mentioned previously, knowledge about the differences of pilot behavior between live and simulated combat flying is sparse. 5. Concluding RemarksAs the modeling and simulation profession has matured and computing power improved, there has been a desire to apply simulation to increasingly complicated domain problems using increasingly complex simulations.  Continuing improvements in the capability of digital technologies to support immersive training and rehearsal systems for military applications has produced complex synthetic systems composed of numerous simulator and simulations systems.  When fully implemented in 2002, ACC’s DMT federation will be one of the first complex synthetic systems to be used in daily training and rehearsal modes.  While complex synthetic systems, strictly speaking, are not simulations, the M&S community needs to develop a conceptual modeling frameworks that can be applied to this increasingly important class of tools.This framework should accommodate two perspectives.  (See Figure 10.)  The first is a systems theory description of the referent domain and intended performance measures of the application.  The second is the perspective provided by current work in the cognitive sciences.  This perspective is essential to understanding human behavior in the referent domain and constructing appropriate interfaces.  Without taking into account of how the human mind receives, manipulates and stores information, a conceptual modeling framework based solely on a systems description will be incomplete.  6. References[1]	Air Combat Command, “Concept of Operations for Distributed Mission Training,” October 1998.[2]	David C. Gross, “Report from the Fidelity Implementation Study Group,” 98 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop Papers, CD-ROM.[3]	Jerry Banks, “Principles of Simulation,” Handbook of Simulation, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1998.[4]	Dale K. Pace, “Conceptual Model descriptions,” 99 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop Papers, CD-ROM.[5]	Dale K. Pace, “Development and Documentation of a Simulation Conceptual Model,” 99 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop Papers, CD-ROM.[6]	A.M. Law and W.D. Kelton, Simulation, Modeling and Analysis, 3rd Edition, McGraw-Hill, 1999.[7]	Van Norman and Jerry Banks, “Managing the Simulation Project.” Handbook of Simulation, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1998.[8]	Kenneth J. Musselman, “Guidelines for Success,” Handbook of Simulation, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1998.[9]	A. Alan B. Prikster, “Principles of Simulation Modeling,” Handbook of Simulation, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1998.[10]	Dale K. Pace, “Use of Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) in Simulation Evaluation,” 99 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop Papers, CD-ROM.[11]	Manfred Rosa, Fidelity Requirements Specification: A Process Oriented View, 99 Fall Simulation Interoperability Papers, CD-ROM.[12]	Frank McGuire, “Simulation of Healthcare,” Handbook of Simulation, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1998.[13]	Bernard P. Zeigler, Herbert Praehoffer and Tag Gon Kim, Theory of Modeling and Simulation, 2nd ed., Academic Press, San Diego 2000, [14]	Paul A. Fishwick, Simulation Model Design and Execution, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ,  1995.[15]	US Air Force, “Air Force Task List,” Air Force Doctrine Document 1-1, August 1998.[16]	Steven Pinker, How the Mind Works, W. W. Norton & Company, New York, 1997.[17]	Steven Pinker, Words and Rules, Basic Books, New York, 1999.[18]	Chris Crawford, The Art of Computer Game Design, Online, http://www.vancouver.wsu.edu/fac/peabody/peabody.htm, available 30 June 2000.Author BiographyROBERT M. CHAPMAN is the Senior Program Analyst for the Air Combat Command Distributed Mission Training Program.  He has is a retired fighter pilot currently with the AB Technologies Group of the Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute (IITRI).  He holds a BS from the Air Force Academy and a MA from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, and is now pursuing a PhD in Modeling and Simulation at Old Dominion University. ISR refers to Intelligence Surveillance and Reconnaissance.  Examples are the E-3 AWACS, RC-135 Rivet Joint, and E-8 JSTARS.  These aircraft are also frequently referred to as LDHD – low density, high demand – reflecting the mismatch between the demand by Joint Force Commanders for their services and their availability.  Beginning with “activity model” and ending with “warfare simulation,” there are nearly 100 entries of words or phrases in the Fidelity ISG Glossary that contain the word “model” or “simulation.”  There is even an entry for “simulation model” [2]:  “A digital or physical realization of a conceptual model in a specific programming language based on some software design methodology; software model, e.g., the layout of instrument panel in a mock-up or motion platform.” A model is a “a physical, mathematical, or otherwise logical abstract representation of a system, entity, phenomenon, or process with its own assumptions, limitations and approximations [2].” Banks [3] describes a simulation as a dynamic, digital implementation of a model over time that generates an “artificial history” of the modeled systems. “Synthetic” has two closely related meanings in the modeling and simulation community.  The first meaning is the notion that a simulation can provide a synthetic or artificial representation of a natural environment.  The second meaning is one of synthesis, or bringing together; for example, combining constructive, virtual or live entities to provide a synthetic battlefield.  Here, the second meaning is used. In addition, the application’s operational and technical architecture is highly variable from one event to another (multiple federations with frequent modifications).  Most other types of simulations or federations are relatively stable once constructed.   Conceptual modeling is the term most frequently assigned to the initial model engineering activity. The term “schematic modeling” is not a commonly used term like “conceptual modeling.”  It is used here to describe the broad set of processes and tools that are employed to develop software architectures or support other implementation-oriented simulation development activities.  The Fidelity ISG Glossary [2] has several dozen entries of modeling terms that might be considered as examples of schematic models.  Pace [5], Law and Kelton [6], as well as Norman and Banks [7], emphasize the conceptual model as the foundation for VV&A.  Mussleman [8] emphasizes the utility of using conceptual models to direct, manage, and “take risks” in a modeling and simulation-based analytical effort.  According to Prikster [9] and also Pace [5], conceptual models can be used to determine the necessary detail or fidelity of a simulation.  Various authors [10,11] refer to conceptual modeling as a way for the domain “owner” to provide an authoritative source for object description to the simulation developer.  McGurie [12] maintains that conceptual models are necessary to help scope the data collection effort and provide formats for input and output data. Fishwick [14] describes model engineering not in terms of the simulation but in terms of the reality of the original system.  “The topic of model engineering (or how to design, create and revise models over time) is of central importance to system study, just as software engineering is a key aspect of computer science.”   Examples of this are creating an HLA federation or using a simulation to support an analytical effort.  If use were not considered, then there would be little basis for constraining the abstraction of the real world system.  Therefore, in addition to being reflective, modeling must be projective. He identifies four types of frameworks that can be used to document conceptual models.  The “Ad Hoc” is a format with no particular end use or consideration of wider application.  “Design accommodation” is a descriptive format, which is created to support simulation design.  One class of formats follows the “CMMS paradigm,” which emphasizes database management system structures such as entities, actions, tasks, and interactions.  The fourth and preferred format is one that is constructed similar to a “scientific paper.”  It provides explicit identification of assumptions, algorithms, constraints, and limitations of the conceptual model.  Of the four, the scientific paper method is the one most useful for M&S activities that extend beyond simulation development, such as VV&A, simulation modification, HLA federation object model (FOM) development, etc.   Refer to Zeigler, Praehoffer, and Kim [13] for a good explanation of how general systems theory concepts apply to modeling.  Especially relevant are chapters 1 and 2, which provide a hierarchical view of system description and levels of models.   See Pinker [16] for a description of the relationship on how objects and relationships, the subject of systems theory, are treated in the human mind.  This text is also useful for understanding memory and learning, and forms the basis for understanding the concept of immersiveness.   Pace refers to this perspective as context [4].  Zeigler, Praehoffer, and Kim [13] discuss the experimental framework.  Others use terms as use cases.   Crawford [18] provides a helpful perspective on the convergence of entertainment and training simulations. One notable effort is the Conceptual Model of the Mission Space (CMMS), which is intended to be a source of data-oriented descriptions of military objects and relationships that can be used by the entire M&S community.  Another effort closely related to conceptual modeling is the DMSO-sponsored effort to develop recommended practices for VV&A.  The need for rigorous VV&A has in turn fostered interest in conceptual modeling, because the conceptual model is the foundation for measuring the degree to which a simulation emulates reality. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8   EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  