Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements: Integration of Tasks and Forces into a JSEAD Mission using FDP-KATMike Hopkins (CoTs)Michael Loesekann (SAIC)Jack Sheehan (ARL:UT)Defense Modeling and Simulation Office1901 N. Beauregard, Suite 500Alexandria, VA 22311703-824-3448 HYPERLINK mailto:mhopkins@dmso.mil mhopkins@dmso.mil,  HYPERLINK mailto:mloseka@dmso.mil mloseka@dmso.mil,  HYPERLINK mailto:Jsheehan@dmso.mil jsheehan@dmso.milMike Burke, Lee Lacy, Wayne Randolph, Cynthia TuttleDynamics Research Corporation3505 Research Parkway, Suite 100Orlando, FL  32816407-380-1200 HYPERLINK mailto:mburke@drc.com mburke@drc.com,  HYPERLINK mailto:llacy@drc.com llacy@drc.com,  HYPERLINK mailto:wrandolph@drc.com wrandolph@drc.com,  HYPERLINK mailto:ctuttle@drc.com ctuttle@drc.comKeywords:Requirements, knowledge acquisition, JSEAD, MRM, TO&E, FDP-KAT, UOB, CMMSABSTRACT: This is the third paper in a linked series of eight individual papers which detail how knowledge acquisition products are conceived, produced, and employed in the development of models and simulations. This paper will describe the integration of missions, operations, and tasks (from MRM) and force packages (from UOB-DAT) into a mission space model using the Formalized Data Product Knowledge Acquisition Tool (FDP-KAT) for the fixed wing JSEAD strike. Capture of the detailed behaviors and interactions are described. Data exchanges using the CMMS Data Interchange Format will be described.See also: “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements: Missions, Operations, and Tasks for JSEAD.” by Bruce Harris (DRC) and Jack Glasgow (DRC), F00-SIW-136 “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements: Task Organization and Equipment for JSEAD." by Mike Hopkins (CoTs), Mike Burke (DRC), Juan Paron (DRC), and Jim Murphy (DRC), F00-SIW-137 “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements: Integration of Task and Forces into a JSEAD Mission using FDP-KAT." by Michael Loesekann (SAIC), Mike Hopkins (CoTs) Cynthia Tuttle (DRC), Lee Lacy (DRC), Wayne Randolph (DRC) and Mike Burke (DRC). “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements: Integration of Tasks and Forces into a JSEAD Mission using DoD-Capture.” by Michael Loesekann (SAIC), Mike Hopkins (CoTs), James Plimpton (Vi-Tech), and Fran Dougherty (IMC) “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements: Cognitive Task Analysis for JSEAD Command and Control.” by LtCol Marvin (NAWC-TSD), Dr. Fowlkes (NAWC-TSD), Dr. Willis (DMSO) and Michael Loesekann (SAIC). “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements: Integration and Analysis of JSEAD Conceptual Models using the CMMS Model Library.” by Fran Dougherty (IMC) and Jack Sheehan (DMSO). “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements: Exchange of Mission Space Models using the CMMS Data Interchange Format (DIF)”. by Dr. Furman Haddix (ARL:UT), Corey Balon (GRCI), Scott Lear (IMC), Cynthia Tuttle (DRC), and James Plimpton (Vi-Tech) “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements: Resolving Ambiguity the CMMS-DD Way.” by Ron Smits (DRC) and Bruce Harris (DRC). IntroductionThe Defense Modeling and Simulation Office developed the Formalized Data Product - Knowledge Acquisition Tool (FDP-KAT) to support the Knowledge Acquisition (KA) efforts of the JSIMS Alliance. The FDP-KAT provides a solution to the challenge of capturing conceptual models of the military mission space in a structured format that facilitates understanding and reuse by simulation developers. The FDP-KAT is one component in a suite of tools developed by DMSO to support the simulation development process. This suite of tools is shown in  REF _Ref485800469 \h Figure 1.Knowledge acquisition is a difficult task due to the complexity of the models being described.  In order for the models to be useful to software developers, the models must describe a minimum set of objects (e.g. organizations, communication links, information items), processes, relationships between objects and processes, and attributes of objects and processes.  The models must be available in a standard, consistent format to facilitate their comprehension and to reveal patterns across models.  If a program plans on reusing the models or performing automated analysis of the models, it is critical that the structure and format of the models are available in a computer readable format.FDP-KAT makes KA tasks less difficult by providing the KA author with a set of data entry forms that guide the author in entering the required information.  The data entry forms are modeled after the JSIMS templates for their Formalized Data Products (FDPs) used in their KA efforts.  The forms help to provide structure to the models as they are created.  The models are stored in a database.  The FDP-KAT provides multiple methods of deploying the completed models.   The following example of the creation of an FDP Process model will provide more details on these features.SEAD ScenarioKnowledge Acquisition TaskA military Subject Matter Expert (SME) is given the task of developing a representation of a real-world military operation, Conduct Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses (SEAD) Phase.  The SEAD mission is designed to increase United States forces' ability to accomplish military campaign objectives by improving the forces' air maneuver survivability.  SEAD involves neutralizing, destroying, or temporarily degrading enemy air defense systems through either physical attack or electronic warfare attack. The electronic warfare attack uses specialized aircraft that electronically jam enemy radars and/or the communications systems associated with the defense.  Jamming the radar and/or communication reduces the effectiveness of the defense.Knowledge Acquisition PreparationsBefore defining any models, several preparations should be made by a KA Administrator.  These advance preparations include locating and approving data sources, identifying and importing existing models that are candidates for reuse, and identification of which models need to be created. Data sources identify the origin of the information being captured.  An example of a data source used in the Conduct SEAD phase model is Joint Doctrine For Theater Counterair Operations.  FDP-KAT allows data sources to be loaded into the database ahead of time so that they are available in dropdown lists for easy selection by the authors while defining models. The Authoritative Data Sources Tool shown in  REF _Ref485800469 \h Figure 1 assists in identifying data sources applicable to the KA effort.Authors may save time by basing their models on an existing model housed in the Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS) Resource Center.  The CMMS Resource Center and FDP-KAT support the CMMS Data Representation Interchange Specification Data Interchange Format (CMMS-DRIS DIF) REF _Ref485806605 \r \h [2].  The CMMS-DRIS DIF is the lingua franca that enables the tools to share information using Extensible Markup Language (XML).  FDP-KAT imports models in the form of XML files defined in accordance with the CMMS-DRIS DIF. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1. Conceptual Model Development WorkflowAlternative sources of starter information include the Mission Requirements Module (MRM) REF _Ref485803479 \r \h [3] and the Unit Order of Battle Data Access Tool (UOB-DAT) REF _Ref485803493 \r \h [4]. The MRM tasks are used as process definitions for the FDP-KAT. UOB-DAT force data serve as organization definitions. The identifiers for these processes and organizations can be imported into the FDP-KAT through Excel spreadsheets. Greater detail from the MRM and UOB can be imported if their products are converted into the CMMS-DRIS DIF format. Entering the names of the organizations and processes in advance makes them available to the authors in dropdown lists for easy and quick selection when defining relationships between models. Such advanced preparation, while not absolutely necessary, is strongly recommended since it speeds up the creation of the models.Knowledge Acquisition ProcessUpon opening the FDP-KAT from the Start menu, the SME enters the Main Switchboard, the starting point for KA activities.  The SME has one of five options to choose from Overview, Models Switchboard, Administration Switchboard, About KAT, and Exit.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2. Overview of KAT ActivitiesOverview gives a graphical interface that displays a navigation diagram of the fundamental KAT activities and a logical order in which they are performed, recommended as the starting point for the SME.  The fundamental KAT activities are FDP editors, import and export models, analyze models, publish reports and administer KAT.Returning to the scenario, the SME is tasked with developing a process model of Conduct SEAD Phase.  The KA administrator has already entered the metadata and title for the model. The SME double clicks on the “Edit Processes” option and finds the assigned process model to edit.The Conduct SEAD Phase model is displayed in the Process Editor as shown in  REF _Ref485806901 \h Figure 3 and is ready to receive information entered by the SME.  The SME sees the major headings of the model on tabs with entry forms below each tab.  The tabs start with description and end with the notes, a total of ten tabs, organized like the JSIMS style guide.  The SME starts filling assumptions in the block provided while the formatting is managed by FDP-KAT. Next is the description of the process, from the physical attack to the electronic warfare attack. The SME fills in the data entry forms, from left to right on the tabs, including the process inputs and outputs.  As he fills in the information he selects from numerous drop-down lists. Examples of drop down list include data sources, Information ID, Source Entity ID, just to name a few.  These drop-down lists enable the SME to define relationships between model elements in the database.  The drop-down lists also reduce redundant input and provide more consistent input.  After he completes the model of Conduct SEAD Phase, he saves the model to the database. Upon completing the Conduct SEAD Phase model, the SME returns to the Overview interface. From the Overview interface, the Edit Objects option gives the SME four types of objects; communication network, equipment, information, organization. The SME proceeds to define those objects by double clicking on the “Edit Objects” option.  This process continues until the SME completes all process, objects, and interactions in the Conduct SEAD Phase model.FDP-KAT provides several ways of deploying completed models. Models can be published automatically as MS Word Documents in the JSIMS FDP format.  Models can be exported as a CMMS-DRIS DIF XML file and uploaded to the CMMS Common Library for distribution and analysis.  Alternatively, the entire database (MS Access) can be shared with others.SummaryFDP-KAT provides a practical means of capturing complex data models and provides several ways of deploying the captured models.  FDP-KAT is available for evaluation by contacting DMSO. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3. KAT Process EditorReferencesCynthia Tuttle, Wayne Randolph: “FDP KAT captures complex concepts quickly” DMSO News, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 16-17, Spring 2000.Jack Sheehan, et al: “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements: Exchange of JSEAD Mission Space Models using the CMMS Data Interchange Format (DIF)”, 2000 Fall SIW, Paper #00F-SIW-142Jack Sheehan, et al: “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements: Missions, Operations, and Task in JSEAD”, 2000 Fall SIW, Paper #00F-SIW-136Jack Sheehan, et al: “Knowledge Acquisition for Simulation Requirements Task Organization and Equipment for JSEAD”, 2000 Fall SIW, Paper #00F-SIW-137Planning PhaseRequirements Definition Phase1DefineMission Tasks to SimulateEuriskoAuthoritativeDataSourcesToolCommonFormatLibraryNativeFormatLibraryCMMS Resource CenterRequiredMissionTasksKnowledgeAcquisition ToolMissionRequirementsModuleUnit Order of BattleData Access ToolData VerificationInteractive EditorUnits and Equipment5 ConductSimulation4PrepareSimulationData3Specify Mission Space Model2Identify   Forces to  Perform TasksData Verification ReportNew ModelsAuthoritativeData SourcesIdentified Data SourcesExisting ModelsTaskForce	StructureSimulationObjectivesCMMS-DRIS DIF