DD 21 Concept Model for Fleet Battle Experiment EchoCDR William GalinisPMS-500Naval Sea Systems CommandArlington, VAJeffrey KentCoastal Systems StationNaval Surface Warfare Center, Dahlgren DivisionPanama City, FLJames PaperJohns Hopkins University Applied Physics LaboratoryLaurel, MDRichard SpiegelJohns Hopkins University Applied Physics LaboratoryLaurel, MDKeywords:DD 21, DIS, Combat System ModelsApproved for Public Release Distribution UnlimitedThe views expressed herein are the personal views of the authors and are not necessarily the official views of the Department of Defense nor the PEO DD 21 (PMS 500)ABSTRACT:  DD 21 is a new Land Attack Destroyer being developed by competing industry teams for the U.S. Navy and U.S. Marine Corps.  The first DD 21 is scheduled for initial operation in the fleet in 2010.  Today, the DD 21 concept is emerging.  By adapting existing modeling and simulation tools, the DD 21 Program Office, in conjunction with U.S. Navy and U.S. Marine Corps forces and the contractors competing to design and build DD 21, is able to experiment with DD 21 land attack and mine reconnaissance & avoidance capabilities.  The virtual DD 21 Concept Model was staffed by Navy and Marine Corps Officers during Fleet Battle Experiment Echo, March 1999.IntroductionThe DD 21 Program Office participated in Fleet Battle Experiment Echo (FBE E) and the Advanced Warfighting Experiment (AWE), Urban Warrior (UW) during the timeframe 10 – 25 March 1999.  FBE E was conducted by Commander, Third Fleet and executed by the Maritime Battle Center (MBC).  The AWE UW was conducted by the Commanding General, First Marine Expeditionary Force (CG IMEF) and executed by the Marine Corps Warfighting Laboratory (MCWL).  The major DD 21 objectives for these experiments were to:Form a partnership between PMS 500 and the Fleet.Assist in evolving DD 21 Concept of Operations (CONOPS)Jointly establish ground rules for industry participation in future Fleet Battle Experiments.The focus of DD 21 participation in these experiments was the development of a DD 21 Concept Model to showcase the Land Attack and Mine Warfare capabilities of DD 21.  The Concept Model was constructed using the objective performance parameters as defined in DD 21 approved Operational Requirements Document (ORD) and does not necessarily represent the exact ship capabilities being designed into DD 21 by the competing industry teams.  This model was installed onboard the USS CORONADO and integrated into the FBE / UW experimental architecture.  This  developed Concept Model was integrated with the operating forces of COMTHRDFLT via a classified Local Area Network (LAN), and with the operating forces of IMEF via a separate unclassified LAN.  The DD 21 Concept of Operations (CONOPS) examined during the course of FBE E and UW included Full Spectrum Land Attack, Sea Mine Reconnaissance and Avoidance, and various Command and Control issues.DD 21 Concept Model DD 21 involvement in FBE E and UW consisted of a Concept Model that allowed a virtual ship to participate in a fleet experiment in both Land Attack (LA) and Mine Warfare (MIW) warfare areas, and to a lesser extent C4ISR.The DD 21 Concept Model developed by the DD 21 Program Office is a federation of integrated models consisting of an operator interface and tactical display, Naval Fire Support (NFS) Tool Set, and Littoral Warfare Simulations (LWS).   These simulations were integrated with Distribute Interactive Simulation (DIS) protocols.  These simulations were successfully integrated, linked, tested at JHU/APL and then installed and tested on board the USS Coronado in five months.  Figure 1 is a graphical depiction of the DD 21 Concept Model.Figure 1.  DD 21 Concept Model Block Diagram2.1 Operator Interface and Tactical DisplayThe operator interface/tactical display module contains a tactical picture display and ship control functions. Its inputs include Land Attack mission data from the NFS Tool Set module and Mine Countermeasure (MCM) System mission data from the LWS module. As outputs it provides MCM System utilization commands to the LWS module, and DD 21 maneuver commands and Land Attack System Utilization commands to the NFS Tool Set.The operator interface/tactical display module is made up of: the Joint Maritime Command Information System (JMCIS), shown in Figure 2; a quad-screen three-dimensional data display capability, show in Figure 3; and a ship control user interface, shown in Figure 4. The JMCIS workstation is used to plan MIW search areas and map ingress and egress lanes.  The quad-screen display is used to visualize in-stride mine detection and avoidance control.  The ship control panel provides feedback on automatic control and allows for operator override. EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure 2.  JMCIS DisplayFigure 3.  Quad Screen DisplayFigure 4.  DD 21 Operator Interface and Tactical Display2.2 NFS Tool SetThe NFS Tool Set is a compilation of models which simulate DD 21’s full spectrum of Land Attack  (Deep Strike, Interdiction, and Close Support weapons) and ship maneuvering capabilities. A block diagram of the major processes is provided in Figure 5. The two basic components are the Communications Controller and the Missile Community Simulation.  The Communications Controller links the Concept Model processes together internally and processes information provided external to the model.   The Missile Community Simulation is a  ship and munitions simulator which provides simulated positioning and control of the ship.  The NFS Tool Set provides the appropriate responses to fire orders, and provides ship position and weapon status information to all of the external systems. The NFS Tool Set inserts the appropriate command and control delays, munitions handling delays and weapon-targeting delays into the response to a call for fire based upon initial state information loaded into its database. The NFS Tool Set will also simulate the weapon flyout to provide a representative flight profile and time of arrival.  The NFS Tool Set also hosts the virtual ship, and accepts as inputs speed and rudder commands, while providing as outputs the ship’s course, speed, and position data.Figure 5.  NFS Tool Set Block Diagram2.3 LWSThe Littoral Warfare Simulations model the MCM Combat Systems, minefield and ship susceptibility to mines in the littoral environment.  Figure 6 is a block diagram of the simulations that the LWS module comprises. During the experiment, the LWS module received tasking for the off-board organic MCM systems, simulated these systems and provided feedback of the mine locations via the operator interface/tactical to the simulated accuracy of the combat systems performance characterization within the environment. The simulation also provided simulated detection of mines with the in-stride detect and avoidance sensor in real time to the operator interface/tactical display. While DD 21 maneuvered in the littoral environment, the LWS module determined if any mines were detonated either as a result of the ship’s signature or by impact against a contact mine.Figure 6.  LWS Block Diagram2.4 Integration with Other Experiment Participants DD 21 was integrated with the command and control elements of  FBE E and UW via LANs using Land Attach Warfare System (LAWS) interface specifications. The DD 21 Concept Model provided both classified and unclassified input/output data paths. Figure 7 illustrates the experiment architecture.Figure 7.  Integration Block DiagramConcept of OperationsThe teams from Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory (JHU/APL) and Naval Surface Weapon Center Dahlgren Division Coastal Systems Command, Panama City, FL (NSWCDD/CSS), operated the DD 21 Concept Model.  Support in the area of Land Attack was provided by the Naval Surface Weapon Center, Dahlgren Division (NSWC DD).  The Naval Surface Weapon Center, Port Hueneme Division (NSWC PHD) supported the experiment planning and execution phases.  The teams ensured the models were operating in accordance with operational parameters, and that data was collected to support experiment analysis. Additionally, the teams verified that the appropriate data sets populated each model prior to the beginning of operations. Model data sets were in accordance with DD 21 ORD objective values.  All exceptions needed PMS 500 approval. The NFS Tool Set and LWS data requirements are discussed in detail in the appendices A and B of the experiment plan. The ship responded to maneuver commands from the fleet operators, serving as the Land Attack Tactical Action Officer (TAO), who conned the ship and from automated ship control inputs from the NFS Tool Set module while that capability was activated. The DD 21 Concept Model responded to calls for fire from command and control elements aboard USS CORONADO over the established LANs. The ship’s MIW TAO, a U. S. Navy Officer assigned to NSWCDD/CSS, determined a best track through simulated mined waters based on data provided by the ships off-board sensors using guidance from NWP 3-15.  The off-board sensors were simulated in a significantly faster than real-time mode in order to provide answers from missions of up to 36 hours within the hour planning time cycle.  In-stride mine reconnaissance and avoidance activities were supported via the integration of a low fidelity algorithm for ship control in the NFS Tool Set with guidance from COMSURFWARDEVGRU TACMEMO MZ6050-1-95.  Figure 8 is a notional DD 21 Mission requiring both MCM and Land Attack Combat Systems Capabilities.Figure 8.  Notional ScenarioDevelopment, Integration, and TestingDD 21 Concept Model development, testing and integration were effective and timely, beginning in October 1998 and completing with the successful installation and checkout onboard the USS CORONADO in March 1999.  A schedule was established and followed during the entire development, testing and integration process.  Interim status reports and designs reviews ensured that the original schedule was met and required capabilities were delivered.  This was crucial to providing a plug-and-play DD 21 Concept Model that worked immediately after install aboard USS Coronado4.1 Land Based Development, Integration, and TestingDD 21 Concept Model development and testing started independently at NSWCDD-CSS, Panama City, Florida and JHU/APL, Laurel, MD in late October 1998. Information was exchanged and agreement was reached early in the process about the architecture for the Concept Model.  This included the version of DIS and the Protocol Data Units (PDUs) to be supported.  In January 1999, the two major segments of the model were installed in a test bed at JHU/APL. Additionally, the latest version of LAWS was also installed to facilitate integration and testing. Integration and testing was scheduled for several weeks with all problems resolved by the final readiness review. Full DD 21 Concept Model integration testing was completed successfully in the laboratory setting with scenario test cases prior to installation on the USS Coronado.  The final week prior to shipping the suite to San Diego for installation aboard USS Coronado was devoted to scenario test runs and training.4.2 Shipboard Integration and TestingShipboard testing commenced on 5 March 1999 with USS CORONADO pierside at the Submarine Base Point Loma, CA. The DD-21 Concept Model suite was loaded, installed, and running in about 6 hours.  Over the next several days external databases were verified to ensure that they had the correct information for DD 21. The DD 21 team worked with the MBC to trouble-shoot and resolve several integration and interoperability issues affecting the conduct of FBE E.  A backup DD 21 simulation system was reconfigured to provide five simulated Naval Fire Support units and their weapons flyouts to the Joint Strike Center (JSC) in support of the overall MBC simulation effort.  The team also developed a target generation and tasking capability to support the MBC efforts to ensure tasking for DD 21.  This capability was used to stimulate the DD 21 Concept Model during early part of the experiment while the FBE E activity was working to getting the overall experiment simulation and target generation capabilities up and operating. The DD 21 team supported the MBC to work the interoperability issues that arose between experimental prototype systems during the at sea period of the experiment.  The SPMAGTF Marines conducting the UW experiment required the capability to generate simulated Navy ships and weapons while underway.  Members of the DD 21 team provided this capability by incorporating two additional simulated ships (DDG and CG).  In addition, the capability to simulate fires from actual participants (USS John Paul Jones and USS Port Royal) was provided via the UW unclassified IMAX LAN by the DD 21 team.  This effort benefited DD 21 by providing additional interaction with the Marines in the area of Land Attack.  Simulation Reuse and DISDue to the short schedule and firm delivery schedule, simulation reuse and DIS were effectively used to produce the Concept Model on time.  All of the simulation tools used existed at NSWCDD CSS, and JHU/APL, or were “commercial-off-the-shelf” (COTS) and “government -off-the-shelf” (GOTS) tools.  Both the NMWS component of LWS and the NFS Tool Set are in the process of being made High Level Architecture (HLA) compliant, but neither simulation was ready for HLA.  However, both tools were DIS compliant and utilized the MAK Technologies VRLink API for DIS.  Early on, it was agreed that DIS would be the protocol for communications between the simulations as well as to the tactical display.The NFS Tool Set simulated the ship position and maneuvers, Land Attack Weapon systems on the ship, and Land Attack Weapon tracks.  The NFS Tool Set generated entity state PDUs for the ship and the weapons.LWS simulated the MCM Combat Systems capabilities, the mine field (and related false contacts), and DD 21 susceptibility to mines.  LWS generated entity state PDUs for the mines identified by the off-board sensors and detected by sonar, and Detonate PDUs for mines which actuated.The tactical displays listened for these PDUs to generate changes.  The 3D display was based on the COTS Vega Marine product which has embedded DIS.  Custom software was developed on the TAC-4 which listened for PDUs and generated changes into the JMCIS track manager database.  Both the 3D display and the JCMIS were able to show the ship position, mine locations, and weapon flyouts.The Concept Model was structured so that it did not matter the order that the tools were brought on-line.  Through use of logger files, it was easy to debug the tools separately.How the Concept Model Supported DD 21 Program Office ObjectivesAs previously stated, the DD 21 Program Office had three major objectives for these experiments:Form a partnership between PMS 500 and the Fleet.Assist in evolving DD 21 Concept of Operations (CONOPS)Jointly establish ground rules for industry participation in Fleet Battle Experiments.The Concept Model was employed as a low cost means to achieve these objectives years before ship fabrication and during a competition sensitive phase of the DD 21 program.6.1 Major Objective OneThe Measure of Performance (MOP) for this objective was to successfully integrate the DD 21 Concept Model into the scenarios proposed for FBE E and UW and obtain feedback from Fleet Operators with respect to the value added by DD 21 participation in the experiments.The DD 21 Concept Model was successfully integrated into the FBE E and UW architectures and its capabilities were utilized during execution of the daily scenarios.  During the experiment, personnel from the DD 21 Program Office, JHU/APL, and NSWCDD-CSS manned the DD 21 cell. A Mine Warfare experienced MH-53E pilot from NSWCDD CSS, supported by a Mine Warfare Tactician, played the role of a MIW TAO. Fleet Operators were briefed on the DD 21 program and trained on the capabilities the Concept Model could provide and interacted with the Concept Model by tasking its Land Attack capability. The Concept Model stimulated the Fleet Operators with responses to all Land Attack tasking.  The responses from the model were identical to other live platforms but employed DD-21’s advanced capabilities.  Fleet Operators interacted with the MIW TAO and the self-contained MIW capabilities provided by the Concept Model. Feedback was received on the value added by DD 21 participation in the experiment, the capabilities provided, and the overall program with respect to the Fleet, including the Marine Corps.6.2 Major Objective TwoThe MOP for this objective was to collect data to support the examination of the postulated concept of operations with respect to DD 21’s (simulated) ability to support mission requirements in the areas of Mine Reconnaissance and avoidance, Land Attack, Concurrent Mission Operations, and C4ISR Issues.All data input to and output from the DD 21 concept was recorded via electronic data logging techniques during experiment play. Initial conditions and databases were archived for post experiment analysis.  In addition feedback was documented for later analysis.During each day of the experiment, mine reconnaissance missions were conducted utilizing the simulated off board combat systems available to the DD 21 concept model MIW TAO.  These missions were planned and executed within the environment of the FBE, and the results were used to plan ship’s tracks within the mine danger areas.  The MIW TAO experimented with various tactics during the experiment and successfully decreased the time required to conduct the mine reconnaissance missions.  During the experiment, in-stride avoidance was not conducted.  There were no cases where the ship had to transit into areas where prior mine reconnaissance had not occurred.  The hull-mounted sonar was utilized when transiting areas that had been previously hunted by both the airborne and seagoing systems.The experiment was structured to demonstrate and evaluate capabilities for the strategic, tactical and operational mission areas of Land Attack.  Deep strike capabilities were extensively tested in the laboratory at JHU/APL and successfully tested during shipboard integration and testing in early March with strikes of 20 missiles. This capability was not fully exercised during the experiment.  As a result no significant strategic (deep strike) data was collected during experiment execution. The tactical and operational Land Attack mission areas were fully demonstrated during experiment play by both the Navy and Marine forces participating in FBE E and UW. Each type of weapon provided by the Concept Model was exercised during experiment play. Operators requested Long Range Cruise Missiles, Land Attack Missiles and Advanced Gun System rounds. The level of activity was much lower than anticipated but showed the benefits of DD 21 Land Attack Capabilities. Land Attack data collected includes all the data exchanged between the JSC and the DD 21 Concept Model. This includes all calls for fire and health and status requests.The concept of performing Mine Warfare activities in order to be able to do Land attack was successfully demonstrated during the execution of FBE E.  The scenario did not initially lend itself to demonstrating this multi-mission capability until taskers (orders to DD 21 for stationing) forced DD 21 to operate inside of mine threat areas.  These taskers fit in the overall scenario but were transparent to the rest of the experiment players. Some data and information was gathered to support this multi-mission requirement for combined Land Attack and Mine Warfare. All operators could relate to the need for this combined activity, though there was some disagreement on how the two missions should interact. Because the Mine Warfare mission was unique to the DD 21 Cell, neither the Fire Support Coordinator nor the operator controlling the mine reconnaissance and avoidance were under real world type stresses.The Concept Model was not specifically designed to exercise C4ISR issues; however, some data to support this objective was obtained through experiment observation of the infrastructure provided by MBC.6.3 Major Objective ThreeThe MOP for this objective was to provide opportunity for Industry Team representatives to observe all aspects of planning, execution, and reporting with respect to DD 21 participation in FBE E and UW.Both industry teams were full observers in the development cycle of the Concept Model.  They were full participants for the entire experiment execution. They were present at all major reviews during the development cycle and received access to all information generated during the development phase and execution phase.  This will greatly benefit their understanding and ability to design.References[1]  Galinis, W., Kent, J., Paper, J., Spiegel, R., “DD 21 Participation in Fleet Battle Experiment Echo / Urban Warrior - Advanced Warfighting Experiment (13- 21 March, 1999),” May 1999.Author BiographiesCDR WILLIAM GALINIS is with the DD 21 Program Office and was responsible for the coordination of the DD 21 FBE-E projectJEFFREY KENT is with NSWCDD/CSS and was responsible for the coordination of the NSWCDD/CSS support to the DD 21 Program Office during the projectJAMES PAPER is with the JHU/APL and was responsible for the coordination of the JHU/APL support to the DD 21 Program Office during the project.RICHARD SPIEGEL is with the JHU/APL and was responsible for the NFS Tool Set Software.Engagement ArcPlanned TargetDiversion RouteTarget ofOpportunityEgress LaneIngress LaneThreat AreaNo Threat Area