NATO Partnership for Peace Symposium on CAX for Peace Support Operations Uwe K.J. DompkeITIS at the University of Federal Armed Forces MunichWerner-Heisenberg-Weg 39 85579 NeubibergGermanyTel.: +49-89-6004-2826FAX: +49-89-6004-2268E-mail: dompke@informatik.unibw-muenchen.deWalter H.P.  SchmidtNC3A - IS DivisionOude Waalsdorperweg 61P.O. Box 1742501 CD  The HagueThe NetherlandsTel.: +31 (70) 314-2261FAX: +31 (70) 314-2163E-mail: schmidt@nc3a.nato.intKeywords:NATO; CAX; PSO; Peace Support Operations; PfP; Partnership for Peace ABSTRACT: The NATO Partnership for Peace Symposium on CAX for Peace Support Operations was held at the end of September 1999 at the NATO Consultation, Command and Control Agency (NC3A) in The Hague. Eighty-six participants from 17 nations (including 7 PfP nations) were present. The symposium  had 4 themes: Military Operational Requirements, Requirements for Combined Joint Exercises, Models and Tools, and Future Avenues. This paper summarized the outcome of the Symposium and discusses a way ahead. 1	History and Background The symposium was proposed in the Long-Term Scientific Study (LTSS/40) on CAX (Study Director Dr. Uwe Dompke, GE). After presentations at the former Defence Research Group (DRG) Panel 1 and the Research and Technology Board (RTB) SAS Panel, the symposium was included in the PfP program for 1999.As a result of the initiative of Dr. Dompke, NC3A agreed to cooperate and co-directed the symposium under Walter Schmidt, Acting Chief of the IS Division of NC3A, who brought with him the experience of NC3A in conducting PfP symposia and in planning and executing CAXs. 2	Goals of the Symposium The goals of the symposium, as described at the SAS- panel, were to:Provide PfP and NATO Nations with an opportunity to explore the use of computer-based systems in support of exercises for combined joint operations of their headquarters in the areas of crisis management and peace support. Assist NATO and PfP Nations in developing an approach to creating a framework, an infrastructure, and supporting tools to conduct combined joint CAXs. Provide participants with an opportunity to exchange information and to establish new relationships for closer cooperation.3	OverviewAt the beginning of the symposium General Sir Rupert Smith (DSACEUR) gave in his keynote speech a high-level overview of Peace Support Operations and the need for appropriate training supported by computer-based systems. Dr. Dompke highlighted in his introduction the goals of this symposium and gave an overview of the different sessions.The symposium had four main themes, each handled in a separate session with its own chairman who works in the respective field and is an acknowledged expert.Theme 1: Military Operational Requirements for CM & PSOChairman LTC R. Kleine, SHAPE Exercise BranchTheme 2: Requirements for Combined Joint ExercisesChairman Dr. Gokay Sursal, SACLANT Theme 3: Models and Tools for CAX including DemonstrationsChairman Dr. Dirk Coppieters, NC3ATheme 4:Future AvenuesChairman Steve Moore, JTASC.At the end of the symposium the group discussed future steps to bring efforts of the RTB and the NC3B together to strengthen the initiative for PSO CAX.The main results of the symposium are:There is an operational need for training and exercise for Peace Support Operations in NATO and the PfP nations.At the moment there are only a few models or simulation systems available that cover the areas relevant to the conduct of useful exercises.The integration of the operational environment (see LTSS/40) is a prerequisite to conducting exercises. Especially in the area of PSO, C3I systems must be integrated into the exercise environment. 4	Sessions4.1	Operational Requirements for CM & PSOThe following presentations were given in this session:LtC C. J. Nunn (SHAPE)Crisis Response Operations, Specifically PSO – A Strategic Command View of Future ChallengesH. D. Richardson (UK)Observations on Civil and Military (CIMIC) Activities in a Computer-Assisted ExerciseProf. D. Davis (US)Functional Requirements for PSO Training Simulation.The main points of this session were:Actual CAX systems are conflict–oriented, intended for situations that lead to a military engagement in the form of a battle. PSOs are not conflict-oriented, thus the use of CAX systems for PSO exercise and training leads to the problem of “train to failure”.Current models do not accommodate civilians, refugees, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGO), etc. The modeling of civilmilitary interactions (CIMIC) is necessary for proper PSO.A “Conceptual Model of Peace Operations (CMPO)” was developed at George Mason University (GMU). Requirements for Combined Joint ExercisesThe following presentations were given in this session:J. Pucket (US)Training RequirementsG. J. Burrows (UK)Cost-Effective Computer Assisted Exercises – UK MOD ExperienceDr. A. Tolk (GE)Interoperability and Integration in CCISProf. A. Serb (RO)Fault Tolerance in Systems Used for CAXBGen S. Persson (SE)C2 Modelling & Simulation - Challenges for the Future  - from a User’s ViewJ. Kincade (NC3A)An Approach to Exercise DesignThe main points of this session were:CAX is now accepted as a cost-effective tool to train staffs in operational artResponse cells must be well equipped with decision support tools to reduce the manpower needed to conduct exercises.Integration in the operational environment is essential. The use of interoperability protocols such as ATCCIS is very helpful.Methods and Tools for CAXThe following presentations were given in this session:T. Woodcock (US)Training and Exercise Support for Peace and Humanitarian OperationsDr. G. Lascar (FR)GECRI: A Tool to Help Analyse an International Situation and Anticipate a CrisisProf. T. N. Nowicki (PL)Modelling and Analysis of Threat Assessment in a Crisis Management Computer SystemE .J. Bearfoot (UK)Development of OOTW Models within the Future Command and Staff Training (FCAST) SimulationL. S. Gale (UK)Research into UK Mine Countermeasure Command Agents with the Aim of Reducing the Number of Personnel Required to Support Computer-Based Training Exercises Dr. A. N. Najgebauer (PL)Interactive Simulation Environment for Training of Peace Support OperationsProf. Dr. A. Barczak (PL)Designing a Combat Simulation Model - An Essential Part of Computer War Game (CWG) B. Witherden (NC3A)NC3A/ORD Experiences in Operational Analysis Support to ExercisesDr. R. H. White (US)S.E.N.S.E. - Synthetic Environments for National Security EstimatesS. Moore (US)The Partnership for Peace Simulation NetworkThe main points of this session were:The models presented by Ted Woodcock and Richard White are cybernetic models with the potential to represent factors that are not covered in other simulations. Medicine, psychology, biology and ecology are represented in these models. State changes are based on all these factors.Requirements of  simulations in this area are covered in the presentation by Bearfoot.NC3A is engaged in the operational support of ongoing operations such as KFOR. Crisis recognition and management is particularly important in this area.The Partnership for Peace (PfP) simulation network combines different approaches of the nations in a coordinated way.Future AvenuesThe following presentations were given in this session:J. Hamers (NL)Distributed Multi-National Defence Simulation (DiMuNDS) 2000Dr. D. Coppieters (NC3A)Human Behaviour RepresentationProf. Dr. Heineken (GE)Human FactorsD. Steinkamp (GE)Technology ForecastThe main points of this session were:DiMuNDS 2000 is a nationally financed programme to demonstrate the benefits of a multinational federation.Human behaviour representation is essential for future simulation systems. Human factors in military decision-making will play a major role in future applications.Technology to support these topics is evolving. 5	Discussion about the way ahead The discussion in the plenum on the way ahead shows that:Future developments should be based on open standards to allow the participation of every nation in the development process.There is still a need for discussion of the definition of PSO and respective requirements.All PfP nations should be invited to contribute to the above processes.NATO funds should be made available to initiate a development and to develop a plan for its implementation.Dr. Dompke, Hr. Hutter, Mr. Woodcock and Mr. Davis will prepare an input to the SASPanel regarding future work.6	ReferencesProceedings of the NATO PfP Symposium for Peace Support Operations, 28. – 30. September 1999 at NC3A, The Hague, to be publishedAbout the AuthorsUwe K.J. Dompke is secretary of the Institute for Technology of Intelligent Systems (ITIS) at the University of Federal Armed Forces Munich. He is Symposium Director for the NATO PfP symposium on CAX for PSO. He is also the Study Director for the NATO Research and Technology Board Long-term Scientific Study (LTSS) SAS-017 on Human Behaviour Representation, LTSS/48 on CGF and NATO LTSS/40 on CAX. He gives lectures at the computer science department of the University of Federal Armed Forces in Munich on Human Behaviour Representation.Walter H P Schmidt is Acting Chief of the Information Systems Division of the NATO C3 Agency in The Hague, Netherlands. His Division is responsible for Allied Command Europe’s information systems integration and technology studies, software applications evolution and computer-assisted exercises (CAX). Since 1995, he has organized and hosted Partnership for Peace (PfP) seminars on CAX, and more recently also on Automated Command and Control Information Systems (ACCIS). Integrating CAX environments with operational ACCIS for minimizing exercise support resources and maximizing training effectiveness is one of his Division’s main activities.