160TH SPECIAL OPERATIONS AVIATION REGIMENT (AIRBORNE) (SOAR(A))SYNTHETIC THEATER OF WAR-ARCHITECTURE (STOW-A):SIMULATION FOR MISSION REHEARSALMr. Thomas LaschU.S. Army Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM) PM STIOrlando, FL 32826 (407) 384-3276, DSN 970-3276, email:  Thomas_Lasch@stricom.army.mil Ms. Alesya PaschalU.S. Army Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM); Orlando, FL 32826 (407) 384-3837, DSN 970-3867, email:  Alesya_Paschal@stricom.army.mil ABSTRACT:  This paper discusses the design and execution of 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment (Airborne) (SOAR(A)) Synthetic Theater of War-Architecture (STOW-A) training exercise executed in Oct 1999 that built on the success of the Oct 1998 160th SOAR(A) STOW-A exercise.  The 160th SOAR(A) STOW-A training exercise-Panther Leap provided the 160th SOAR(A) Aviators, the 75th Rangers, 1st Special Forces Group, and AFSOC mission planning and execution in a synthetic environment.  The STOW-A effort created an infrastructure that combined existing simulation and simulators to support this mission planning exercise.For the Oct 1999, the training exercise again consisted of the MH-60L/47E CMS that had recently became High Level Architecture (HLA) compliant.  The CMSs interfaced to other DIS components with an HLA Gateway.  The MH-47E CMS also had improved visuals provided by TOPscene.  The SAF support for the exercise was provided by a Special Operations Force (SOF) version OneSAF testbed.  ENEWS, now named Builder, was again used for the plan view display of the exercise. The HLA MC-130E Talon 1 Weapon System Trainer at Hurlburt Field, FL was also Secure T-1 into the exercise.  Simulation radio communications were again supplied by ASTi for the simulation traffic and a live helicopter feed was provided by SimPhonic, while data logging was again through Simulyzer.  This years exercise again replicated real life training events while in the confines of simulation.1.  IntroductionMission Rehearsal allows trainees to practice what they will soon be doing for real.  One way the Special Operations Forces (SOF) does Mission Rehearsal, is with the use of a complex synthetic environment.  This Synthetic Environment allows the SOF to practice their mission, readying them to actually execute with the utmost of confidence.  The Synthetic Environment that was created for SOF, networked their individual training simulators, along with other simulations to create an interactive-reactive environment, that the SOF uses for real world rehearsal.1.1 OCT 99 STOW-A ExerciseExercise Panther Leap was the second in a series of 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment (Airborne) (SOAR (A)) Synthetic Theater of War-Architecture (STOW-A) exercises.  This year’s mission conducted a Ranger Company Raid using air and ground assets, replicating a real world mission while relying on simulation.  The actions required joint coordination between the 75th Rangers Regiment, 1st Special Forces Group, 19th Special Operations Squadron, and 160th SOAR (A) units.  This integration of simulated and live tools provided the units with a synthetic environment in which to conduct joint tactical mission planning and execution.  It also allows the units to rehearse a simulated contingency mission on geo-specific terrain that is impossible to do in the real world, due to the target location.Building on the success of the OCT 98 160th SOAR(A) STOW-A exercise, the Oct 99 STOW-A Training Exercise-Panther Leap again consisted of the MH-60L/47E CMS but relied on an High Level Architecture (HLA) interfaced with an HLA Gateway to DIS systems. The MH-47E CMS also had improved visuals provided by TOPscene.   An HLAed MC-130E Talon 1 Weapon System Trainer was used from Hurlburt Field, FL.  This year Semi-Automated Forces (SAF) support was provided by a SOF version of OneSAF Testbed.   ENEWS, now named Builder was used for a plan view display for the Command and Control Staff.  Simulated radio communications were supplied by ASTi for the simulation radio traffic and SimPhonic provided a live helicopter radio feed.  Data logging for the exercise was through Simulyzer.  This years exercise replicated a real life training events while in the confines of simulation.1.2 160th SOAR(A) STOW-A Oct 99 Mission ExecutionThis arrangement of simulation assets was used to conduct a 160th SOAR(A), 75th Ranger, 1st Special Forces Group, and AFSOC Panther Leap training exercise in Oct 99.  The training mission focused on a real world mission area and allowed the 160th SOAR(A), 75th Ranger, 1st Special Forces Group, and AFSOC to plan and conduct a mission that centered on retrieving Precious Cargo from a real world area.  As was done for last year STOW-A training exercise, the planning phase of the exercise followed actual planning procedures but to execute this training mission, the 160th SOAR(A), 75th Rangers,  1st Special Forces Group, and AFSOC took advantage of technological advances in simulation to provide the robust training environment to actually execute the mission.  This allowed the trainees to experience close to combat experiences, allowing them to focus on the mission without the fear of loss of life. To fly the training mission this year, the 160th SOAR (A) trainees used both the MH-60L and MH-47E Combat mission simulator located at FT Campbell, KY.  The simulators lead the group of helicopters filled with Rangers for the rescue flight.  OneSAF Testbed, a computer generated forces rounded out air support and ground activity.  While the helicopter flew to the objective area, an MC-130E Talon 1 Weapon System Trainer located at Hurlburt Field, FL flew to an airport and awaited the PC.  Once the Rangers recovered the PC, they were exfilled on the Helicopters.  The PC was then flown back to the airfield and transported to its final location by an MC-130E Talon 1 Weapon System Trainer.  During the mission, a live C2 helicopter flew in the air over FT Campbell, and kept in radio communication with the mission with a simulation to live radio SimPhonic link with the simulated ASTi simulated radio traffic.2 160th SOAR(A) STOW-A Oct 99 Simulation Components This years exercise integrated many simulation/simulators to accomplish this HLA training exercise.  HLA  HLA was used for this years exercise.  A middleware product in the MH60/47 CMSs and MC-130U WST, replaced their DIS Interface Unit (DIU) with an HLA Interface Unit (HLA-IU).  The other simulation (OTB, SVS, MetaVR, Simulyzer, and Sound Storm) used a gateway to convert between DIS and HLA.  The RPR-FOM (Federation of Object Models), a reference FOM developed to meet the needs of the Real-time Platform and former DIS community was used.  And, all federates utilize Run-time Infrastructure (RTI) version 1.3V6 for interactions.Lead Helicopter The MH-60/47 CMSs are full-motion high-fidelity visual training device.  It replicates the full functionality of the respective aircraft systems including; Forward Looking Infrared Radar (FLIR), Multi Mode Radar (MMR), Digital Map (DigMAP) and Integrated Avionics System (IAS).  This allows for realistic tactical training within a fully tailorable geo-specific virtual environment. Tactical Operations include but are not limited to: Night Vision Goggles (NVG), A/R, Threat, Ship Operations, Qualification and Continuation Training and Mission Rehearsal. Computer Generated Forces A Special Operation Force OneSAF testbed was created to support this exercise.  OneSAF is the next generation CGF that can represent a full range of operations, systems, and control process from individual combatant and platform to battalion level, with a variable level of fidelity that supports all modeling and simulation (M&S) domains.  It will accurately and effectively represent specific activities of ground warfare (engagement and maneuver), Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I), combat support, and combat service support.  It will also employ appropriate representations of the physical environment and its effect on simulated activities and behaviors. Man-in-the Loop control options.  For this years exercise, the OneSAF testbed provided supporting Helicopters/Aircraft representation and Ranger Ground OperationsMC-130 E Talon 1 Weapon System TrainerMC-130E TALON I Weapons System Trainer (WST) includes a radar and Forward Looking Infra-Red (FLIR) system allowing simulated all-weather, day/night Terrain Following Radar operations and high/low altitude air drops.  The WST is also capable of simulated in-flight refueling and Helo refueling operations.   The visual, radar, FLIR, and electromagnetic combat environment databases are correlated to each other for real-time display.  The real-time display is a high-resolution perspective scene generator, including day/night, radar, and FLIR capabilities.  The visual image generation system will display multiple computer-generated moving models in the visual and FLIR scene.  Databases for simulated operations include fixed cultural features and fixed or moving models in the applicable visual, electromagnetic, FLIR, and radar presentation.   The MC-130E WST was used to transport the PC to its final destination for the mission.2.5 Pre-Flight TOPscene was used to pre fly the mission for terrain familiarization.  TOPscene is an operational training system consisting of 3D imagery products and infrastructure.  TOPscene can produce imagery clear enough to see major and minor roads as well as buildings, vehicles, doors, and windows.  TOPscene is the only battlefield visualization system that lets aircrew and battle commanders rehearse their missions before going into combat with timely, realistic, real-world images of the contingency area. A single, unit-level console with a footprint smaller than a desk, the Model 4000 generates photobased 3-D imagery at 30-Hz frame rates for real-time simulations over large terrain databases.  The databases are acquired from various sources (photographic, sensor, satellite, Defense Mapping Agency, etc.) and processed by the off-line TOPscene Data Base Generation Systems. They are stored on removable digital disks and transported to the user, where specific routes are flown to support mission needs.  System enhancements permit changes in visibility, time of day, sensor imagery, graphic overlays, instrument indications, even threat warnings.  TOPscene was also integrated into the MH-47 CMS for its visual scene.75th Ranger OperationsThe Rangers used OTB to perform their ground mission.  OTB was aided by  Soldier Visualization Station (SVS) that provided a 3 Dimensional Viewer for the ground.  SVS is a state-of-the-art, turnkey, high fidelity, individual combatant (IC) virtual simulation system. SVS has real-time 3D graphics, directional audio portals and a unique user interface into the virtual battlefield.  It enables realistically individual soldier representation into a Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) networked simulation.  For this exercise, SVS allowed the Rangers to perform ground operations to include building clearing operations. SoundStorm 3D provided the “sounds of battle” for the Rangers during the exercise.  SoundStorm 3D is a DIS compliant three-dimensional battlefield sound generator.  Sounds are heard from the perspective of that entity’s ear point.  Six-dimensional aural realism is maintained by biasing the sound output slightly to the left/right, front/rear, and above/below.  In addition, the volume level of the sound output is varied to account for the distance of an entity from the selected ear point1st Special Forces Group ViewerThe 1st Special Forces Group also used OTB for their reconnaissance mission.  Their OTB was aided by MetaVR to provide another 3D view of the battlefield.  MetaVR is a state-of-the-art, high speed generation and rapid terrain creation application for personal computers.  It provides a real-time single or multiple-channel visualization of entity interaction.  For this exercise, it provided a view of the target area and airfield for reconnaissance operations.    DIS Data Collector  For data collection, Simulation Analyzer (Simulyzer) was used.  Simulyzer is a software tool used for data collection and analysis in the DIS environment.  It is a universal simulation data collection and analysis capability incorporating key design criteria that ensures system flexibility, usability, and extensibility.2.9 Communication SupportAlso supporting this training exercise was a communication structure that consisted of the actual live radios and simulated radios (ASTi).   These radios provide simulation to simulation communication as well as communication to the actual live C2 helicopter, through Simphonic. ASTi Radios uses a DIS compliant radio model that is used for tactical voice communications, aircraft intercom, and test control networks. The ASTi Radios used the Digital Audio & Communications System (DACS) that is an integrated solution for the sound and radio communications.  The DACS is fully user configurable via the Model Builder interface.SimPhonics provided the bridge between the live radio to the simulated radio network.  This PC becomes a network radio that can be visually programmed to perform a variety of tasks, including interfacing to simulator hardware and connection to DIS networks via almost any type of network. Command and Control Overview DisplayEffectiveness of Naval Electronic Warfare Systems (ENEWS)/Builder was used as the plan view display for the exercise. Builder provides digital maps for an overview perspective of the mission.3 Oct 99 160th SOAR(A) STOW-A Integration IssuesHLA IntegrationThe MC-130 WST and MH-47 and MH-60 CMS had been recently HLAed prior to this mission.  With the requirement to long haul between the Hurlburt Field MC-130 WST and the Ft Campbell CMSs, the HLA routers had to be configured to support this capability.  At first, the HLA Team had difficulty getting the sites to do Multicasting since as a network service, multicasting has issues.  Most commercial available routers do not support Multicasting, but, after reconfiguring the sites existing routers with a software patch, the multicasting issue was resolved.  Now, the sites can operate in both networking services (Broadcast and Multicast).  And, with the routers configured for multicasting, using the HLA RTI, there is a significant reduction in network traffic.A remaining issue with HLA is that the simulation radios (ASTI) is not HLA.  To overcome this, an ASTI filter using a STOW developed XCAU was used to filter the ASTI traffic. OTB Terrain DevelopmentThe OTB Terrain development resulted in only one detail GEO with contour lines for the other Geo Cells.  The tool that could stitch GEO cells together in ModSAF is not operational.  A terrain skin is needed for control over the OTB entities since their actions can not be controlled when no terrain is under them.  The standard SOF terrain development process should be pursued for next years exercise (SEDRIS).Live Radio to Simulation ASTi Radios/SimPhonic Due to the amount of radio traffic created by the exercise, the simulated radios need their own network.  Radio traffic can get very large and should be separate from the DIS (simulation) LAN.   Also, and HLA solution for Radio traffic needs to be pursued.Three Dimensional Viewers-MetaVR and Soldier Visualization Station  MetaVR provided a three dimensional view of ground battle.  It was used for Ranger operations and as the ground battle viewer in the command center.  Also, MetaVR terrain can be converted from CTDB with tools that are located on the system.Only one of the SVS was consistently operational during the exercise since only the NT version had a memory allocation patch to accommodate the large terrain.  But after 90 entities, this machine failed as well.  The other three Window 95 machines could not handle the terrain size and crashed after 27 entities were received.  SVS could have provided a better 3D viewer if a smaller terrain file had been developed.  SVS currently provides detail DI movement and building clearing functions.  If this is to be used again, an Open Flight with textures the size of the area should be created rather than using the entire GEO cell due to the memory problems that caused system failures.4  Mission Success   While the synthetic environment infrastructure had issues that still need to be resolved, the overall training mission was accomplished.  Follow-on efforts with the 160th and other simulation training exercise will further the technology to refine the synthetic environment to support more aspects of the training mission.  This year’s effort, highlighted the following accomplishments in simulation.4.1 HLA This years exercise utilized High Level Architecture (HLA) as the primary means of communication between the systems.  The HLA RTI 1.3v6 and SOF FOM 1.0 were used to connect the simulators at the remote location using KIV-7HS encryption over a dedicated high-speed (T-1) communications circuit.  For the exercise, each site, FT Campbell, KY and Hurlburt Field, FL provided an HLA interface to its simulators and simulation applications.  All information transmitted via the T1 used the HLA protocol with the exception of the radio traffic.  For the radio traffic, each site used radio filters to insert radio packets into the HLA network for simulated radio communications, using the Distributed Interactive Simulation protocols. One Semi Automated ForcesThe exercise also used a Special Operations Force (SOF) Version of the One Semi-Automated Forces Testbed (OTB).  The SOF OTB was used to replicate air, ground, and threat components for the exercise.  This SOF OTB created several new entities to include: FWA, RWA, Infantry, Rangers, Special Forces, and Precious Cargo entities.  Extensive modifications were also made to the Aerial mounting and dismounting behavior, as well to the current RWA and FWA dynamics.  Miscellaneous OTB bug fixes were also corrected.  All these improvements will become part of the OTB baseline and will benefit future development.CMS The MH-60K Blackhawk and MH-47E Chinook Combat Mission Simulators (CMS) located at FT Campbell, KY were used for the exercise.  A number of actual aircraft components are used in these virtual simulators to enhance realism and ensure compatibility with the supported weapon system.  The embedded systems include; Forward Looking Infrared Radar (FLIR), Multi Mode Radar, Digital Map and Integrated Avionics System.  This allows for realistic tactical training within a fully tailorable geo-specific virtual environment.  These simulators illustrate the concept of embedding systems, in this case, the actual helicopter equipment into simulation.  This realism is accomplished by aggressively tracking simulator upgrades concurrently with flight line aircraft via tail number assignment to the CMS’s. 4.4 WSTThe MC-130E TALON I WST located at Hurlburt Field, FL was also used for the exercise.  This simulator also embeds actual systems into the simulator to include a radar and FLIR system.  Live/Simulated RadioRadio communications for the exercise used various configurations of the DIS ASTi DACS integrated with the MH-60K and the MH-47E CMS, hand-held radio control terminals, SimPhonics PCs, and long hauled radio communications with the MC-130E WST at Hurlburt Field.  A live-to-virtual radio communications bridge was developed using a SimPhonics PCs with custom interface boxes.  This allowed an individual using a hand-held Radio Control Units to communicate, on multiple radio networks, with simulators and an actual live aircraft that flew overhead at FT Campbell during the exercise.  Radio Communications were in both clear and secure radio modes with simulated crypto tones.  The Virtual to Live Radio Symphonic Communications Bridge not only established a stable and permanent configuration to allow Simulated and Live Radios to talk, it established a standard configuration for others to use.4.6 TOPSceneFor the pre-execution mission planning, the TOPScene mission preview system was used.  Due to the ability to use high resolution imagery, combined with NIMA data, pilots can become familiar with the terrain prior to mission execution.  TOPScene uses computer generated imagery based terrain databases that allow crews and planners to preview routes and mission areas in three-dimensional real-world target areas.   The TOPscene also interfaces with the Mission Planning System in real-time to support Course of Action analysis and planning.  Additionally, the TOPscene was used as the Image Generator to create the out-the-window scene in the CMS. 4.7 ConclusionThis integration of simulated and live tools provided the units with a synthetic environment in which to conduct joint tactical mission planning and execution.  It also allowed the units to rehearse a contingency mission in geo-specific terrain that that is impossible to do in the real world.Author Biographies THOMAS LASCH is a Project Director in the Product Manager for Simulation Technology Integration (PM-STI), STRICOM.  He is currently assigned as the Project Director for the Synthetic Theater of War - Architecture (STOW-A) program.  Mr. Lasch holds a Bachelor of Science degree from North Georgia College and has served in a variety of command and staff positions is the United States Army.  He is an Honor Graduate of the Army Management Staff College (AMSC).  He was formerly assigned as the Director, Training Analysis Computer Support & Simulations, Combat Maneuver Training Center (CMTC), Hohenfels, Germany, where he served from 1990-1995.ALESYA PASCHAL is a Systems  Engineer  at  U.S. Army Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation  Command (STRICOM) in Orlando, Florida.   Alesya began her career in 1988 at the Army Materiel Command (AMC) School of Engineering and Logistics (SEL), Texarkana, TX.  In 1990, she transferred to the Project Manager for Training Devices, Orlando, FL and worked on Flight Simulators until 1993 when she began working with Distributed Interactive Simulations.  In 1995, she was the Army Deputy Study Director for the Joint Advanced Distributed Simulation Joint Feasibility Study for the Office of the Secretary of Defense.  In 1996, she again supported the Office of the Secretary of Defense by demonstrating how a Synthetic Environment could be used for the Bradley A3 Operational and Live Fire Testing.  She has recently worked on the Synthetic Theater of War-Architecture efforts and STRICOM's SMART initiatives.  Ms. Paschal holds a Master of Science degree in Engineering from Texas A&M University and a Bachelor of Science degree in Engineering from University of Tennessee.