Report Out of the Fidelity Experimentation ISGZ.C. RozaDelft University of Technology,Aerospace Control & SimulationKluyverweg 1, 2629 HS, Delft, The NetherlandsZ.C.Roza@lr.tudelft.nlD.C. GrossThe Boeing CompanyM/C JR-80499 Boeing Blvd, Huntsville, AL 35824David.C.Gross@boeing.comS.Y.  Harmon Zetetix6547 Bayberry Street, Oak Park, CA  91377(818) 991-0480Harmon@zetetix.comKeywords: Fidelity, HLA, Fidelity Experimentation Study Group, Simulation Quality, Simulation CharacterizationABSTRACT: The ability to appropriately describe and quantify simulation fidelity or "goodness" is essential if simulation is to achieve its promise. Effective use of the HLA and support of endeavors such as Simulation Based Acquisition requires a meaningful approach to understanding fidelity. Major simulation users have expressed a substantial interest in fidelity as a technique for improving simulation interoperability and reuse. For example, the NATO Modeling and Simulation Master Plan (Version 1.0) includes in paragraph 4.2.1 an Objective I - Establish a Common Technical Framework to Foster Interoperability and Reuse, which clearly relates to fidelity. In addition, the Department of Defense Modeling and Simulation Master Plan gives prominent recognition for the issues commonly grouped under the general heading of fidelity, specifically identified in Objectives 2 (in each sub-objective), 3, and 4. Furthermore, the ability to describe and quantify simulation fidelity or "goodness" appropriately will be essential for fully achieving other objectives identified in the master plan, such as HLA (Sub-Objective 1-1), CMMS  (Sub-Objective 1-2), and support of endeavors such as Simulation Based Training, Analysis, and Acquisition (Sub-Objective 5-1). Recognition of the need to characterizing simulation fidelity has been growing throughout the life of SISO. Many forums have solicited and published papers on fidelity. Many forums have recommended and sponsored fidelity-related implementation study groups within SISO to address a number of specific simulation fidelity issues that cut across the concerns of virtually all SISO forums. SISO first chartered the Implementation Study Group for Fidelity Definition and Metrics (ISG-FDM).  The ISG-FDM published its work as paper 99S-SIW-167.  Excitement about the consensus and products created by the ISG-FDM and the interest in pursuing the ideas presented in 99S-SIW-167 led to the suggestion that SISO charter a follow-on ISG. Consequently, , the Fidelity Experimentation ISG (ISG-FEX) was chartered to  experiment with and improve the ideas described in the ISG-FDM report.  This paper reports the results of the ISG-FEX.  It discusses 1) refinements in the Fidelity Conceptual Framework, 2) applications of that framework to real simulation problems, and 3) the prospect for developing fidelity standards at this time.Introduction This is the report out of the Fidelity Experimentation Implementation Study Group (ISG-FEX).  The ISG-FEX was charged with experimenting with and refining the Fidelity Conceptual Framework  REF _Ref422627242 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [4] developed by the earlier Fidelity Definition and Metrics Implementation Study Group (ISG-FDM). Rationale for the ISG-FEXThe publication of the baseline Fidelity Conceptual Framework  REF _Ref422627242 \r \h [4] is considered by many as a major step forward in simulation science.  Others criticize this framework for not being practical or providing no significantly useful insights into modeling and simulation.  However, both judgements are primarily based on intuition rather than factual judgements based on experimental facts. The most objective way to provide a preliminary proof of concept of the Fidelity Conceptual Framework is by exploring its usefulness and applicability to real simulation problems. The practical experimentation approach should also uncover imperfections in the Fidelity Conceptual Framework and provide practical suggestions for its improvement.  Identification of these imperfections in an early stage of development will help avoid serious problems with the foreseen standardization of this framework.  Moving too quickly to standardization  without careful practical experimentation and evaluation involving a broad cross section of simulation domains could result in a fidelity standard with little or no real utility.  Such a standard will most likely suffer from incompleteness, inconsistency, and irrelevancy.  A fidelity standard, if not verifiably applicable across different domains, could worsen our already poor understanding and communication about fidelity and actually inhibit reaching our goal of achieving valid simulation interoperability and reusability. The only effective way to move toward standardization is through extensive fundamental and experimental research supported and performed by a representative subset of the broad simulation community. This practical approach will lead to a fidelity standard that best serves the whole simulation community.ISG-FEX Tasks and ProductsThe primary task of the ISG-FEX was experimentation with and refinement of the Fidelity Conceptual Framework.  The objective was to provide sufficient experience with the framework to improve it and to assess its suitability for standardization.  To achieve this goal the ISG-FEX issued calls-for-papers which dealt with the Fidelity Conceptual Framework, collected these papers, and discussed the results at special fidelity sessions at the Fall 1999 and Spring 2000 SIW. The experimentation goals set by the ISG-FEX, which should have been touched upon by these papers and fidelity sessions include:Solicit Related Data: Search for other fidelity related information, and research the applicability of this data to the Fidelity Conceptual Framework.Conduct Trials: Actual application of the Fidelity Conceptual Framework to real simulation applications in different problem and application domains.Prototype Fidelity-Based Verification & Validation Procedures: Determine how ISG-FDM fidelity achievements can enhance the simulation verification & validation process and outline a prototype processes.Identify Standard Fidelity Referents: Identify existing or develop new authoritative real-world descriptions and data sources against which the fidelity of a model or simulation can be measured.These experimental research efforts were not intended to result in a set of formal and fully completed products, but to be considered as a first formal iteration step in the development of standards.  It is unrealistic to expect that this first iteration would yield a credible, verified fidelity framework because: the number of identified previous attempts to address the issue of simulation fidelity ( REF _Ref422627242 \r \h [4], REF _Ref448891373 \r \h [11], REF _Ref448891384 \r \h [12]), the complexity of the real-world underlying fidelity definition and measurement, andthe interrelationship of fidelity characterizations with all aspects of model and simulation development. Therefore, the ISG-FEX experimental results were primarily expected to identify areas for further research and discussion, which should result in improvements of the baseline Fidelity Conceptual Framework and  so contribute to the eventual development of a fidelity standard.Expected Benefits of the FrameworkA broadly accepted, standardized Fidelity Conceptual Framework  could reasonably be expected to serve as a major tool for improving simulation development processes and the quality, credibility, and suitability of the resulting simulations. The expected benefits  REF _Ref422627242 \r \h [4] include: more thorough validation, greater, interoperability and reuse, simpler simulation requirements specification, and better, clearer quantification of model and simulation capability and economics. The potential for a fidelity standard to meaningfully address simulation interoperability is very significant  REF _Ref472760155 \r \h [5].  Recent SIW papers have classified interoperability issues into two classes: technical and substantive interoperability  REF _Ref464296517 \r \h [13]. Technical interoperability, sometimes referred to as syntactical interoperability, is characterized as the ability of simulations to physically connect (RTI, etc.) and exchange data according a predetermined contract (FOM, etc.).  Technical interoperability while necessary, is not a sufficient condition to insure that a particular collection of simulations will combine to form a valid federated simulation Substantive (or semantic) interoperability is concerned with establishing that the set of interacting simulations forms a coherent and logical whole, with enough realism to fulfil its purpose.  In other words, substantive interoperability can only be achieved when the fidelity of the federates within a federation support interoperability. Beyond substantive interoperability, fidelity plays a role in enabling reuse.  Reuse of one or more previously created federates is a regular practice to reduce federation development time and costs.  In fact, our ability to reuse these federates is a key benefit of HLA.  However, making a good decision about the reusability of  a given simulation in a current federation basically depends on two things. Consumers of reusable components must be able to specify the fidelity the needed to fulfil the simulation purpose .  Furthermore, this over-all fidelity must be translated or decomposed to the required fidelity levels for each federate. Providers of reusable components must be able to describe the fidelity of the federate and its underlying models be de well enough that the simulation fidelity level can measurably represent the referent to a certain fidelity level. The Fidelity Conceptual Framework is expected to provide better means to capture and express these required fidelity levels as part of the complete simulation requirement specification. The Fidelity Conceptual Framework is also expected to provide the means to describe these simulation and model capabilities.Until some practical experiments prove otherwise, these expected benefits remain theoretical rather than established facts. The Fidelity Experiment Interim Study group aimed at collecting the experimental evidence needed to formally establish that the Fidelity Conceptual Framework if standardized, does indeed provide the claimed benefits.A Practical Example of  Fidelity ProblemsA recent simulation development effort described in [14] provides a real-life example of fidelity problems regarding simulation interoperability and reuse.  This example contains several types of problems which the Fidelity Conceptual Framework is intended to address.This example describes a distributed simulation  federating legacy simulations with the intent to evaluate marine combat systems.  One of the scenarios to be represented by this environment includes joint operation of several ship platforms  executing a co-operative defensive action against incoming air-threat.  Despite the fact that a good equivalent model of data-link between the platforms was available, over-all fidelity problems were expected because of the different fidelity levels of the radar models used by each platform.  Several radar systems did not taken into account all the environmental conditions in the scenario that limited target detection.  Some radar systems could see the target while others did not.  If the simulation designer failed to anticipate and handle this problem prior to the execution of the scenario, severe conflicting radar readings will be communicated among the platforms, causing an unrealistic situation, not at all representative of the actual systems under study.  The problem is caused by combining simulations, each of which has a fidelity perfectly acceptable for its original purpose, into a configuration to serve a new purpose.  Since this is exactly the purpose of simulation reuse, we clearly need to equip simulation developers with the means to anticipate and correct these problems.   This is a clear example of substantial interoperability problems closely related to the issue of over-all fidelity of distributed simulations, stressing the importance of a structured approach to fidelity such as the Fidelity Conceptual Framework.Summary of Actual Experiments with the Fidelity Conceptual FrameworkUnfortunately, while the primary objective of the ISG-FEX was to collect and discuss all published work regarding the usage of the Fidelity Conceptual Framework, and the  ISG-FEX members diligently solicited such experimentation, the response has been disappointing.  So far the only published serious experimentation with the ISG-FDM framework comes from a single source, the Delft University of Technology in co-operation with the TNO Physics and Electronics Laboratory, both located in the Netherlands. The following describes their work.  Further elaboration of this discussion is contained in references  REF _Ref464296485 \r \h [9],  REF _Ref448891373 \r \h [11] and  REF _Ref448891384 \r \h [12].Fidelity Management Overlay (FiMO)Fidelity is one of the major cost drivers of any simulation development, yet the simulation community has no way to objectively measure, how much fidelity is needed for a given application or how much fidelity exists in a particular model..  An objective way to quantify and measure fidelity is long overdue.  Currently, fidelity assessment is mostly performed in an ad-hoc subjective manner after the simulation has been fully developed and implemented.  A major disadvantage of this approach is that very often a much more costly redesign or modification is needed when the completed  simulation is found to have incorrect fidelity for its intended purpose. Clearly the role of fidelity in simulation validation is often underestimated. A comparison of the definition of fidelity with that of validation found in the Fidelity Glossary  REF _Ref422627242 \r \h [4], reveals that validation can be defined and characterized in terms of fidelity (See Section  REF _Ref471546303 \r \h 2.2). The Fidelity Concept Framework focuses primarily on a fidelity definition and measurement approach aimed at more objective simulation fidelity specification.  To large extent, it succeeds. However, it fails to provide structured guidelines to help simulation developers manage all the many kinds of fidelity decisions they make during the development and validation of complex distributed, causing the application of the framework to be somewhat problematic.   The Fidelity ISG’s proposed Fidelity Management Process is described in the Fidelity Glossary [4].  In contrast to the relatively well substantiated fidelity definition and measurement data provided in the Fidelity Framework, the Fidelity Management Process is not well elaborated or supported This weakness may partially explain the limited number of experiments with the framework  undertaken by the community..  Determining the relationship of fidelity to the entire simulation development, including validation is equally important to objectively measuring the degree of fidelity.  In other words, we must understand not only what fidelity is and how we measure it, but we must understand how we are going to apply this understanding to the full gamut of development of complex simulations. Only when we gain this understanding, can we obtain the full potential (Section  REF _Ref470268767 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT 1.3) of the Fidelity Conceptual Framework. These considerations are the driving force behind the ongoing development of the fidelity management overlay overlay (FiMO) for the FEDEP model. FiMO’s basic framework ( REF _Ref470858877 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 21) was created after an extensive research into existing fidelity constructs ( REF _Ref448891373 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [11],  REF _Ref448891384 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [12]). This structured approach  addresses the numerous fidelity characterization and measurement issues that occur in the activities of each development stage, and  describes how fidelity descriptions are transformed during the transition from one development stage to the next. Also, he entire  FiMO framework, has been upgraded to achieve compatibility with the Fidelity Glossary and Fidelity Conceptual Framework  REF _Ref464296485 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [9].The FiMO starts in the first two stages of the FEDEP with the specification of required levels of over-all or federation fidelity.  These fidelity requirements are deduced from the federation needs and objectives using FiMO’s Fidelity Requirements Specification (FiReS) method (Section  REF _Ref470861027 \n \h 2.3).  These federation fidelity requirements support estimating and allocating the fidelity of the federates during the design stage.  These fidelity requirements not only quantify the required represented dimensions of the  real-world (e.g.  entities to be represented, tolerance levels for entity properties, etc.) but also the implementation dimension of fidelity.  Fidelity implementation dimensions include the physical, functional and performance characteristics of specific hardware and software elements, which determine and impact the eventual federation fidelity (e.g. program-language limitations, network, processor, latencies, etc.)  REF _Ref448891384 \r \h [12].  Based on the federate fidelity requirements and the federation development constraints, suitable existing federates can be selected or modified for reuse, or new federates can be developed.  The federation development may reveal some unexpected difficulties in the actual implementation of the design causing some modifications to the design or limitations of the implementation.  Addressing and documenting the effects of these modifications and limitations on the eventual fidelity of both the federate and federation is part of the FiMO process.  In the integration and testing stage of the FEDEP, the FiMO successively checks whether the fidelity requirements of the federates and federation are achieved for the current implementation.  During the federation execution by the user fidelity characteristics are monitored and analyzed to assure that the federation indeed fulfilled the fidelity requirements during all execution runs. Figure  STYLEREF 1 \s 2 SEQ Figure \* ARABIC \s 1 1 FEDEP Fidelity Management Overlay (version 99-0.3)Fidelity-Based V&V Using FiMOThe FiMO structure implicitly contains a process for fidelity-based verification and validation which is a prototype Fidelity-Based Verification and Validation (V&V) process. First, consider fidelity-based validation.  The definition of validation, according to Reference  REF _Ref470939924 \r \h [3], is:Validation, the process of determining the degree to which a model or simulation accurately represents the real-world, or some other meaningful referent, from the perspective of the intended purpose of the model or simulation.   Stated shortly, the definition for fidelity  REF _Ref422627242 \r \h [4] states that fidelity is an array of metrics and techniques that measure this 'degree to which a model or simulation accurately represents the real-world or referent'. Therefore, validation can expressed in terms of fidelity ( REF _Ref448891373 \r \h [11],  REF _Ref448891384 \r \h [12]) as 'the process of determining whether the level of fidelity of a model or simulation is sufficient from the perspective the intended purpose of the model or simulation'.  This last definition is the one that is utilized in the FiMO for capturing the validation aspects of simulation development. Validation of a model or simulation applied in this manner consists of primarily two steps: measurement of the current level fidelity of the model or simulation, and the evaluation whether this measured fidelity level is good enough for the intended purpose.  In this way the difference and relationship between model or simulation fidelity and model or simulation validity is clearly and transparently expressed. I.e., while fidelity is an intrinsic and absolute measure of realism of a model or simulation, validity is a relative measure related to  particular model or simulation’s purpose. . This perspective is   found in  REF _Ref448891373 \r \h [11] and described by the Fidelity Conceptual Framework (see definition 12 in reference  REF _Ref422627242 \r \h [4]).However, such a fidelity-based validation process can only be properly executed when both a suitable authoritative real-world description (i.e., a fidelity referent and a specification of the required level of fidelity  REF _Ref464296485 \r \h [9] are available for the model or simulation and its intended application. The Fidelity Requirements Specification (FiReS) method (see Section  REF _Ref470861027 \r \h 2.3) as part of the FiMO provides guidelines to develop these fidelity requirements from the federation objectives and conceptual model.  Fidelity-based validation activities in the first two stages of the Fidelity Management overlay of the FEDEP, comprise:the assessment of the sufficiency of the specified fidelity requirements to achieving the federation needs and objectives. the assessment of the adequacy of conceptual model support for federation fidelity requirements and needs/objectives. Next, consider fidelity-based verification.  According to Reference  REF _Ref470939924 \r \h [3], verification is ‘the process of determining that model or simulation implementation accurately represents the developer's conceptual description and specification. Therefore, fidelity-based verification activities focuses on verifying whether the conceptual model and fidelity requirements are properly translated to a supporting hard and software realization of the federation with appropriate real-world and implementation fidelity dimensions.  Specifically, in step five of the FEDEP, fidelity-based V&V focuses on measuring certain fidelity characteristics (Fidelity MOPs & MOEs) throughout the federation execution and checks whether they fulfil the fidelity requirements developed in the first step of the FiMO.  Prior to this, the available fidelity capabilities of each federate are checked against the fidelity requirements set for each federate in the third step of FiMO.  The last activity of a fidelity-based V&V process is establishing, in co-operation with the federation user, that the stage five measured and checked level of federation fidelity indeed fits the federation purpose.  If the result of this last activity is negative, this indicates that the federation does not have enough credibility and the fidelity requirements deduced from the federation purpose in first two states of the FiMO were inadequate and require adjustment.  Such a situation is highly undesirable and can be avoided by using a carefully specifying fidelity requirements.Fidelity Requirements Specification Using the FiReS MethodThe previous section clearly demonstrates simulation fidelity requirements must be developed from the federation needs or objectives for fidelity to be useful as a tool for V&V activities.  For several reasons, elicitation of needs and objectives is the hardest part of simulation requirements engineering: users have no clear idea of what they really need, users have difficulties to express needs, needs are stated in the user’s language.  However, failurer to completely elicit the users actual needs and objectives will result in  inappropriate, incomplete, or simply wrong simulation fidelity requirements. FiMO addresses these problems with a two stage process for capturing true needs/objectives and federation fidelity requirements, called the Fidelity Requirements Specification (FiReS) method  REF _Ref464296485 \r \h [9].FiReS federation fidelity requirement specification format, based on the Fidelity Conceptual Framework, contains the following elements:Pointer to Fidelity Referent or other authoritative real-world standard.Real-world aspects or entities (Similar to the object detail component of the Fidelity Conceptual Framework’s resolution).Real-world aspect cardinality or number of simultaneously represented instances (Similar to Fidelity Conceptual Framework’s capacity).Behavioral characteristics description of each real-world aspect (Similar to the dependency detail component of the Fidelity Conceptual Framework resolution).Observable properties of each behavioral characteristic (Similar to the property detail component of the Fidelity Conceptual Framework’s resolution).Observable property tolerance or allowed error (Similar to Fidelity Conceptual Framework‘s variable error/accuracy and tolerance).Tolerance conditions or the conditions for which the property tolerance must hold.Measurement methods to be utilized for measuring the actual observable property error/accuracy.Federation timing approach: event-driven, real-time, faster real-time etc.The two remaining ISG-FDM concepts, sensitivity and precision, are not part of the federation fidelity requirements specification stage of FiReS, because they basically quantify limiting factors of the quality or accuracy of the model’s or simulation’s  internal representation of the real-world  REF _Ref464296485 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [9].  Sensitivity and precision play a major role in the second stage of the FiReS process, federation fidelity specification.  In this stage the federation fidelity requirements are used to specify the federate fidelity requirements. This specification starts with the selection of proper algorithms for the internal representation of each real-world aspect or entity behavior.  The selection of algorithms is based on the tolerance and conditions under which those tolerances apply, for each observable property together the limitations/assumptions of the available algorithms .  Furthermore,  errors caused by the relationships and interactions of internal representations and their affect on the overall system fidelity must be considered..  Here the Fidelity Conceptual Framework’s precision and sensitivity concepts must be applied while selecting algorithms, levels of aggregation, and allocation to (i.e. required Ideal SOMs), and the real-world data to be exchanged between federates (required Ideal FOM).FiMO Application: ERA-2020 ProjectCurrently, both the FiMO and its FiReS process are applied to the Delft University of Technology En-Route Airspace 2020 project (ERA-2020). This program applies HLA and FEDEP to interconnect several aircraft and Communication, Navigation and Surveillance Future Air Navigation Systems (CNS/FNS) within a single simulation executive to study future air traffic control and management concepts.  This practical application aims to demonstrate how the FiMO, including the underlying ISG-FDM concepts, could provide substantial improvement in  simulation  development and validation. Furthermore, the practical experience gained from this exercise will be used to further improve the FiMO.Since the ERA-2020 project is in the early stages of requirements development,  little data is available to formally prove the usefulness of both the FiMO and Fidelity Conceptual Framework. However, this first practical experience reveals some important problems and concrete research questions regarding the applicability and future development of the Fidelity Conceptual Framework. These issues will be presented and discussed in the next two sections.Fidelity ExperimentationThis section discusses the experience, problems and concerns in applying the Fidelity Conceptual Framework.Maturity of the Current  FrameworkApplication of the Fidelity Conceptual Framework in the FiMO development and the ERA-2020 project, showed where the framework needs to mature.Clarity in the Current FrameworkThe first difficulty when applying the Fidelity Conceptual Framework is to understand what it is, because this is not explicitly stated in the ISG-FDM report out  REF _Ref422627242 \r \h [4]. The framework is section 2, Fidelity Overview, and Appendix B, A Mathematical Foundation for Fidelity, in  that report.  The updated  framework, presented at the 1999 Fall SIW, is somewhat more explicit  REF _Ref471114060 \r \h [6]. Figure 3.1.1-1 illustrates a graphic communicating the framework to the simulation community and to better explain  relationships among its components.. This graphic has been successfully used in the ERA-2020 project to communicate the framework. Obviously, any attempt to create a fidelity standard on the basis of the Fidelity Conceptual Framework will have to clarify it.  The ISG-FEX has recognized this problem by proposing a “synthesis” ISG after the conclusion of the current experimentation ISG before establishing a standards development group.  Clarification will not, however, address other problems in the current framework.Figure  STYLEREF 1 \s 3.1.1 SEQ Figure \* ARABIC \s 1 1 The FiMO, Fidelity GraphicTime Modeling in the Current FrameworkThe most important issue not addressed in the Fidelity Conceptual Framework, is the relationship between fidelity and time.  This is of major importance because simulations are by definition dynamic processes, which represent systems whose state and characteristics change over time  REF _Ref422627242 \r \h [4].  The framework does recognize this problem but does not provide a concept or metric(s) to quantify the time element effects on the model or simulation fidelity. In real-life, time is a fundamental mechanism underlying our perception and description of how the real-world evolves, i.e. capturing changes over a certain period of duration (dynamics) and ordering mechanism for the occurrences of certain changes (events).  This makes time a complex and very special fidelity issue.  The capability of characterizing these time aspects as part of an authoritative real-world description or fidelity referent is an essential part of fidelity.  Another important part is how to deal with fidelity time aspects in the effort to represent certain parts of reality by a model or simulation.  This requires new fidelity concepts to characterize and measure the effect of time aspects on the eventual level of realism of a model or simulation.Implementation in the Current FrameworkWhile the ability to describe how well a model or simulation must represent the real-world in specific fidelity terms is important, understanding  how these descriptions map to performance, physical and functional characteristics of the implementing simulation hardware and software is equally important.  These can then be used to describe the effects of the implementation techniques on the fidelity of the simulation which will eventually be produced.  So far the Fidelity Conceptual Framework describes and characterizes model or simulation fidelity in a real-world oriented language. However, the fidelity implications of the technologies applied in a simulation implementation are not fully addressed by the current framework.  Clearly this is an important consideration which must be understood and addressed, if simulation fidelity s and performance are to be properly defined and managed. and capabilities for model or simulation in the design and implementation stage of a simulation development process.Capacity in the Current FrameworkIn the current Fidelity Conceptual Framework 'capacity' is, at best, mysterious.  The current framework  provides no  formal definition of capacity, nor any real application of it. Only after careful study of the frameworks mathematical foundation, does it becomes clear that capacity has something to do with instances of objects.  Any standard would have to clarify this concept.After some discussion over the fidelity reflector, the following definition for capacity has been compiled  REF _Ref471116761 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [10]: Capacity, the number of instances of an object or detail that are simultaneously represented by a model or simulation; cardinality. An analogy used in this context, considers capacity as a function of size of the available bucket. This bucket represents the capabilities (computational power, data structure size, etc.) of hardware and software  used in a simulation.  Capacity includes  time aspects such as the ability of the simulation system to provide a certain number of object updates within a specified time frame. To make it more complex, the inherent limitations of a model are also included in the capacity’s scope. Discussions on the ISG-FEX have formed a consensus that capacity is closely related to fidelity implementation. Further research may determine that the capacity concept can replace implementation as an element of the framework.Referents in the Current FrameworkA major, still unsolved, difficulty encountered in the ERA-2020 project is the creation or definition of the authoritative real-world description or referent. This is a very important topic, since most expect that fidelity is measured against this referent. The Fidelity Conceptual Framework does not provide examples or practical guidelines for the development of such referents.  The only known useful fidelity referent is the FAA’s Simulation Certification Program, and the related USAF Simulation Certification Program.  Neither of these approaches has been shown to be useful in other simulation domains. While one might imagine that there should be one referent because there is just one world.  The referent is the sum of all knowledge about the aspect being represented.  If we assume perfect knowledge, readily accessible to and understandable by the simulation developer, we are left only with selecting what we want to represent out of the referent.  However the great complexity of the real-world differences inherent to the problems addressed by each simulation problem/application domain and differences in the cultural background of persons involved in the modeling and simulation business, this will be an utopia.  Therefore, its is most likely that the contents of a referent will vary across the problem/application domains.  This will make it more complicated to achieve substantive interoperability and to reuse simulations across different domains, because of possible incompatibility problems between the used fidelity characterization formats.  However, this does not imply that the Fidelity Conceptual Framework will not be universal applicable, only their implementations will be different. A small example to illustrate this.  Some part of the simulation community may classify aircraft in three types, heavy, medium, light weight.  Each of the types contains only five state variables, representing the 3D position, in meters, of the aircraft, ground speed in meters per second and heading in degrees, with respect to a flat-earth axis system. Another part of the community (e.g., an airline training facility) might define aircraft in 4 types: B747-300, A330-200, MD11 and Cessna172.  Each of the types contains twelve state variables, representing the 3D position in nautical miles and feet with respect to a geodetic axis system, 3D orientation in Euler angles in radians, the aircraft 3D airspeed vector in knots and angular rotation in radians per second, measured in the aircraft stability axis system.Both communities apply the same concept of resolution, in terms of object and property detail, in their attempt to represent aircraft in an airspace system.  The difference between these two approaches lies only in the implementation of the resolution concept in the current framework, i.e. what the communities interpret as being an aircraft type object and its properties.  Also, the accuracy concept in the current framework will be applied similarly in both communities.  However, the metric used to measure the difference between the referent values and simulated values of the state properties could be different.  The first could measure the accuracy of state property one as follows: 'one divided by the absolute value of the maximum measured difference between the referent value and the simulated property value during a period of 5 minutes'.  The other community could measure the accuracy of its state property one as follows: 'one divided by the average value of the measured difference between the referent value and the simulated property value during a period of 10 seconds'. Both implementations comply with the formal definition of the accuracy concept in the current framework.This example demonstrates that the concepts in the current framework are universal applicable but that the difference in implementation requires a different structure of fidelity referent.  The referent for community ‘1’ must at least contain a description in terms of what is called a heavy or medium weight aircraft and needs at least 5 minutes of recorded data, while community ‘2’ needs only 10 seconds of recorded data for property one. Therefore it is much more likely that each problem/application domain will develop their own referent that addresses their domain best.  This will make it much harder to directly compare the fidelity of simulations from different domains. Since there is one world it should, in theory, be possible to deduce a mapping between the different fidelity implementations in order to make a comparison.  In practice, constructing such mappings would be a very complex, erroneous and sometimes impossible task.Another concern is capturing the referent of a system that does not exist, or for which we know very little. For example, consider RD&E simulations such as the ERA-2020 project. In the case of such systems, we know very little, and therefore have a very small  (simple) referent.  It is easier to make models that match simple referent than models that match complex referent – but surely this should not mean that their fidelity is higher!  Instead of impacting fidelity, the sophistication of the referent impacts risk we can correctly select from and apply that knowledge to build a model that meets the users needs.  However, the current framework does not address this distinction.None of this implies that fidelity measurement of a simulation is useless or waste of time. The opposite is actually true, having an estimate of the uncertainty in your available capabilities of measuring the model or simulation realism, is a most powerful metric of fidelity in judging the usability and validity of a model or simulation for a specific purpose.  Knowing that you are 90% or 40% sure that the accuracy of a simulation parameter is 0.95, is equally important than knowing the accuracy level itself.  The point is that approaches to fidelity that depend on known referents are and will continue to be, intractable.The Umbrella Approach to FidelityFidelity is characterized in the current framework as a multi-dimensional metric instead of the often-used short subjective descriptions like high, medium or low fidelity, or just as bad the notion of a single fidelity number.  The advantage of these long descriptions of fidelity is that they provide a larger information content, which is needed to make fidelity a real useful metric for simulation development.  However, the implication of this umbrella approach to fidelity is the large amount of complex fidelity-related data that must be understood, analyzed, process and managed by the simulation developers during simulation development.  The preliminary experience of the ERA-2020 project showed that for such larger applications the amount of fidelity related data becomes rapidly too large, to be solely handled by the human-mind.  A form of automation is therefore desirable to make the Fidelity Conceptual Framework better applicable to larger simulations.  Creating such automation depends of course on the existence of a accept fidelity standard.Fidelity Framework and Contextual Aspects The current framework  emphasizes  entities and technical system  fidelity specification.  Less attention is paid to the simulation context in which these entities should be combined, operated and considered.  The simulation context can be characterized as the 'overall-reality' that should be represented by a simulation and describes all entities involved, the representation of the human-made and natural environment in which the entities operate, the operational procedures and processes utilized etc.   Simulation context is deduced from the simulation objectives and formally defined in the simulation conceptual development stage by means of a set of scenarios.  The simulation context describes the complete integrate set of real-world aspects or elements of that part of reality we want to include in our model or simulation in order to achieve our simulation objectives.  Therefore it is reasonable to assume that the simulation context is the highest (aggregation) level possible for which the fidelity of a model/simulation can be viewed or considered. To be able to achieve proper substantive interoperability between several inter-operating entity simulations it is thus necessary to develop such a context and assess its desired level of fidelity. The next simplified example illustrates the issue of simulation context, fidelity and simulation objectives.  Assume that a simulation uses the most sophisticated and 'high' fidelity entity model of a B747- 400 aircraft is available and that this model is combined with the most sophisticated synthetic environment model of an airport with only a small grass runway.  Furthermore, the objective of the simulation is to study the take-off and landing performance of the B747-400 aircraft.  Obviously, this created context is far from realistic and certainly not a right one to fulfil the simulation objective.  Fidelity characterization of synthetic environments itself is also a fidelity issue, which is not well covered by the current framework.  The SEDRIS development efforts seem to provide some useful knowledge on how to abstract, structure and measure realism of such a synthetic environment as part of a simulation fidelity assessment.The Framework and the FEDEPA second main goal of the FEX-ISG was to promote the use of common fidelity terminology throughout the SISO community and its major products.  This goal was partially met when the ISG-FEX supported balloting resolution Draft Standard for Modeling and Simulation High Level Architecture (HLA) – Object Model Template (OMT) by resolving two issues related to fidelity terminology, namely the use of accuracy and resolution in the standard.However, the goal of standardizing use of fidelity related terminology goal has not yet been fully realized.  A prime example of this is fidelity and the Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP).  The FEDEP is the main framework for developing federations. As discussed in section  REF _Ref471290903 \r \h 2.1, fidelity is a major characteristic of a federation effecting all stages of federation development, including its validation. Practical experience shows ( REF _Ref471116464 \r \h [9],  REF _Ref448891373 \r \h [11]) that while the FEDEP does certainly address some aspects related to fidelity, it does so in an implicit manner that is incomplete, sufficiently specific or consistent with the ISG-FDM products. this is primarily because, while  the FEDEP is  supports technical interoperability  REF _Ref464296517 \r \h [13] between simulations: describes when and how to create  required HLA products, such as FOM, FEPW, RID-file, FED-file, RTI selection, and shows how to establish a network connection, it fails to fully address substantial interoperability   REF _Ref464296517 \r \h [13]. I.e.  the FEDEP does little to establish that the  real world representations contained in the simulations it federates  make any sense for the intended federation purpose. The ability to characterize the reality that needs to be represented and imparted in a simulation, i.e. fidelity, is key to achieving substantive interoperability.  Therefore, a transition from a focus on technical interoperability to inclusion of substantial interoperability issues, will necessarily include fidelity.  In such an approach, simulation objectives will be mapped to the over-all fidelity requirements of a federation.  In their turn, these derived federation fidelity requirements form a basis  for technical interoperability requirements (FOM/SOM contents, network requirements, RTI time management and DDM services required etc.) to be specified and implemented.  FiMO implements this approach to federation development (See Section  REF _Ref470861027 \r \h 2.3).  This implementation is now being  tested in the ERA-2020 project. Early results are encouraging but more experience is required before the possible benefits and drawbacks of such fidelity driven approach to federation development may be conclusively described.. ConclusionsThis section draws some conclusions regarding the Fidelity Conceptual Framework and its future development, from the previously described practical experimentation.Difference between This and Previous Efforts Since any model or simulation is an abstraction or representation of some part of reality (material or imagined  REF _Ref422627242 \r \h [4]), fidelity measurement has always been considered as an essential part of any M&S effort.  This explains the objections about the ISG-FDM framework like, “the ISG-FDM provides answers we already know and tells us to do things we already practice”.  However, such opinions fail to account for the approach taken in previous fidelity studies, which are 'artistic', 'ad-hoc', and 'problem/domain specific'. An analysis  REF _Ref448891384 \r \h [12] of these efforts reveals that they consistently failed to provide a uniform, sufficiently robust approach to fidelity qualification able  to sufficiently deal with all simulation fidelity issues.  To consider one example, some believe that the 'FAA/JAA simulator requirements for pilot training fully addresses simulation fidelity. Indeed the 'FAA/JAA simulator requirements comprise the most mature, practical and proven approach to fidelity  yet developed, and it offers valuable insights, as do  other fidelity efforts.  But  careful tailoring of the FAA/JAA requirements for unitary pilot training simulators and assumptions about the availability of a rich set of real-world  aircraft data limits their ability to fully and generally address distributed simulation fidelity.  In contrast to these previous efforts, the fidleity ISG have has followed a scientific approach in seeking a fidelity theory that is generic, formal and robust enough to be applied across multiple M&S application and problem domains.  In this light the accomplishments of the fidelity ISGs over the past two years can be considered as a substantial improvement over the other efforts.  Even so, the work is still far from being ready for standardization for the reasons noted.ISG-FDM Framework and StandardizationThe current Fidelity Conceptual Framework is neither sufficiently complete nor adequately tested to serve as basis for a fidelity standard.  The observations reported in this paper are  based upon on a very small published body of work.  The experimental data gathered does not provide enough data to irrefutably demonstrate the value and legitimacy of the current framework’s approach to fidelity. Weakness in the framework revealed by Experimentation require further research.  This may indicate the transfer of emphasis from fidelity theory development to practical application, instead of further developing the framework to a level more suitable for experimentation was premature.  Extensions and refinements to address the weaknesses have been proposed in this report and elsewhere, but of course these too would require experimental verification before a standardization effort should commence.A standard based on the current framework would not properly serve the  needs of the simulation community. A fidelity standard with no real demonstrated practical utility would be disregarded by the community much as the DIS fidelity standard  REF _Ref470315938 \r \h [7]. More fundamental theoretical research, experiments , and trial applications are needed, before a proven, useful fidelity standard with any hope of achieving broad acceptance and adoption among simulation developers can be prepared.. The good news is that the framework is technically promising and that only interest and involvement is needed  to accomplish the needed work.  Unfortunately, few researchers have taken up this challenge  Future Fidelity Research ChallengesThis section describes some the future development and research needed to support development of fidelity standards like the Fidelity Conceptual Framework.Fidelity in the Context of Simulation TheoryExisting simulation practices ( REF _Ref448891373 \r \h [11],  REF _Ref448891384 \r \h [12]) prove that fidelity characterization and measurement is  interwoven with all facets of model and simulation development.  It can be concluded from this observation that a relationship exists between perceptions, abstractions and representations of reality (i.e., a model) and methods of measurement of  the difference between the representation and reality (i.e. .fidelity measurement).  in this context  the particular set of real-world knowledge against which the fidelity is measured, the 'Fidelity Referent, is  also a model of reality.  The real-world described by the referent and the simulation are thus both based on  human perceptions, abstractions, and understanding of the same reality.  The  difference is that the referent is considered as an authoritative and  credible representation of reality, while the model or simulation is considered less authoritative  less credible.  Therefore, a sensible fidelity theory can only be fully understood and utilized in a wider modeling and simulation context. Current practice is an art-form and at best an inexact science lacking serious fundamental and common accepted theory.  The way in which models and simulations are build depend upon the real-world system to be represented, its purpose and the background of the simulation developers performing the development process.  Therefore, almost every organization uses its own unique simulation approach. The lack of an uniform and formal development theoretical framework combined with the notion that a fidelity theory should be considered in such a larger context, will make it difficult to develop a fidelity theory that can easily be applied and provide significant improvements to each individual simulation process.  This observation is a plausible explanation for the encountered difficulties in applying the Fidelity Conceptual Framework to actual simulation development and the simulation community's reserved attitude to experimenting with this framework.Such a formal M&S framework or theory should be rooted in and build on a set of principle M&S concepts that described how reality can be or is perceived, measured and how real-word knowledge is expressed by human's.  Furthermore, these principle M&S concepts should describe how reality can be or is artificially abstracted or represented by a model or simulation.  This first activity deals with the process of how people create an authoritative real-world description or fidelity referent.  The second activity addresses the process of how people develop models and simulations.  If fidelity is considered in this framework, a fidelity theory, which measures the difference between 'true' reality and 'virtual' reality, is then a logical outcome and will naturally fit in any simulation development and validation process applying the same underlying principles. By changing the perspective from how a fidelity theory can contribute modeling and simulation to how a theory can contributed to fidelity measurement, may provide some new insights for the further development of the Fidelity Conceptual Framework and its potential benefits.Model Fidelity versus Simulation FidelityThe formal definition of fidelity in the framework speaks of fidelity in terms of the degree of realism of a model or simulation  REF _Ref422627242 \r \h [4]. Does this definition imply that there is a distinction between model fidelity and simulation fidelity? The framework does not address whether this statement is true or false. Simulation is defined as 'a method, software framework or system for implementing one or more models in the proper order to determine how key properties of the original may change over time'. A model is defined by the same glossary as 'a physical, mathematical, or otherwise logical abstract representation of a system, entity, phenomenon, or process with its own assumptions, limitations and approximations'. A simulation is thus an implementation of one or more models so there may be a difference between the fidelity of a model and a simulation.  A simulation is a model or a set of models in an execution environment that animates the models over time. Model fidelity will focus more on the mathematical or algorithm errors of the behavioral representations used and look & feel errors of the used mock-ups, while the execution environment will add some additional constraints and implementation errors to this model fidelity.  These constraints are related to the fidelity implementation dimension discussed earlier.Making this distinction between model and simulation fidelity could be a very useful in developing simulations.  A model itself is not the goal but is an important vehicle, necessary to create the simulation.  It is the simulation that is used for doing the training, collecting experimental data or any other application purpose.  Therefore, it is the simulation fidelity that should be known to be able to assess the validity and credibility of the simulation results.  Assume a model is available that describes the velocity of a car using a set of complex thermodynamic differential equations for the engine dynamics. Implementing this in two different execution environments (WinNT vs. Real-Time Linux, PII CPU vs. PIII, etc) does not change the 'model fidelity' however the fidelity of the eventual simulation can differ significantly.  Environment one cannot guarantee hard real-time updates because of the NT operating system being used.  The computation performance of execution environment one will be less than execution environment two due to the slower CPU.  This means that smaller time-frames or integration step-sizes (i.e. less integrative error in the velocity state variable) can be used for the model executing in environment two and still capable of providing the state updates in real-time.  A simulation composed of the car model and execution environment one has thus a different level of fidelity than a simulation composed of the same model and execution environment two.This example indicates that the current framework’s concepts (resolution, accuracy, etc.) could be applied equally well to describe fidelity of a model and a simulation, although the used fidelity metrics behind these concepts might be slightly different.  Basically the model fidelity metrics are a sub-set of the metrics used to characterize and measure the fidelity of a simulation.  The additional fidelity metrics used for simulation fidelity measurement will take the effect of the fidelity implementation dimensions (Sect.  REF _Ref471200506 \r \h Error! Reference source not found.) into account.  This perspective of dealing with fidelity may provide some insights to the further development of the framework’s fidelity metrics and how they relate or apply to models and simulations.Two Faces of Federate FidelityTraditionally fidelity research and experience has been a practice well cultivated in the training simulation domain.  Most of this research has been and still is focussing on the fidelity of the simulated entity as experienced by the human operator.  Publications from this domain mostly deal with the human perception of the entity behavior and representation and how to stimulate the human visual, auditory and vestibular systems in order to give the human operator the impression that he or she is in the real entity.  This type of research always considers fidelity solely in the context of unitary simulators.  For unitary simulators, which involve humans, these human-machine interface aspects of fidelity are the most important ones and define the MOPs for judging the simulator suitability for a certain training purpose.When using several human-in-the-loop simulators in a single simulation execution to perform for example team training, each simulator must also interface with the other simulators, which make up the whole virtual environment.  This means that such a federate or simulator must provide a certain level of fidelity in the human-machine interface presented to the human operator and in the federate interface represented to the rest of the federation. These two 'fidelity' boundaries of such a federate are connected to each other through the internal structure of the federate (entity system models, terrain data-base, entity representation in the virtual environment, mock up, visual system etc.).  This introduces extra complexity and problems in characterizing the over-all fidelity of the complete federation, which is an issue not really touched upon by the Fidelity Conceptual Framework.  Such issues deal with how the level of fidelity of real-world representations coming from other federates effect the realism or fidelity of the situation experienced by the operator and vice versa.  Solutions to these fidelity aspects are of vital importance in order to achieve substantial inter-operation of human-in-the-loop simulators. Fidelity and Conceptual ModelingThe FiReS work  REF _Ref471116761 \r \h [10] compared to the results of the Conceptual Model Tiger Team (CMTT)  REF _Ref448993659 \r \h [8] demonstrate that conceptual modeling and fidelity requirements specification are closely related processes. It is even possible to speak about a mutual relationship between both activities  REF _Ref471116464 \r \h [9].  A conceptual model is often characterized as an implementation independent abstraction of a part of reality that should be represented by a simulation.  This comes close to the definition for simulation fidelity requirements found in Ref.  REF _Ref471116761 \r \h [10].  However the imprecise definition of conceptual model makes it hard to understand how to develop or what should constitute a conceptual model.  Thanks to efforts of the CMTT, there is now a better framework available for developing and documenting conceptual models.  The elements suggested by the CMTT include the enumeration of entities, enumeration of entity state properties, enumeration of parameters, enumeration of entity interactions, enumeration of processes, real-world data sources used, algorithms, architecture, assumption etc.  These elements have a close resemblance with and relationship to the current framework’s concepts of resolution, accuracy, tolerances and fidelity referent  REF _Ref471114060 \r \h [6].  Requirements engineer considers conceptual modeling as the process of eliciting and modeling of real-world knowledge resulting in a functional specification of the problem domain.  For these reasons conceptual modeling can be considered as a tool for mapping the simulation purpose or objectives to a set of measurable fidelity requirements.Fidelity requirements specification and conceptual modeling activities have many similarities  REF _Ref471116761 \r \h [10].  Both have the identification of required aspects of reality as their basis. While fidelity requirements specification focuses more on the allowable deviation of this real-world aspects in terms of resolution and tolerance levels, conceptual modeling focuses how to internally realize these real-world aspects in order to fulfil these fidelity requirements.  Currently, both the fidelity research and the conceptual model research are executed separately.  The encountered difficulties in using and defining conceptual models and the ones encountered in fidelity research, stem from the same source, the lack of a formal and fundamental simulation theory or framework (see Section  REF _Ref471458616 \r \h 3.4.1) that underlies both processes.  Therefore, cooperative research could be most beneficial for both areas of concern.  This may result in the required context in which the mutual relationship between fidelity and conceptual models can be better understood and the encountered problems can be solved in a compatible manner.ReferencesDefense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO), 'Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) Model, version 1.4'. Department of Defense: June 1999.Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO), 'Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) Checklists, version 1.4'. Department of Defense: June 1999.Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO), 'VV&A RPG Glossary, Version 2.0'. Department of Defense: 24 April 1999.Gross D.C., et. al.,  ‘Report from the Fidelity Implementation Study Group’. 1999 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 1999, Paper 167.Gross, D.C., et al, “Why Fidelity”, 1999 Spring Interoperability Workshop, March 1999, Paper 168/Harmon S.Y., 'An Update to the FEX-Fidelity Framework'. 1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 1999, Invited Presentation for the ISG-FEX session.IEEE, 'Standard for Distributed Interactive Simulation - Fidelity Description Requirements'. IEEE-1278.5, 1995.Pace D.K., ‘Development and Documentation of a Simulation Conceptual Model’. 1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 1999, Paper 017.Roza M., 'Experiences in (Ab)using the ISG-FDM Fidelity Framework'. 1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 1999, Invited Presentation for the ISG-FEX session.Roza M., J. Voogd, H. Jense, P. van Gool, ‘Fidelity Fidelity Requirements Specification: A Process Oriented View’. 1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 1999, Paper 032.Roza M., P. van Gool, H. Jense,  ‘A Fidelity Management Process Overlay onto the FEDEP Model’. 1998 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 1998, Paper 083.Roza Z.C., ‘Simulation Fidelity: A preliminary study to fidelity assessment methodologies for HLA based distributed simulations’. TNO-Report FEL-98-I311. TNO Physics and Electronics Laboratory: The Hague, December 1998.Turrell C., et. al., ‘HLA and Beyond: Interoperability Challenges’. 1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 1999, Paper 073.White S.A., ‘Use of Mixed Time and Fidelity Legacy Simulations in an Engineering Federation’. 1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 1999, Paper 020.