Multiple Resolution Terrain FeaturesDr. Dale D. MillerAnnette JanettLockheed Martin Information SystemsAdvanced Simulation Center3605 132nd Ave. SE, Suite 400Bellevue, WA 98006ddmiller@lads.is.lmco.com,  HYPERLINK mailto:ajanett@lads.is.lmco.com ajanett@lads.is.lmco.comDr. Paul A. BirkelThe MITRE Corporation1820 Dolley Madison BlvdMcLean, VA 22102(703) 883-6399pbirkel@mitre.orgJohn NordstromEvans and Sutherland600 Komas DriveSalt Lake City, UT 84108(801) 588-1891 HYPERLINK mailto:jnordstr@es.com jnordstr@es.comKeywords:synthetic natural environment, terrain data base, multiple resolution terrain, terrain data model, featuresSEDRIS Environment Data Coding SpecificationABSTRACT: Traditionally, simulation systems have represented terrain-associated features at a single level of resolution, ranging from analytical simulations which typically represent the features found on a 1:1,000,000 map to simulations of individual combatants, which represent building interiors including, e.g., doors, windows, rooms, stairs and furniture. While a single level of resolution (almost) guarantees interoperability among heterogeneous simulations, it severely restricts which simulations may interoperate. The literature abounds with papers on the use of multiple resolutions in the terrain surface geometry, with the general conclusion that such trickery, when used conservatively, is a boon to visual simulators, but full interoperability requires that Synthetic Forces (SF) all operate at the highest available resolution, everywhere.Representation of features at multiple resolutions may be of great benefit to both visual and SF simulations. For example, we all understand the notion of a town, which is an abstraction of the elements which comprise it: roads, buildings, water towers, residential areas and so on.  Roads, in turn, are comprised of lanes, lane markings, shoulders, medians, and curbs. A hierarchical multi-resolution representation of features could allow SF systems to reason about the environment much as we do, and could provide extensions to the traditional terrain geometry-based “level-of-detail” used in visual systems so as to additionally encompass terrain features.With explicit multiple resolution features, SF systems could perform efficient reasoning (e.g., route planning, line of sight approximations over long distances) using an abstract, simplified view of the world, but then represent a higher level of resolution (and potentially fidelity) for more accuracy (e.g., vehicle movement, vehicle-to-vehicle line of sight).The visual subsystems associated with virtual simulations traditionally represent vertical infrastructure with multiple levels of detail, usually transitioning between levels as a function of the distance from object to the observer eyepoint.  Even forests have been represented in the Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT) as ”tent canopies” from long distances and as individual trees from closer viewpoints. We propose extending this general visual concept to the principled aggregation of features. This could allow for significantly improved interoperability between, for example, high flying fixed wing (e.g., DMT) and ground based virtual simulators (e.g., CCTT), or between constructive and virtual simulations such as WARSIM and CCTT.This feature hierarchy decomposition must be made from the perspective of the military operations rather than from more traditional scientific landform or cover classification schema. In general, these scientific classification schema can be significantly simplified with regard to their impact on military operations. In this paper we describe the rules/basis for the decomposition developed, the results of applying those rules to the SEDRIS Environmental Data Coding Specification (EDCS), and provide examples of the resulting utility to existing (and future) simulations. The resulting multi-resolution hierarchy has been incorporated into the STRICOM Terrain Common Data Model (TCDM).IntroductionWe appear to reason about the world by using a variety of abstractions at different resolutions. To plan a route to our destination, we reason about the highway network and its topology (it really does matter whether roads connect!). To find a town or city to spend the night, we look for the connecting nodes in this network. To navigate a city, we need a higher resolution representation, so we use a city map at larger scale. If we go to a park, e.g. Disneyland, we acquire an even larger scale map to help find our way from the Matterhorn to the Pirates of the Caribbean. All of these maps are abstractions of, and representations of, the world. All appear to be required to perform efficient/effective reasoning about the world – whether that reasoning is natural or artificial.The Synthetic Natural Environment (SNE) Conceptual Reference Model (CRM)  REF _Ref475694721 \r \h [1], distinguishes between those simulations incorporating explicit behavioral models of warfighters (constructive) and those where the behavior of the trainee is stimulated (virtual). In both cases, a common SNE (and component models) is required to support interoperable results – regardless of the level of abstraction (or detail) at which the simulation/stimulation operates (e.g., vehicle- or Division-level). In the constructive case, success is judged by the degree to which the simulation exhibits behavior consistent with that of real forces/warfighters in the same circumstances (a variant of the Turing test). In the virtual case, the visual system component must, in the same circumstances, present a credible scene from which the trainee can glean the necessary information with which to make a good decision.In this paper we report recent efforts to define a methodological approach to developing representations of terrain features which can consistently support multi-level reasoning (for Synthetic Forces – SF) and display (for virtual simulations). Those efforts are as yet incomplete – therefore this report describes a work-in-progress.After quickly reviewing related literature in the cognitive sciences, we discuss prior art in terrain database feature representation and requirements for constructive and virtual military simulations. Several relevant feature classification (“top down”) schemes are subsequently described, as well as our efforts in leveraging those schemes to develop an approach appropriate in our domain. The approach currently being pursued (“bottom up”) is then presented in greater detail, followed by a discussion of the benefits (and shortfalls) of the current approach, including lessons learned.Environmental Perception and CognitionWhy should we care about human cognition and perception for representing the SNE in military simulations? Current military simulations do not propose to attempt to replicate the detailed vagaries and adaptivity of human mental processes, however they do leverage, where appropriate, known human problem solving techniques. We conjecture that representation of the terrain SNE using multiple scales and levels of detail can improve the qualitative and computational performance of SF systems, the perception of visual scene utility by human participants, and the resulting quality of the terrain SNEs built.Environmental psychology is an active area of research  REF _Ref475694745 \r \h [2]. The cognitive psychologist Jean Piaget (1896 – 1980) believed that adults possess a fully coordinated, complete and metrically accurate mental representation of their environment. This is completely analogous to the environmental representations we currently give our SF and visual simulation systems (which, in the simulation business, we often refer to as ground truth).Based upon experiments in human perception, the theory of environmental perception has gradually changed from this ‘map in the head’ metaphor to a more loosely structured, hierarchical representation. Carreiras  REF _Ref475694769 \r \h [4] discarded the theory that an Euclidean geometry underlies the human spatial representation of relations between locations. Instead, he contends that an information processing account better captures the level of spatial representation in humans. According to this theory, “spatial information is organized hierarchically and schematically, at different levels of abstraction and in different modes of representation so as to maximize the power of spatial thought while making most efficient use of limited working memory capacity” REF _Ref472136151 \r \h [3].Kuipers  REF _Ref472136515 \r \h [5] suggests that we should think of human spatial representations as an atlas rather than a map, where knowledge of the environment is represented on different pages at different scales and levels of detail; the selection of a page of the atlas depends upon the application. For example to estimate the distance from Portland to Anaheim one would not examine separately the Oregon and California maps. Rather, one would open the atlas to a map of the western states.Prior Art in Simulation Terrain DatabasesConstructive SimulationsTerrain databases that are intended to support SF applications have historically been designed to support only a single level of detail. That level was determined by the requirements of the particular simulation supported, and generally was as simple as possible. While this tended to reduce the complexity of the SF “logic” which was designed to respond to terrain features, it also tended to result in SFs which were relatively “terrain ignorant”.The Joint Theater Level Simulation (JTLS) provides a typical example of an aggregate-level terrain representation. It uses a hex representation, and recognizes the following terrain characterizations interior to and at the boundaries of the hexes:Ocean, City, Desert, Forested, Mountainous, OpenRivers, LakesRoads {good or poor}, Railroads, Bridges, TunnelsAirfieldsPipelinesCliffsBarriers (along hex edges)	{Open, Limiting, Difficult, Restricted Area,		Moderately Restricted, Highly Restricted Area, Impassable,	Bridged Water, Lightly Bridged Water,Wadi, Bridged Wadi, Lightly Bridged Wadi, Heavily Bridged Wadi,Tank Ditch, Bridged Tank Ditch, Lightly Bridged Tank Ditch, Heavily Bridged Tank Ditch,	River, Heavily Bridged River,Navigable River, Bridged Navigable River, Lightly Bridged Navigable River, Heavily Bridged Navigable River,	Shore, Shore LCAC}As can be seen, there are only a few “broad category” feature types, plus a generic barrier feature with a type enumeration explicitly distinguished by military import. In general we find that there are features providing “lines of communication”, features supporting cross-country movement, and features acting as barriers to movement. Similar characterizations can be found in the Corps Battle Simulation (CBS), Eagle, JANUS, the Close Combat Tactical trainer (CCTT), and the Modular Semi-Automated Forces (ModSAF). While the details may differ, the same basic approach to terrain features characterization holds for all – excepting that CCTT and ModSAF (“platform-level” simulations) also represent buildings. The OneSAF system, currently being defined, will require not only buildings, but also building interiors, underground passageways, and a variety of higher-resolution features not currently represented in terrain databases.Virtual SimulationsVisual scene generation systems have long used the concept of level of detail (LOD) to help manage the number of graphic primitives (e.g., polygons, texels, light points) displayed in the visual scene at any one time. Databases designed for efficient scene rendering are often structured in such a way that it is possible to transition from one representation of a feature to another – typically as a function of the range between the observer’s eyepoint and the feature. For example, high LOD models (using large numbers of graphic primitives) are used when the viewing range is short, and low LOD models are used when it is long.  REF _Ref472348282 \h Figure 1 shows vector drawings of a helicopter represented at four different LODs. The lowest LOD uses 13 polygons to represent the helicopter while the highest version uses hundreds.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1: Model Levels of DetailIn many ways, building the helicopter with hundreds of polygons is an easier task than building the lower LOD versions. There is ample budget to include all of the parts of the helicopter and create a realistic model. Finding the 13 polygons that represent the essence of the helicopter at the lowest LOD requires skill on the database engineer’s part. They must use their knowledge of both the scene generation system’s limitations and of human visual perception to both remove fine detail from the model and consolidate the basic shape of the model into fewer and fewer polygons. If they do their job right, the human observer will perceive the resulting 13 polygons as a credible helicopter when it is used to represent the model at very long distances from the observer.A number of ways of transitioning between LODs have been used by visual scene generation systems. The simplest method is to simply pop between LODs (i.e., when the transition range for the higher LOD is reached, that LOD abruptly replaces the previous LOD). A less jarring method is to fade between LODs. Instead of an abrupt pop between the two versions, one version gradually becomes more transparent while the other becomes more opaque. An even more elegant method is to morph between the two versions. During morphing, new vertices and polygons are added when transitioning from a low LOD model to a high LOD version.  REF _Ref472348406 \h Figure 2 graphically shows these transitioning techniques.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2: Techniques for Transitioningbetween Levels of DetailOther visual database elements besides individual features use LOD to help manage processing load. Texture maps use a technique knows a multum in parvo (MIP). A MIP texture map is essentially a pyramid of texture maps, each one re-sampled by a factor of 2 from the map below it. The largest map is displayed closest to the eyepoint, with the visual system automatically blending to lower resolution layers of the MIP pyramid at distances further away. The terrain skin itself is also typically MIPed, with small terrain facets displayed close to the eyepoint and larger facets used for lower LODs. Either fading or morphing may be used to support transitioning between LODs.Complex database features, such as basis sets, use a variety of techniques to efficiently manage load. Small features, such as bushes and rocks, are gradually removed from the feature, reducing polygon load. Groups of trees might be coalesced into grove models that use fewer polygons than if each tree were represented separately. These groves may be merged into a single monolithic canopy model for use at the lower levels of detail. Finally, even the canopy is removed when it is too small to be perceived as a 3D object, and replaced by a texture map directly applied to the terrain surface.In some sense, databases intended to support scene generation are currently constructed as if they have access to multi-resolution feature data. Unfortunately, they don’t. The feature data, while possibly rich in descriptive attributes, remains impoverished. Instead, database engineers implicitly create multi-resolution databases through the addition of geo-typical 3D models. A residential areal is transformed into American suburbia, complete with split-level homes, detached garages, well-trimmed hedges, and streets lined with trees. A fabrication plant point feature is expanded with a modern industrial plant with fabrication buildings, paved parking lots, smokestacks, and large water tower with a faux company logo on it. All this makes for an attractive visual database, but may actually prevent the database from meeting the military requirements for which it is being designed.If the residential areal represents, e.g., San Francisco, then it more appropriately should be modeled as attached row houses abutting streets lined with parked cars. If the fabrication plant is a brick-making factory in the third-world, there are may be a smokestack and a building, but no parking lots or water towers. By not having information about what features are contained within aggregate features, the construction of the visual database is a guessing game. Correlation to the real-world has been, at best, compromised. Even if the visual database is a reasonable match to the real-world, there are still internal correlation issues. The visual database, complete with its aggregate features, needs to be shared with a SF system. The database can either share all of its fine detail with the SF system, which is probably more detail than desired, or it can share its features at coarser level of resolution. If the visual system cannot supply these aggregates of feature as explicit multi-resolution features, then the SF system runs the risk of incorrectly deciding what is “in the database”.Classification SchemesMany alternatives exist for designing a classification scheme for terrain based features. The JSIMS Terrain Common Data Model (TCDM), for example, defines a classification scheme at a “medium” level of resolution as given in  REF _Ref472149047 \h Table 1  REF _Ref472148429 \r \h [6].Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 1: JSIMS TCDM Classification SchemeClassificationDescriptionSurface ArealsIncludes vegetation, water, urban and physiographic regionsPoint CultureBuildings and facilities generally smaller than 90,000 sq. meters.Linear and Point HydrographyRivers, streams, lakes, locks represented as linear or point featuresLinear and Areal Terrain ObstaclesQuarries, ditches, pipelines, escarpments, etc. (natural or man-made)Maritime TrafficabilityMaritime routes and obstaclesLinear and Point TransportationRoads, railroads, bridges, etc.Administrative BoundariesPolitical boundaries, claim lines, international date line, etc.Battlefield ElementsObstacles or fortifications constructed for the purpose of improving survivability or affecting mobility or countermobilityLinear Connectivity / DistributionPower transmission lines, telephone lines, etc.While this classification scheme is closely tied to military functional use  REF _Ref472148429 \r \h [6], it is a completely flat, single resolution classification and does not meet our immediate goals.Anderson  REF _Ref475365607 \r \h [7] developed a two-level hierarchical land-use, land-cover classification scheme as shown in  REF _Ref472149768 \h Table 2. This is a generic classification scheme, which was developed for use with remote sensed imagery and has been used for classification of agricultural land for water quality assessment  REF _Ref475694951 \r \h [8].Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 2: Anderson’s Classification System1. Urban or build-up land 11. Residential. 12. Commercial and services. 13. Industrial. 14. Transportation, communications, and utilities. 15. Industrial and commercial complexes. 16. Mixed urban or built-up land. 17. Other urban or built-up land. 2. Agricultural land 21. Cropland and pasture. 22. Orchards, groves, vineyards, nurseries, and ornamental horticultural areas.23. Confined feeding operations. 24. Other agricultural land. 3. Rangeland 31. Herbaceous rangeland. 32. Shrub and brush rangeland. 33. Mixed rangeland. 4. Forest land 41. Deciduous forest land. 42. Evergreen forest land. 43. Mixed forest land. 5. Water 51. Streams and canals. 52. Lakes. 53. Reservoirs. 54. Bays and estuaries. 6. Wetland 61. Forested and wetland. 62. Nonforested wetland. 7. Barren land 71. Dry salt flats. 72. Beaches. 73. Sandy area other than beaches. 74. Bare exposed rock. 75. Strip mines, quarries, and gravel pits. 76. Transitional areas. 77. Mixed barren land. 8. Tundra 81. Shrub and brush tundra. 82. Herbaceous tundra. 83. Bare ground tundra. 84. Wet tundra. 85. Mixed tundra. 9. Perennial snow on ice 91. Perennial snowfields. 92. Glaciers.From a military perspective, this hierarchy is unsatisfying because of the complete lack of physiographic, obstacle, and transportation features, as well as its relatively impoverished set of cultural features.In the late 1960s, Richard Murphy  REF _Ref475694967 \r \h [9] constructed a regional landform classification system based upon structural regions (geology), topographic regions, and erosional/depositional regions (climate history). By taking the cross product of the subregions of these three regional types (and discarding nonsensical combinations), 37 mapping units are obtained – many world atlases continue to use Murphy’s maps. While Anderson’s classification system ignored physiographic features, Murphy’s ignores built-up and vegetation features.Richbourg et al.  REF _Ref472154151 \r \h [10] developed a taxonomy of terrain features to support the generalization of the Synthetic Environment Evaluation - Inspection Tool (SEE-IT) to facilitate the dynamic specification of geometric interactions between feature instances and to ease retrieval of data to support user queries. Richbourg provides a brief history of classificatory systems, and concludes that there is no single criterion for classification in any field.For the current effort, several alternative approaches were investigated, and ultimately discarded, in designing a hierarchical feature classification scheme to meet the needs of military modeling. An initial, intentionally naïve, approach was based on a highest level decomposition into natural and cultural features as shown in  REF _Ref472156487 \h Figure 3. This approach was quickly determined to be inadequate since if a SF unit encountered (e.g.) a Forest aggregate feature, it would typically need to query that aggregate feature for the Transportation features it contains in order to plan an appropriate route through it. The split between natural and cultural features makes responding to such queries inefficient, and fails to capture the fact that the effect of features on military operations does not split nicely along the natural vs. cultural divide.Another highest level decomposition considered was Mountains vs. Valleys. While having clearly different trafficability, vegetation, and hydrographic characteristics, their union fails to capture tundra and plains, and these extensions would result in yet another physiographic decomposition.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3: Initial Hierarchy ConsideredWe ultimately discarded the “top down” classificatory-based approach, concluding (as Richbourg did) that there was no good available classification scheme which would adequately and consistently capture the necessary distinctions to support both SFs and visual scene generation.. A Bottom Up ApproachThe approach currently being pursued (“bottom up”) is based on the conclusion that logical multi-level aggregations of features that match our conceptual understanding the military environment provide a more neutral approach to multi-resolution representation. In object-oriented design, inheritance is stressed as a strategy to maximize code reuse  REF _Ref475258153 \r \h [11]. It is predicated on defining a proper set of base classes, whose properties and methods can be inherited by classes lower in the class hierarchy (and whose own properties and methods are inherited by classes yet lower in the hierarchy). The hierarchy is formed by finding the “is-a” relationships between classes (i.e., a class lower in the hierarchy is a refinement of its parent). As noted previously, we found that all extant feature classification hierarchies tend to be essentially arbitrary, and that a militarily significant set of “base classes” for feature classification was found wanting. Furthermore, we question whether there are sufficient properties associated with many higher level features that could be usefully inherited by lower level, more specific, features. For example, there are no obvious properties associated with a generic transportation feature that would be usefully inherited by both a ferry and an airfield. On the other hand, knowledge about the aggregation of features is immediately useful to both virtual and SF systems. Databases constructed to support visual scene generation can use the features contained within another feature to help chose appropriate models from which to compose the larger feature. Similarly, a SF database made up of a hierarchy of aggregations could be directly usable in a variety of consuming applications – depending on the resolution requirements, the level to which aggregations are decomposed can vary.With these considerations in mind, we explored multi-resolution features in terms of aggregation. In “object-speak,” we went looking for the “has-a” (or “part-of,” depending on whether the point of view is the parent feature or the child) relationships between features. By finding rational aggregations of features, we felt that we could build a logical multi-resolution feature model from the bottom up. The SpreadsheetConcluding that it would be hopeless to attempt to construct an aggregation model beginning with atomic features, instead we began by looking for aggregations at a relatively coarse level, realizing that the individual features that make up these aggregations could themselves be decomposed into finer aggregations as the need arises.We began development of feature “has-a” relationships by first constructing a list of features that might logically include aggregations of other features. This list was initially composed of features comprising the areal features coverage in the JSIMS TCDM, plus elaboration of the Built-up Area (AL020) feature according to the EDCS  REF _Ref475418738 \r \h [12] USE_ attribute. This list was compared against all TCDM features in order to determine which could logically be contained within each of the potential aggregate features. To aid in this exercise, a large Excel™ spreadsheet was constructed, with potential aggregate features as rows and potential contained feature as columns. This resulted in more than 30,000 entries to evaluate.Since the generic building feature (AL015) would necessarily be contained in a large number of aggregate features, we expanded the number of columns by elaborating the building feature according to the Building Function Category (BFC_) attribute – providing a large number of building types to consider. All of the new feature types generated by the USE_ and BFC_ attributes required definitions. Finding it easiest to determine if a feature could be contained by a potential aggregate feature, we worked down each column, asking for each row whether the column’s feature could rationally be contained within the row’s aggregate feature. Where a feature could be logically contained within an aggregate feature, that cell received an “x”. If not, the cell remained blank.  REF _Ref475256437 \h Figure 4 shows the first portion of this (large) spreadsheet.ECCECC NameAA010  MineAA012  QuarryAA040  Rig / SuperstructureAA050  WellAA052  Oil / Gas FieldAC000  Processing Plant / Treatment PlantAC010  Blast FurnaceAC020  Catalytic CrackerAC030  Settling Basin / Sludge PondAC040  Oil / Gas FacilitiesAD010  US-Power PlantAA010MinexxAA052Oil / Gas FieldxxAC000Processing Plant / Treatment PlantxxxxxAC040Oil / Gas FacilitiesxxAD010US-Power PlantAD030Substation / Transformer YardAK030Amusement ParkxFigure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 4 – Portion of Excel™ SpreadsheetIn this partial example, an Oil/Gas Field could contain Rig/Superstructure and Well features. Likewise, Wells could be contained in Oil/Gas Fields and Amusement Parks. Note that the aggregations are made up of possible combinations of other features. We do not make any claims that a particular instance of an aggregate feature will have all or necessarily any of the features it can possibly contain.The Initial ProcessDriving the analysis was the question of military significance. Spanning the relatively low resolution needs of WARSIM and the extremely fine resolution of future OneSAF requirements was a critical driver. Interviews with subject matter experts (SMEs) from WARSIM, CCTT, and OneSAF aided our understanding of the military significance of individual and composite features.Beyond refining the definition of features and resolving simple containment conflicts, other problems were discovered. One was that there were a significant number of features potentially appearing in aggregates, but which were not listed in the EDCS. Examples of these features are shown in  REF _Ref472279392 \h Table 3. Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 3: Example Additional Features RequiredLawnGardenSeaplane BaseFenceRocker PumpMountain PassMountain PeakParking LotCultural LightingTailingsLarge areal features, such as desert and swamp, which were necessary aggregates (similar to the existing Forest or Scrub), were also missing from the EDCS. Physiographic regions, generally orthogonal to already identified land-cover features, were added. It became apparent that the more general land-cover types, such as Forest or Desert, could potentially contain any or all features. This was especially true if feature containment was defined as being transitive (i.e., if a contains b, and b contains c, then a contains c). Clearly, both a top-level hierarchy and well-defined set of rules for feature aggregation were needed.A Reference Multiple Resolution Feature ModelHighest Level Aggregation – by ClassificationTo obtain the highest level aggregation, we have synthesized Anderson’s and Murphy’s classifications to better satisfy the military modeling requirements. The result is based on two separate classifications, one for physiography and one for cover. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 5: Meaningful Associations of Physiography and CoverThe physiographic aggregate features are {Mountain, Valley/Basin, Inland Water, Water Except Inland, Perennial Snow or Ice, Tundra, Plains, Rock Strata, and Sand Dune}. The cover aggregate features are {Grassland, Scrub/Brush/Bush, Forest, Desert, Wetland, Cropland, Built-Up Area, and Barren Land}. By taking their cross product and discarding nonsensical combinations, a classification with 39 mapping units results.  REF _Ref472230438 \h Figure 5 shows the meaningful associations of the physiography and cover features and Table 4 provides the exhaustive list.Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 4: The 39 Highest Level Aggregate FeaturesMountain – GrasslandMountain – Scrub / Brush / BushMountain – ForestMountain – DesertMountain – WetlandMountain – CroplandMountain – Built-Up AreaMountain – Barren LandValley / Basin – GrasslandValley / Basin – Scrub / Brush / BushValley / Basin – ForestValley / Basin – DesertValley / Basin – WetlandValley / Basin – CroplandValley / Basin – Built-Up AreaValley / Basin – Barren LandInland Water – WetlandInland Water – CroplandInland Water – Built-Up AreaWater Except InlandPerennial Snow or IceTundra – GrasslandTundra – Scrub / Brush / BushTundra – WetlandPlains – GrasslandPlains – Scrub / Brush / BushPlains – ForestPlains – DesertPlains – WetlandPlains – CroplandPlains – Built-Up AreaPlains – Barren Land.Rock Strata – Scrub / Brush / BushRock Strata – DesertRock Strata – Barren LandSand Dune – GrasslandSand Dune – Scrub / Brush / BushSand Dune – DesertSand Dune – Barren LandDerived Aggregation RulesThrough consideration of over 30,000 individual instances of aggregation relationships, we derived general rules for aggregation. In general, an aggregate feature cannot be an aggregate of a feature of the same type. For Feature A to be an aggregate of Feature B, we require thatFeature B is an innate component of Feature A, orFeature A has cover type Built-Up Area and there are least two real-world examples of this aggregation, orFeature B is fundamental to SF reasoning or visual perception of Feature A.An example of rule [1] is that a Forest feature may be an aggregate of a River/Stream feature, since rivers occur naturally within forests. An example of rule [2] is that a Settlement aggregate feature may contain a Windmill feature but not a Quarry feature. For rule [3], consider the following:  Should a Forest feature be an aggregation of a Road feature?  We all know of roads that go through forests, but intuitively the road is not an innate component of the forest. But the principal aspects of a forest from a military perspective are transportation networks through it, degradation to cross-country mobility, degradation to line of sight, and opportunities for cover and concealment. Therefore the road is fundamental to SF reasoning about the forest, so the Forest feature should be an aggregation including the Road feature.The rule set is not transitive. A Mountain – Forest feature contains a River/Stream feature, which in turn contains a Ford feature. But a Mountain – Forest feature does not directly contain a Ford feature, because this relationship does not satisfy any of the rules above.Aggregate Features vs. Features which may be AggregatedThe second level of aggregation was defined by extracting features in the JSIMS TCDM considered to be aggregations, adding features derived from the enumerations of USE_ in the EDCS, and then adding features from the “bottom up” considerations (Section 4). This listing of aggregate features is given in Table 5. While stated informally, previously, we now formalize a fourth rule:An aggregate feature cannot be an aggregation of a feature of the same type, but an aggregate feature can be an aggregation of other aggregate features.The resulting aggregation scheme makes no presumptions about the atomicity of any feature and spans resolutions from feature content and density of 1:1,000,000 (or smaller) cartographic products for the highest level features, to the feature content and density of 1:50,000 products – generally the scale at which individual structures are represented.Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 5: Second Level Aggregate FeaturesAggregate Feature (ECC)Aggregate Feature (ECC)Agricultural FacilityAirport / Airfield / Air-stripAmusement Park (AK030)Anchorage (BB010)Animal SanctuaryAssembly Plant (AE010)Athletic ComplexAutomobile PlantBarracks / DormitoriesBivouac AreaBuilt-Up Area (AL020)Burial GroundsCart TrackCastleCommunication FacilityCommunity Recreational FacilityContainer FacilityCorrectional Institute / PrisonDepot (Storage) (AM010)Embassy CompoundFabrication FacilityFarmFiltration PlantFiring RangeFish Hatchery / Fish Farm / Marine Farm (BH050)Forest (EC015)Forest PreserveFortGovernment ComplexGrass / Scrub / Brush (EB015)Heliport (GB035)Indigenous People's ReservationIndustrial Complex (Heavy)Industrial Complex (Light)Inland Water (BH000)Institutional FacilityKennelLandfill AreaManufacturing FacilityMaritime Port FacilityMarketplaceMedical CenterMilitary Area (AH080)Military InstallationMine (AA010)Minefield (AH025)Mixed Urban or Built-Up LandMobile Home ParkMunicipal Utility FacilityMuseum ComplexNative Settlement (AL135)Oil / Gas Facilities (AC040)Oil / Gas Field (AA052)Oil / Gas Refinery Oil / Gas Tank FarmOrchard / Plantation (EA040)Ore RefineryPalace ComplexPaper / Pulp MillPark / Recreation Area / Arboretum, LocalPark / Recreation Area / Arboretum, NationalPark / Recreation Area / Arboretum, RegionalPlatform (BD110)Power Generation PlantPrepared Defensive Positions Area (AH030)Primary or Secondary School CampusProcessing Plant / Treatment Plant (AC000)Prohibited RegionRace Track FacilityRailroadRailroad Storage / Repair FacilityRailroad Yard / Marshalling Yard (AN060)Recreational ComplexReformatory FacilityRefugee CompoundRepair FacilityResearch and Development Lab / Research FacilityReserve / ReservationResidential RegionRetail FacilityRiver / Stream (BH140  )RoadRuins (AL200)Runway (GB055)SanitariumSawmillSea-Plane landing areaSeminarySettlement (AL105)Shanty townShipyardShopping CenterSpace PortStadium (AK160)Steel MillSubstation / Transformer Yard (AD030)Tent DwellingsTown (Population Less Than 25,000)TrailTransportation FacilityUniversity / CollegeUrban Region (Population  25,000 - 150,000)Urban Region (Population 150,000 - 500,000)Urban Region (Population Greater Than 500,000)US-Airport / Airfield (GB005)US-Offshore Loading Facility   UK-Single Point Moor (BB170)US-Pier / Wharf / Quay (BB190)US-Power Plant  (AD010)Vessel Berthing AreaVineyards (EA050)Yacht Club / Sailing Club*Note that features not including an ECC need to be added to the EDCS.While atomic features are not defined per se, a separate set of features has been defined (from those in Table 5) which can be aggregated to comprise the features in Table 4. This set of features was obtained by expanding the feature set in the JSIMS TCDM (and is therefore a superset of Table 5). These features are shown in Table 7. Recall that the Building (AL105) feature was also expanded by the Building Function Code attribute (140 enumerations) – which space prevents us from including here.Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 6: Features in the Data Model which may be AggregatedAggregate Feature (ECC)Aggregate Feature (ECC)AA010  MineAA012  QuarryAA040  Rig / SuperstructureAA050  WellAA051  WellheadAA052  Oil / Gas FieldAB000  Disposal Site / WastepileAC000  Processing Plant / Treatment PlantAC010  Blast FurnaceAC020  Catalytic CrackerAC030  Settling Basin / Sludge PondAC040  Oil / Gas FacilitiesAD010  US-Power PlantAD030  Substation / Transformer YardAD040  Nuclear ReactorAE010  Assembly PlantAF010  Chimney / SmokestackAF030  Cooling TowerAF040  CraneAF070  Flare PipeAH021  Cross Country BarrierAH025  MinefieldAH030  Prepared Defensive Positions AreaAH031  Defensive PositionAH035  Infantry TrenchAH080  Military AreaAJ050  WindmillAK030  Amusement ParkAK110  GrandstandAK130  US-Race Track AK160  US-Stadium / Amphitheater AL015  BuildingAL105  SettlementAL135  Native SettlementAL200  RuinsAL210  Snow Shed / Rock ShedAL240  Tower (Non-communication)AL260  WallAM010  Depot (Storage)AM020  Grain Bin / SiloAM030  Grain ElevatorAM060  Storage Bunker / Storage MoundAM061  Hardened Aircraft ShelterAM062  Tunnel ShelterAM070  TankAM080  Water TowerAN010  US-Railroad   UK-RailwayAN050  US-Railroad Siding / Railroad SpurAN060  Railroad Yard / Marshalling YardAP010  Cart TrackAP030  RoadAP041  BarrierAP050  US-Trail   UK-Trail / FootpathAQ010  US-Aerial Cableway Lines / Ski Lift LinesAQ040  Bridge / Overpass / ViaductAQ041  Engineering BridgeAQ045  Bridge SpanAQ060  Control TowerAQ064  CausewayAQ070  Ferry CrossingAQ112  Breach Point / LaneAQ113  Pipeline / PipeAQ116  Pumping StationAQ130  TunnelAT010  US-Disk / Dish AT030  Power Transmission LineAT040  US-Power Transmission Pylon AT050  Communication BuildingAT060  Telephone Line / Telegraph LineAT080  Communication TowerAZ010  Railroad in Built-Up Area Centerline / NexusAZ030  Road in Built-Up Area Centerline / NexusAZ060  Railroad Yard / Marshalling Yard Centerline / NexusBA010  Coastline / ShorelineBA020  ForeshoreBA040  Water (Except Inland)BB010  AnchorageBB040  Breakwater / GroyneBB042  MoleBB090  US-DrydockBB140  US-JettyBB170  US-Offshore Loading Facility BB190  US-Pier / Wharf / QuayBB230  SeawallBC020 BuoyBC040 LightBC050  LighthouseBD000  US-Underwater Danger / HazardBD100  Pile / Piling / PostBD110  PlatformBD120  ReefBD130  RockBD180  WreckBF010  US-Bottom CharacteristicsBH010  AqueductBH020  CanalBH030  DitchBH040  Filtration Beds / Aeration BedsBH050  Fish Hatchery / Fish Farm / Marine FarmBH070  FordBH080  Lake / PondBH095  Marsh / SwampBH120  RapidsBH130  ReservoirBH135  Rice FieldBH140  River / StreamBH150  Salt PanBH155  Salt EvaporatorBH160  SebkhaBH170  Spring / Water HoleBH190  Lagoon / Reef PoolBI010  CisternBI020  Dam / WeirBI030  LockBJ040  Ice CliffBJ070  Pack IceBJ080  Polar IceBJ100  Snow Field / Ice FieldBJ110  TundraBZ010  Aqueduct Centerline / NexusBZ020  Canal Centerline / NexusBZ080  Lake / Pond Centerline / NexusBZ130  Reservoir Centerline / NexusBZ140  River / Stream Centerline / NexusDA010  Ground Surface ElementDB010  Bluff / Cliff / EscarpmentDB070  CutDB080  DepressionDB090  Embankment / FillDB110  FaultDB145  Miscellaneous ObstacleDB160  Rock Strata / Rock FormationDB170  Sand Dune / Sand HillsDB190  Volcanic DikeDB200  US-Gully / GorgeEA010  CroplandEA020  HedgerowEA040  Orchard / PlantationEA050  VineyardsEA055  HopsEB010  GrasslandEB020  Scrub / Brush / BushEC010  Bamboo / CaneEC030  TreesEC040  US-Cleared Way / Cut Line / Firebreak   UK-ClearedFA000  Administrative BoundaryFA001  Administrative AreaFA020  Armistice LineFA030  Cease-Fire LineFA040  Claim LineFA050  Mandate Line / Convention LineFA060  Defacto BoundaryFA070  Demilitarized ZoneFA110  International Date LineFA170  Zone of OccupationFC021  Maritime Limit BoundaryFC165  Route (Maritime)GA035  NAVAIDs (Aeronautical)GB005  US-Airport / AirfieldGB010  Airport LightingGB015  US-Apron / HardstandGB030 HelipadGB035  HeliportGB055  RunwayGB075  TaxiwayOZ165  Route (Maritime) Centerline / NexusSA030  Exposed BedrockZD013  Geographic Information AreaZD050  Boundary LineCultural LightingFenceGardenLawnMountain PassMountain PeakParking LotRocker PumpSeaplane BaseTailingsIntegration into a Compositional ModelThe analogy of human spatial representation as an atlas is also true for this representational model. We cannot reprint the entire atlas in this paper, however, we can give some representative pages.  REF _Ref472266197 \h Figure 6 shows the draft compositional hierarchy for a Forest – Mountain feature using Object Model Template (OMT) notation to express this three level hierarchy.Not all resulting aggregation relationships are intuitively obvious. Why, for example, should a River / Stream (potentially) contain a Railroad? Because a River / Stream is an obstacle to ground movement, and a railroad crossing it comprises a breach, and is therefore important for SF reasoning by Rule [3]. REF _Ref472351229 \h Figure 7 shows a more complex decomposition. This feature, Urban Region (Population 25,000 - 150,000), is an aggregation of both aggregate and non-aggregate features. All aggregation relationships are shown. Although completely described by the spreadsheet, we clearly need better ways to visually present such data. EMBED MSDraw.Drawing.8.1  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 6: Mountain – Forest Compositional Feature HierarchyFigure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 7: Decomposition of Medium Sized Urban RegionConclusions and Future WorkThe proposed multi-resolution feature model appears to appropriately capture many of the uses of multi-resolution features in both SF and visual scene generation applications. The former through explicit specification of multi-resolution relationships which can be reasoned about; the later by defining how aggregate 3D feature models (and themal sets) should be decomposed into more primitive visual elements.It is, however, a work in progress. Having been developed by a small team over a relatively short period of time, some of the initial decisions made may not yet be optimal, and are potentially tainted by our own intuitive notions of aggregation rather than being rigorously defensible. Our knowledge of real-world feature composition outside the United States is limited at best. The initial result necessarily needs more analysis, review and extension by a much larger peer group.Currently, the data model is encoded in a pair of Excel™ spreadsheets. A next step will be to represent it in a relational database with reports to generate data models for specific applications or representation resolutions. For example, the JSIMS TCDM should be automatically derivable from this database.The current three-level aggregation scheme needs to be extended to higher resolutions to support such simulations as the OneSAF final operational capability and Marine Corps Urban Warrior through the inclusion of de-aggregates of buildings, such as rooms, hallways, doors and windows. A further additional level of decomposition will probably be required to de-aggregate living/dining/bed rooms into specific ensembles of furniture.Ultimately, we propose this work as providing a reference multi-resolution feature model for use in the M&S community. Support across the community is critical to achieving many of the benefits of this work (beyond those accruing to the specific simulations currently being modeled). Potential benefits include:Increased pre-simulation and runtime inter-operability between constructive and virtual simulations,Decreased cost of terrain database production,Increased terrain database reuse, andIncrease in the likelihood that more M&S requirements will be met in the future data source materials (e.g. NIMA FFD and MSDS).We encourage the M&S community to examine the design approach described here, and identify specific shortfalls and recommended enhancements. We suggest that such extensions might be productively pursued in community organizations such as the Simulation Inter-operability Standards Organization (SISO).AcknowledgmentsThe authors wish to acknowledge STRICOM and the Synthetic Natural Environment project (an Army Science and Technology Objective). We thank Ms. Pamela Woodard and Mr. Bernard Gajkowski of STRICOM for their technical, moral, and financial support.ReferencesBirkel, Paul A., “The SNE Conceptual Reference Model”, In Proc. Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 1998, 98F-SIW-018.Journal of Environmental Psychology, Academic Press, London.S. Ungar, “Microgenesis and Structure of Environmental Representation”, from lecture notes series “Environmental Perception, Cognition , Feb., 1999 ( HYPERLINK http://www.lgu.ac.uk/psychology/ungar/sun/LectureNotes/Env4_EnvCog/) http://www.lgu.ac.uk/psychology/ungar/sun/LectureNotes/Env4_EnvCog/).Garling, Lindberg, Carreiras & Book (1986), HYPERLINK "http://www.nuis.ac.jp/~mat/works/tetugaku93.html"http://www.nuis.ac.jp/~mat/works/tetugaku93.html.B. Kuipers, “The ‘map in the head’ metaphor”, Environment and Behaviour, 14, 202-220, 1982.P. Birkel et al., “The Terrain Common Data Model (TCDM): A Joint Effort of JSIMS, STOW, and JWARS”, In Proc. 8th Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation, Paper 8TH-CGF-004, May 1999.J. Anderson et al., “A land use and land cover classification system for use with remote sensor data”, U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 964, 28 p., 1976.R. J. Gilliom and G. Thelin, “Classification and Mapping of Agricultural Land for National Water-Quality Assessment”, U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1131, August, 1997 (http://water.wr.usgs.gov/ pnsp/circ1131/).R. Murphy, 1967, “A Spatial Classification of Landforms Based on Both Genetic and Empirical Factors--A Revision”, Annals, Association of American Geographers 57(1).R. Richbourg and T. Stone, “Searching for Functional Equivalence Classes in Environmental Data”, In Proc. Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Paper 99F-SIW-108, September 1999.G. Booch, Object-Oriented Analysis and Design with Applications, Second Edition, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA 1994.ISO/IEC WD18023 Environmental Data Coding Specification (EDCS), see also HYPERLINK "http://www.sedris.org/wg8home/index.htm"http://www.sedris.org/wg8home/index.htm.Author BiographiesDR. DALE D. MILLER is the manager of Advanced Technology Development for the Advanced Simulation Center group of Lockheed Martin Information Systems. He led the projects Dynamic Terrain and Objects in a Virtual World and the Terrain Database Generation & Technology for Synthetic Environments both sponsored by DARPA and USATEC. He was also the technical leader for the terrain database and terrain data fusion development for the WARSIM Program. Currently he leads the STRICOM Common SNE and DMSO Dynamic Terrain in the Environment Federation projects. Dr. Miller received his Ph.D. in Mathematics from the University of Washington in 1976 (where he studied non-commutative ring theory and the application of Piaget’s theories of child cognition to the learning of elementary mathematics). Since then he has contributed to the areas of DIS and its successor, HLA, data models for terrain representations, real-time computer graphics, computer image generator design, adaptive filtering, image processing, feature extraction, machine vision, and optical character recognition.Annette Janett is a senior software engineer with Lockheed Martin Information Systems Advanced Simulation Center. She previously led in the development of the OpenScene visual system, the STOW Dynamic Terrain and Objects, and Dynamic Virtual Worlds programs, and STOW SE integration with virtual simulation. Ms. Janett provided the expertise and development experience necessary to implement SEDRIS as the DTDB for point features.DR. PAUL A. BIRKEL is a senior principal scientist for The MITRE Corporation. He currently provides technical support to DMSO in multiple environmental areas including the Synthetic Environment Data Representation and Interchange Specification (SEDRIS) and Environmental Books on the Shelf (EBS) projects, the STRICOM Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) and OneSAF Program SNE activities, and the Army SNE Science and Technology Objective. In addition he provides technical support as needed to other DoD M&S and C4ISR programs via the US Army Topographic Engineering Center (USATEC).JOHN NORDSTROM is the software engineering manager of Terrain Tools for the Integrator Modeling Tools group at Evans & Sutherland. He has worked at Evans & Sutherland since 1986 and has been involved in a wide variety of visual database and modeling tools efforts. Ungar  REF _Ref472136151 \r \h [3] presents an overview of evolution of the theory of spatial cognition. Literally, “much in little.” Intended to capture the feature types and densities typical of a 1:250,000 scale hardcopy map. Or at least what is defined as atomic today – atomicity has a way of getting finer.