Foundation Initiative 2010:  The Foundation for Test and Training Interoperability George J. RumfordU.S. Army White Sands Missile RangeATTN:  CSTE-DTC-WS-TT (FI 2010)Building 1506White Sands, NM 88002 505-678-2836grumford@dote.osd.mil Minh VuongU.S. Army Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation CommandATTN:  AMSTI-ITTS-I12350 Research ParkwayOrlando, FL  32826404-384-5238minh_vuong@stricom.army.milKeywords:Interoperability, Re-use, Architecture, Instrumentation, Ranges, Test and EvaluationABSTRACT:  The Foundation Initiative (FI) 2010 project is an interoperability initiative of the Director, Operational Test and Evaluation (DOT&E), funded through the Central Test and Evaluation Investment Program (CTEIP). The FI 2010 vision is to enable interoperability among ranges, facilities and simulations in a quick and cost-efficient manner, and to foster reuse of range assets and of future range system developments.  The conceptual framework for military operations defined in Joint Vision 2010 is of a size, scale, and scope that cannot be physically, technically, or economically recreated within the existing Department of Defense (DoD) test and training infrastructure.  In the past, DoD test and training facilities and instrumentation have evolved autonomously, resulting in duplication of effort and resources, differing processes and procedures, and wide variations in the age, type, and capability of basic resources such as computers, software, communication systems, and data displays.  These variations limit the interoperability, sharing and reuse of resources demanded by the Joint Vision paradigm.  In addition, the emphasis on the use of Modeling and Simulation (M&S) in support of acquisition streamlining will result in increasing duplication and disparity if an interoperable, common framework is not established soon.  A clear advantage of using M&S for testing and training is the potential to conduct distributed operations across a common network.  To make this happen, participating models and simulations must have the ability to interact.  FI 2010 is charged with developing and promulgating the capabilities that will make this interaction practical and is postured to improve systems development, testing, training and fielding through the application of object-oriented systems interoperability between simulations, hardware-in-the-loop test laboratories, live/operational tests, and training systems.   The FI 2010 concept builds on the High Level Architecture (HLA) and Test & Training Enabling Network Architecture (TENA) standards and includes a core set of tools, inter-range communication capabilities, interfaces to existing assets, and procedures for conducting a multi-Range, synthetic exercise.  FI 2010 will serve as the foundation upon which ranges will want to build their future investments. Ranges can utilize the FI 2010 standards, protocols, procedures, and tools to increase their commonality and interoperability with other ranges. The interoperability and reusability provided by the FI 2010 products will result in reduced development, maintenance, and operations costs.  This paper will describe each of the FI 2010 products and a series of successful risk-mitigating exercises that have been performed as a part of the development process.1. IntroductionOpen Air Ranges, Installed Systems Test Facilities, System Integration Laboratories, Hardware-in-the-Loop Facilities, Measurement Facilities, and Modeling & Simulation Centers are Test & Evaluation (T&E) resources.  They are National Assets that represent the bulk of the Department of Defense (DoD) infrastructure that has successfully supported the acquisition of weapons systems over the past half century.  These resources have evolved over time in parallel with the growth in technology and the complexity of the weapons systems that they have supported.  By design, their evolution has occurred predominantly on an individual system and project basis as specific service needs arose.In recent years, the T&E infrastructure has not kept pace with the weapons systems technology advances; nor has it kept pace with the evolution of the methodologies of the testers who use this infrastructure.  Shrinking defense dollars for T&E has resulted in:ineffective testing, and  high infrastructure cost.1.1 Ineffective testingThe T&E community goal is to assess the capabilities of warfighting systems.  The warfighting systems must be involved in realistic test conditions that can measure the system’s capabilities to meet this objective.  The T&E community increasingly has to provide more complicated test environments as more complex warfighting systems are being developed.  The more complex weapons systems require test ranges and facilities with greater capabilities than the currently available test infrastructure.  Specific test limitations include:the inability to provide large enough test areas for the engagement ranges of new weapons systems,the inability to provide a target-rich environment expected in combat,the inability to provide an adequate number of friendly forces that the weapons systems must interact with, andthe inability to provide sufficiently realistic physical environments across the spectrum expected in combat.These shortcomings can be mitigated in large part through interconnecting with other ranges and facilities and making test resources interoperable. Many test exercises have already shown that resources from multiple ranges can be integrated.  However, these test exercises involving multiple ranges also showed that interoperability, though achievable, is difficult with the current T&E infrastructure.  Current fiscal realities and technical configurations limit what interoperability and data exchange are currently available.1.2 High infrastructure costsThe existing T&E infrastructure was developed incrementally on individual ranges to address the specific needs of a program, a Service, or a range or facility.  One way to corporately reduce the costs of the existing infrastructure is to minimize duplication of effort among the various activities across the T&E community – a primary objective of the Central Test and Evaluation Investment Program (CTEIP).  Minimizing duplication requires an investment in a common architecture to foster opportunities for instrumentation systems to be used at multiple ranges. The FI 2010 project, sponsored by the CTEIP, is chartered to establish the elementary foundation among DoD ranges and facilities, posturing them to cost effectively support emerging warfighter requirements (Joint Vision 2010) and a re-engineered acquisition process (simulation-based acquisition) which includes distributed simulation.  FI 2010 will create the framework from which the range and facility support organizations can interdependently develop, share, and reuse software that will greatly reduce their infrastructure support costs. 2. Project DescriptionThe FI 2010 project, an interoperability initiative of the Director, Operational Test and Evaluation (DOT&E), is a proactive investment designed to address two current challenges facing the T&E community: interoperability cost reduction, and infrastructure cost avoidance/reduction.The capability provided by FI 2010 project is needed to provide interoperability and to reduce and control cost.2.1 Interoperability The T&E community needs to be able to test big, complex systems in stressful environments.  Interoperability leverages the available infrastructure – ranges, facilities, and simulations – to achieve the test conditions needed.  Many of the needed resources to provide the capacity to test properly are currently available, but the resources are distributed across many ranges and facilities.  Interoperability eliminates the need to develop costly and time-consuming “one-of-a-kind” solutions.  The ability to interoperate is limited by distinctly different systems at the various ranges and facilities housing the needed resources.2.2 Reduced costsThe FI 2010 project will result in reduced and controlled costs for the T&E community.  Currently, high costs are incurred when trying to link resources from different ranges, and the products of the FI 2010 project will streamline interoperability, lowering integration costs.  Moreover, there are currently multiple solutions being built to satisfy similar needs for T&E ranges because no common architecture exists.  The FI 2010 products will ensure feasibility of software reusability, thus tremendously lowering development and maintenance costs for range software.  The graphic below shows the comparison of costs to develop reusable and non-reusable products for a varying number of systems over a 10-year period.  This cost is based on an engineering estimate intended to approximate the software suite of a typical T&E resource. EMBED Excel.Sheet.8  2.2 FI 2010 solutionInteroperability cost reduction will come by standardizing data elements, instrumentation interfaces, and test processes employed in planning, executing, monitoring, and analyzing test events.  Infrastructure cost avoidance/reduction will come through standards and processes that allow each of the Major Range and Test Facility Bases (MRTFB) to be able to use instrumentation systems developed by other test ranges or facilities. The FI 2010 solution will include a suite of products (data standards, interface standards, development standards, and software applications) that will:enable affordable interoperability between test ranges and facilities as a means of sharing resources and data, thus enhancing the capabilities of the integrated test ranges and facilities, andprovide a common architecture that will enable improvements and modernization efforts made by one range to be used by all cooperating ranges.Basic test functions (such as data collection, test monitoring, range control, and resource scheduling) that are organic with the current infrastructure will still be conducted but will be more automated and efficient.  The FI 2010 project will provide a common method for defining and interacting with test resources (such as instrumentation systems, display systems, range control systems, communication systems, hardware-in-the-loop facility, etc.), so that test configurations of the future will be more modular and flexible to support test customers.3. FI 2010 ProductsMuch of the functionality of the FI 2010 products may be familiar to those currently involved with the ranges.  However, the functionality is known by different names, names that vary between the Services and among the test ranges.  The FI 2010 products include:Common Architecture,Resource Manager Tool,Test/Exercise Planner Tool,Test/Exercise Manager Tool,Test/Exercise Analyzer Tool,Selected Resource Interfaces, andWorkforce Training and Recommended Practices. 3.1 Common ArchitectureThe Common Architecture (called ‘TENA’ for the Test and Training Enabling Architecture) is the cornerstone of the FI 2010 project on which cost-effective interoperability is achieved.  It will allow range engineers to:define and allocate T&E resources,facilitate the use of modular solutions,provide structure for a library of resources,create consistent standards for development, andleverage existing DoD architecture work, being built upon the High Level Architecture.This product provides the test and training communities with enhanced capabilities by being able to integrate test resources more easily.  The combination of all the attributes makes the FI 2010 common architecture beneficial to the ranges and facilities.  The ability to assemble a more complex test or exercise in a shorter period, keeping the costs in check, depends on a well-built architecture.3.2 Resource Manager Tool The Resource Manager Tool is a software application consisting of tools and utilities to be used by range developers to define resources for incorporation into missions.3.3 Test/Exercise Planner Tool The Test/Exercise Planner Tool is a software application consisting of tools and utilities for range engineers to design a test or training mission with defined resources.3.4 Test/Exercise Manager Tool The Test/Exercise Manager Tool is a software application comprised of tools and utilities for range engineers to execute (monitor and control) a complex mission with defined resources, including communication networks and services.  This tool will be scalable to support execution of single or multiple events comprised of multiple range resources and weapons systems.3.5 Test/Exercise Analyzer ToolThe Test/Exercise Analyzer Tool is a software application consisting of tools and utilities for range engineers to assess the mission prior to the event and evaluate the results after the event.3.6 Selected Resource InterfacesThe FI 2010 project will also develop interfaces for several selected legacy T&E resources, so that they are compliant with the Common Architecture.3.7 Workforce training and recommended practicesDetailed training materials and guidelines that describe how FI 2010 products work, how to define T&E resources in the Common Architecture, and how to assemble T&E resources to support a specific test mission will be provided. Risk-Mitigating Exercises The FI 2010 project explored the viability of the High Level Architecture (HLA) for interoperability and reuse among ranges, facilities, and simulations through three successful exercises.  FI 2010 exercises are conducted for the purpose of product development, either to better understand product requirements (risk mitigation) or to test and evaluate developed/acquired products (performance assessment).  Three risk mitigation exercises performed were the: (1) Joint Advanced Distributed Simulation (JADS) System Integration Test (SIT) II; (2) Synthetic Environment for Tactical Integration (SETI); and (3) Simulated High-speed Anti-radiation Missile Exercise (SimHARM).  One of the primary purposes of the exercises was to demonstrate data exchange and connectivity between an Installed System Test Facility (ISTF) and an Open Air Range (OAR) using HLA technology. The exercises each included tests and assessments of the simulation and federation object model development tools provided by the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO).   They also included check-outs of the latest HLA runtime infrastructure and Hardware-in-the-Loop to OAR interaction investigations.  The exercises’ goal was to gain broad-based insight into the utility and feasibility of conducting distributed synthetic and live testing and training events using a common architecture and reusable software tools. The exercises were selected based upon their simplicity and similarity in scenario and scope.  Although they could easily be expanded to include more, all three exercises involved only three objects or entities in their scenario: a shooter, a threat system or target, and a weapon.  The purpose of the exercises was to gain an understanding of HLA in an attempt to assist the HLA community in providing information that will better serve the real-time needs of the T&E and Training communities.  All of the exercises utilized similar types of DoD infrastructure -- linking a range with a hardware-in-the-loop facility -- to conduct an integrated, “hybrid” (part live/part simulated) mission.The exercises served to be an integral step toward the FI 2010 project’s ultimate goal (range interoperability and reuse).  The exercises generated data that was comparable to past Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) methodologies, identifying potential HLA shortfalls to be rectified by TENA, and providing insight to the common aspects among ranges and facilities ideal for standardization. Each of the exercises investigated alternative configurations, interfaces and procedures. The lessons-learned were used to refine the baseline TENA architecture to complete an initial comparison of HLA and TENA. 4.1 Joint Advanced Distributed Simulation System Integration Test II The JADS SIT II exercise replicated the original JADS SIT risk mitigation test scenario although HLA was used instead of Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS).  The exercises involved linking the Pre-flight Integration of Munitions and Electronic Systems (PRIMES), the Guided Weapon Effectiveness Facility (GWEF), and the Central Control Facility (CCF) at the Air Force Development Test Center, Eglin AFB, FL.  A Development Test Cell (DTC), wich was operated and maintained by range personnel, emulated the MRTFB and was established to cost-effectively develop, test, and validate the software interfaces and exercise tools in a controlled environment.  During the exercise, a blue aircraft acquired a red aircraft and engaged it with an air-to-air missile. The PRIMES served as an open-air range surrogate, generating position data of both the blue and red aircraft.  The GWEF hosted the simulation of the missile, while the CCF provided exercise control and visualization.  These federates exchanged data via the HLA Runtime Infrastructure (RTI).4.2 Synthetic Environment for Tactical Integration During the SETI exercise, a Los Angeles class nuclear submarine (SSN) localized a target and launched a weapon.  During the initial engagement phase, the submarine updated and controlled the torpedo via fiber optic wire telemetry.  After the “wire-break” event, the torpedo autonomously homed to target.  The torpedo was simulated in the Weapons Analysis Facility (WAF) in Newport, Rhode Island.  Weapon command and telemetry information was transferred via acoustic range telemetry at the Atlantic Undersea Test and Evaluation Center (AUTEC) through the Combat Control federate while submarine and target position data was produced by the Range Interface.  In addition, a Display federate provided status and control.  These four federates exchanged data via the HLA RTI.4.3 Simulated High-speed Anti-radiation Missile ExerciseThis exercise was completed at the Atlantic Ranges & Facilities, Naval Air Warfare Center Aircraft Division, at Patuxent River, Maryland.  The Patuxent River DTC was utilized for the development and testing of the HLA Gateway and to host federate surrogates during pre-exercise testing for risk and cost mitigation.  The SimHARM Exercise Federation was executed on the computer systems, associated software, and communications links located in the Cedar Point Facility of the Atlantic Test Ranges (ATR) and the Air Combat Environment Test and Evaluation Facility (ACETEF).The DTC processed tracking (TSPI) data from a live aircraft and simulated missile, simulated the threat and missile, enabled communication between federates and displayed real-time visualization of the exercise. The data was exchanged between the ACETEF facility and the ATR via the HLA RTI.  Appropriate Federation Object Model (FOM) and Simulation Object Model (SOM) documents were generated and adhered to. The method of data transfer was over a T1 line.  The TSPI data was passed to ACETEF and HARM situational data was passed from ACETEF to ATR for display.ConclusionThe FI 2010 intends to plant the seed for future range interoperability.  Future warfighting concepts, relying heavily on network centric warfare capabilities, cannot be tested with today’s test infrastructure. A new, interoperable foundation must be established.  The nation cannot afford to rebuild the entire infrastructure, so a strategy must be instituted to ensure that needed legacy capabilities are adapted, and future investments are designed to be interoperable in support of these future warfighting scenarios.  FI 2010 is a clear step toward developing this strategy by investigating, developing and coordinating the standards and procedures needed to achieve interoperability.  Range asset owners and acquisition program managers are the key to successful implementation, and the FI 2010 team is heavily involved in coordinating their activities among all potential stakeholders to ensure success.Author BiographiesGEORGE RUMFORD is the Technical Project Manager for FI 2010.  With degrees in Electrical Engineering and Computing Engineering from the University of Missouri, he is an Electronics Engineer at the U.S. Army White Sands Missile Range (WSMR).  George is a member of the DoD Architecture Management Group (AMG) for the High Level Architecture (HLA) and serves on the DoD HLA Transition Team.  He is also responsible for all High Performance Computing assets at White Sands.MINH VUONG is the Project Director of FI 2010 for the Program Manager – Instrumentation, Targets, and Threat Simulators (PM-ITTS) at the U.S. Army Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM).  Minh received a Bachelor of Science in Computer Engineering from George Mason University in Fairfax, Virginia in 1991.  As a Project Director at PM-ITTS, he has managed various T&E instrumentation acquisition programs.