The Value of Distributed Modeling and Simulation for "What If" ApplicationsMichael R. OakesBMH Associates, Inc.Senior Systems Engineer(757) 857-5670, ext 249moakes@bmh.comKeywords:HLA, Distributed Mission Training, DIS, Modeling and Simulation, DMT, STOW, Kosovo, WISSARDABSTRACT:	The Kosovo Air War conducted during OPERATION ALLIED FORCE highlighted a need to the USAF to develop a robust modeling and simulation environment capable of reconstructing the war's outcomes and apply alternative strategies for a "What-If" capability in follow-on analyses.  The U.S. Army set the precedent for battle reconstruction using simulation immediately following the termination of hostilities in DESERT STORM with the Defense Advanced Research Project Agency (DARPA) sponsored simulation reconstruction of the Battle of 73 Easting.  DARPA used the then current SIMNET technology and attempted to highlight many of the actions/initiatives that took place during that battle to educate future combat leaders.  The 73 Easting reconstruction was never used by the Army for any follow-on "What-If" instruction or validation.  Even though simulation capabilities have greatly improved, "What-if" simulation applications of this or any other battle have not been pursued by any service . . . until now.  Since the original 73 Easting Project, M&S has dramatically advanced with affordable computer processing and visualization techniques.  Current distributive training technology has evolved towards larger federations with greater entity resolution and granularity.  DARPA’s Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) is the only demonstrated large-scale High Level Architecture (HLA) simulation using both large aggregates (for visualization) and entity resolution (for interaction arbitration).  Since STOW's initial 1997 Advanced Concept Technology Demonstration milestone, it has evolved into a viable technology with high resolution (platform level) simulation to support joint command and staff training, mission visualization capabilities and unit level training.  STOW's ability for entity-level resolution has made it an excellent candidate for the USAF Distributed Mission Training (DMT) Program, the USN Battle Force Tactical Training (BFTT) System and it appears to be the logical choice for the Air Force's plan for the Kosovo Reconstruction and application of "What If" capabilities. This paper describes recent experiment/exercise "what if" applications and the efforts proposed to reconstruct the Kosovo Air War into M&S using the STOW Joint Synthetic Battlespace and its computer generated Joint Synthetic Forces.  In addition, this paper describes the STOW capability to demonstrate "what if" applications as variables change and how they will apply from unit / theater-level training to doctrinal analysis.  The transition from "fog of war" to "what if" applications assists decision support training execution in all warfare levels as well as provides an excellent opportunity to discover how changes in friendly or enemy ISR/weapons platforms determine battlespace outcomes.1.	IntroductionThe "what if" is the historian's favorite secret weapon.  To question what occurred and what did not then play the outcome is more than an idle game.  War is a circumstance of chance and luck where chance is a function of timing.  There are many times when we might say, "the timing's just not right."  With M&S, we have the opportunity to replay the scenario and observe and interact to determine when, how and why of different maneuvers and force applications.  Taking the "what happened" and transforming it into the "what if" can provide insight beyond simple reason.  It can eliminate hindsight biases and provide an environment to evaluate outcomes for the future as well as investigate the past.  This paper is not designed to be a history dissertation, but rather discuss applications of history and its alterations to transition from what has already occurred to the deterministic point outcomes IF variables were changed.  A robust Modeling and Simulation (M&S) system capable of entity resolution as well as the ability to ramp up to theater level play is an absolute requirement for "what if" applications.  "What if" scenarios are not limited to historical events.  The ability to conceptualize future weapons into an arena is a valuable tool for both leadership and developers to better allocate design resources.  In addition, "What If" applications provide military trainers insights and analyses into the many ways to execute a battle plan or provide the necessary observations for new unit members into the various theater CONOPS. 2.	Background2.1	The Battle of 73 EastingAs we begin this new century, we are still haunted by the battles we faced in the last, including our most recent battles in during Operation DESERT SHIELD/STORM in Iraq and in Kosovo during Operation ALLIED FORCE.  At times the unexpected seems to be the only certainty.  Real-time simulation provides the forum to "see" multiple approaches to a problem/situation.  The war with Iraq gave the U.S., its allies and foes around the world volumes to examine on the conduct of warfare and the value of technology.  In fact DESERT STORM provided a classic 'what if" scenario with the Battle of 73 Easting.In the early afternoon of 26 February 1991, the 2nd ACR advanced east through a sandstorm to Objective Collins.  The regiment was screening in front of the 1st Infantry Division, which had just arrived after clearing the mine belt along the Saudi border.  The Iraqis had long expected the American attack to come from the south and east, and were now frantically turning hundreds of tanks, towed artillery pieces and other vehicles to meet the onslaught from the west.  On the Iraqi side, unit locations were changing almost by the minute. As the 2nd ACR neared Phase Line Tangerine, 20 miles east of Objective Collins, it received fire from a building on the "69 Easting," a north-south line on military maps.  The regiment returned fire and continued east.  They were met with more enemy fire for the next two hours. About 1600, the regiment found T-72 tanks in prepared defensive positions at "73 Easting."  Using its thermal imagery equipment, the regiment destroyed every tank that appeared.This was a different kind of battle from what Americans had fought so far.  The destruction of the first tanks did not signal the surrender of hundreds of Iraqi soldiers.  The regiment had found two Iraqi divisions willing to put up a hard fight, the 12th Armored and the Republican Guard Tawakalna divisions.  The regiment found a seam between the two divisions, and for a time became the only American unit obviously outnumbered and outgunned during the campaign.  But here again, thermal-imaging equipment cut through the dust storm to give gunners a long-range view of enemy vehicles and grant the first-shot advantage.  For four hours, the 2nd ACR destroyed tanks and armored personnel carriers while attack helicopters knocked out artillery batteries.When this "Battle of 73 Easting" ended early in the evening of 26 February, the 2nd ACR reported they had destroyed at least 29 tanks and 24 armored personnel carriers, and had taken 1,300 prisoners.  That night, the 1st Infantry Division (Mechanized) passed through the regiment and continued the attack east.2.2	M&S Reconstruction for 73 EastingImmediately following the termination of hostilities in DESERT STORM, the Defense Advanced Research Project Agency (DARPA) sponsored a simulation reconstruction of the Battle of 73 Easting.  This reconstruction used the current SIMNET technology representing the battlespace and attempted to highlight many of the actions/initiatives that took place during that battle to educate future combat leaders.  The reality of 73 Easting is that an outnumbered American Force once exposed, took the initiative and used their technological superiority and training to decisively defeat the threat.  The 73 Easting reconstruction was never used by the Army for any follow-on "What-If" instruction or validation.  The IDA high fidelity simulation of the 73 Easting reconstruction was never used for any value other than a videotape describing the battle.  There is no reason why this reconstruction capability was never used though simulation capabilities have greatly improved since the 73 Easting Project was completed with its final report in February 1992.  "What-if" applications of this battle or any other have not been pursued by any service . . . until now.  Since the original 73 Easting Project, M&S has changed dramatically with great advances in affordable computer processing and superb 3-D visualization techniques.  In fact, current distributive training technology has evolved towards larger Federations and greater entity resolution.  DARPA’s STOW has been the only demonstrated large-scale High Level Architecture (HLA) simulation using both large aggregates (for visualization) and entity resolution (for interaction arbitration).  Since the October 1997 DoD Advanced Concept Technology Demonstration (ACTD) milestone, STOW has evolved to a viable technology demonstrating high resolution (platform level) simulation to support joint command and staff training, mission visualization capabilities and unit level training.  STOW's ability for entity-level resolution has made it an excellent candidate for the USAF Distributed Mission Training (DMT) Program.  The current STOW operational sponsor is the United States Atlantic Command (USACOM) and the technology developer is DARPA.2.3	DARPA Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) The STOW Program was created within the DARPA Advanced Distributed Simulation Program as a result of the recognition that the capability for high fidelity distributed simulation (live, virtual and constructive) offered great potential for training joint forces and for a variety of other DOD uses. The program was based on work then being done at DARPA on synthetic forces and synthetic environments and earlier efforts with the US Army on the SIMNET virtual trainers.  STOW provides simulation of a joint synthetic battlespace.  The key elements of STOW are the Synthetic Natural Environment (SNE), Synthetic Forces and Command Forces.  The SNE features high-resolution terrain databases, dynamic terrain and objects and a meteorology and ocean server.  Synthetic Forces simulate all the platforms and entities in the synthetic battlespace, incorporating individual and unit behaviors.HLA provides a specification for common architecture and structural basis for simulation interoperability.  The HLA environment allows for a common “boiler-plate” for supporting reuse and simulation inter-operation across the Department of Defense.  HLA was developed on the premise that no one simulation can meet the diverse demands or requirements for all Service and Joint Components.  However, having a common architecture where all users can tie-in allows for a greater interaction among federates and provides the common environment for reuse.  These users can develop specific simulation federates to meet their needs as the rules established in the HLA baseline definitions for both time management and data distribution management are followed.The STOW advances in a large curved earth dynamic terrain database and its dynamic weather built a great foundation towards increased realism in virtual and constructive simulation.  These added benefits allow training audiences to see the effects of poor weather on target acquisition and make real-time targeting decisions for follow-on Air Tasking Orders (ATOs).  Once the new ATOs or ATO changes are distributed, then the STOW constructive simulation reattacks the targets.  These features coupled with an accurate Bomb Damage Assessment (BDA) capability allow for interplay with the Intelligence and Combat Plans communities.The STOW ACTD demonstrated a large-scale dynamic synthetic natural environment (SNE) with a predistributed terrain database (TDB) and the real-time distribution of the battlefield environmental effects and dynamic changes to the terrain and cultural features.  SNE digital terrain features included 3-D representation of cities and other manmade objects such as bridges, pipelines, and roads based on comprehensive mapping and analysis of the urban areas to intermingle with cultural features of military significance.  Source data for the TDB was the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) that included digital elevation models for terrain surface and ocean bathymetrics, 10 meter resolution satellite imagery, numerous digital feature data sets, digitized amps, and paper maps with scales as large as 1:12,500.  Current high resolution TDB for the Kosovo region covers the eastern two-thirds of the country.  Additional theater TDBs are available to fly in and out of the high resolution TBD.  An interactive TDB showing defensive positions, emplacements, and associated weapons acquisition and effects is key to construct "what if" scenarios for new weapons platforms, sensors, and individual weapons.  AirSAF and Soar are respectively the physical system and cognitive components of the air portion of the STOW Joint Synthetic Forces (JointSAF) system.  JointSAF also includes naval, ground maneuver, amphibious, Opposing Forces (OPFOR), and other constructive simulation representations (computer generated forces) that are fully interoperable with one another.  JointSAF entities interact in the most sophisticated synthetic environment (atmosphere, terrain, ocean) currently available.  JointSAF provides a set of “common” physical system models such as flight dynamics, airframe, sensors, and communications, to name just several, that are data driven and can be parameterized to represent a variety of U.S., coalition, threat, and civilian aircraft.   Intelligent aircrew agents which are capable of performing a variety of doctrinal missions (OCA, DCA, CAS, strike, interdiction, etc.) are modeled using the Soar AI application language.  Soar has several distinct advantages that apply to modeling human performance in a very complex task domain such as air combat.  Some of these advantages compared to other threat system generators include:Ability to achieve multiple "skill levels" based on performance variables covering the entire spectrum of:	a) Platform sensors use (ability to use Fire Control System to full fidelity based on experience levels) as well as proper use and interpretation of RWR inputs	b) Weapons employment (function of shots available based on varied weapons selections, percent of max range, ID criteria, and FCS/visual cueing).The Soar language is a true model of human cognition and not an expert system or “if/then” finite state machine.  Soar models short-term memory and perception (situation awareness), long-term memory (tactics, techniques, procedures), and the capability to learn through experience.  (At this time learning is not activated for JointSAF/Soar.)Because a rete matching algorithm is used, Soar performance is independent of the total number of rules used to represent mission behavior. The rete algorithm precompiles the rules into a network, then as new data comes it traverses this network to see which rules might match the new data.  Only those rules, which are potentially applicable, are considered.  The bottom line is that the times required for a match is pretty much constant no matter how many rules are added.Soar aircrew agents communicate with one another and with human participants in a simulation exercise through use of either understandable military directives or the Command and Control Simulation Interface Language (CCSIL).  Messages are used to convey both voice and digital communication messages between Soar aircraft and their controlling agencies which can include at this time either human controllers or Soar agent forward air controllers and air controllers.  This capability includes inter-aircraft tactical communications for combat formation flight, air combat intercepts, and CIC maneuvering. Soar aircrew agents operate as multi-aircraft, 2-ship, and 4-ship units that can be integrated to form large strike packages with varied aircraft types performing different but complementary missions in the same manner as for live air operations.  During mission execution each Soar aircraft outputs a list of current goals and actions, and may be queried for the reasons for the actions that specifically describe the “when/how/why” behind the decisions made that affect mission performance.  This capability should be considered a hard requirement for any computer generated force used for DMT as it allows the mission behaviors to be validated for the intended purpose of DMT in accordance with USAF VV&A policies.  This capability has been further extended with graphical tools that show the current situational awareness of any entity. Soar mission execution is fully automated and does not require any manual intervention except to retask a mission through simulated command and control channels.  This capability can also be used by an instructor to modify mission execution to achieve training objectives.  Soar agents operate as Mission Commanders, Four-Ship Flight leaders, Element Leaders, and Wingmen including inter-aircraft communications for tactical operations including a very robust capability to fly tactical formations (tactical turns, in place turns, cross turns, etc.) while patrolling and during air combat intercepts.  In the event of loss of lead, the aircraft are able to adjust their formations and determine a new lead.STOW's object based modeling allows greater flexibility and ease to create modifications.  Its modular and composable architecture provides the Plug-and Play aspect needed to evaluate new systems to conduct "What-If" iterations in the joint synthetic battlespace.  Basically, if the model physical attributes (data) are provided, then adaptations can be made and easily integrated.  During the Joint Warfighter Experiment 99 (JWE-99) development, software engineers and subject matter experts (SMEs) adapted STOW for a 2015 time critical target scenario using future sensors and weapons.  This development was implemented within three months.  Object oriented modeling permits the user to modify known platforms or models with attributes of another provided the same interactions are used.  For example, Object 1 has attribute A and B; Object 2 has attribute C and D.  With object oriented modeling, Object 2 can be modified to have a hybrid of both objects' capabilities.  Basically, an interchange of existing systems can be placed on various platforms to determine it survivability or whether it makes a difference in the way the operation is conducted or in its effectiveness within the same engagement parameters as before.STOW produces stochastic results during the simulation execution.  Of course, that is not to say it can not be deterministic.  In fact, if all variables remain constant, then the outcomes will be very deterministic.  Given enough stochastic runs, you can achieve a high degree of confidence intervals to bound conclusions while operating in the battlespace.3.	Reconstruction ApproachLeon Trotsky said:  "You may not be interested in war, but war is interested in you."  We might alter that phrase for today's military with apologies to Leon and say that you may not be interested in M&S but it is interested in you.  Today's military must analyze many factors to prosecute warfare.  The M&S piece allows him to connect to a battlespace and execute plans and strategies with existing or future weapons systems/sensors to gain as much knowledge and experience for an affordable cost, both fiscally and manpower use.  History of the "what happened" may be a function of momentum at the time.  "What if" environmental factors affected sensors in the C2ISR architecture?  For Blue?  For Red?  For Third Party Belligerents?  Does the weather or environment (night operations in Desert Storm) provide the force multiplier?  "Was the weather different in Kosovo and was the outcome different than DESERT STORM?  All these questions are important to outline as the discussion begins to reconstruct battles using M&S.  This reconstruction must be methodical and provide the necessary framework to accurately reenact the battles before any limits can be removed and variables altered for "what if" applications.The efforts needed to reconstruct the Kosovo Air War during OPERATION ALLIED FORCE into a modeling and simulation (M&S) architecture would be accomplished using the Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) Joint Synthetic Battlespace and its computer generated Joint Synthetic Forces (JointSAF).  While an M&S reconstruction provides an opportunity to see the "fog of war" as the Air War was executed, the primary objective should be to use STOW capabilities to demonstrate "what if" applications as different variables are changed.  The transition from "fog of war" to "what if" applications will assist decision support training for execution in all warfare levels as well as provide an excellent opportunity to discover how alterations in friendly or enemy ISR / weapons platforms determine battlespace outcomes. The first objective is to provide a scalable mission-level joint synthetic battlespace using STOW technologies to provide a composable simulation capability with realistic outcomes representing the Kosovo Air Campaign during OPERATION ALLIED FORCE.  O.K. it's a run on sentence but still a big order since accomplishing this task demands painstaking attention to detail in order to catalog results and present the actual Bomb Damage Assessment (BDA) from the battles.  This small feat must be set up and run to ensure valid (actual) results occur as they did during combat.The second and most important objective is to successfully integrate a "What-If" capability to the validated reconstruction altering attributes in the STOW SNE, TAOS, weapons platforms, sensors, or tactics to create an interactive simulation capability for theater mission level or unit level evaluation.  The "What-If" application capabilities must be readily available and easy to implement and execute.  Easy to execute means importing different Air Tasking Orders (ATOs) and the ability to easily aply object models to the SNE for evaluation.  The third objective is to leverage these capabilities to improve war fighter training for the USAF Distributed Mission Training (DMT) program by collecting required data for enhanced aircraft, environment, and visualization simulations in addition to the applications for other Battlelabs and staff analysis centers.  This "what if" capability will allow the USAF to alter the physical environment (terrain, weather, diurnal effects, etc.), sensors, weapons and tactics individually and/or collectively to attain reasonable deterministic outcomes using cognitive or semi-automated synthetic forces.  Once the necessary data (USAF, USN, and NATO) is collected and integrated, the Knowledge Acquisition Engineering (KAE) for scenario reconstruction and simulation development begins.  Validation and Verification is necessary to proceed with the "what if" phase as well as a continuance to complete further scenario reconstruction.Ideally, demonstrating a reconstruction of an actual strike package executed during Operation ALLIED FORCE using current STOW Joint Synthetic Battlespace and JointSAF begins the M&S validation of the Air War outcomes.  The simulation validation demonstration exhibits the capability to accurately reconstruct the terrain, meteorological conditions, Serbian ground and air forces, as well as the NATO forces and their respective C2ISR networks used in the various battles.  The goal is to first validate the simulation reconstruction of the battles, then alter specific variables (e.g. force displacement, maneuver changes, sensor field of view, new sensors / weapons, C2 Network changes, weather, Information Warfare, etc).  The STOW object model architecture allows for sensor and weapon changes without altering vehicle dynamics models.  This interaction benefit will provide the basis for evaluating the various "What-If" scenarios.  4.	Applying the "What If" to Recent and Future ApplicationsThe approaches individuals take in conflict are what mathematicians might say are asymptotic.  Though some might argue Doctrinal Behavior has bounds and breeds predictability.  The commander in the 73 Easting failed to follow doctrine and the outcome was in favor of those who were innovative, aggressive and had the technological advantage (GPS capability and IR/Thermal sights).  How every commander approaches a battle may not be the right approach for M&S "what if" applications, as it creates too many variables for evaluation and needs some bounding.  However, playing weapons instead of actions may provide the necessary limits to prevent a paralysis through analysis of infinite variables.  Future M&S runs can accommodate commander preferences and innovative methods to attack a battlespace dilemma.  Recent exercises and experiments demonstrate the utility of JointSAF for "what if" applications as variables were changed for sensor use, weapons selection, commander's intent and various task order executions, and operator training, awareness and proficiency.  4.1	WISSARDDARPA's NAS Oceana-based What If Simulation System for Advanced Research and Development (WISSARD) Tactical Research Facility is an epicenter for M&S "what if" applications used for service and joint experimentation/exercises.  WISSARD is a distributed simulation environment allowing the operation of DIS based and HLA based computer-generated forces in support of either R&D efforts or actual operations.  WISSARD has a T-3 fiber connection to a wide area network with the capability and is currently run at on a WAN at COMSEC Secret (DREN to be installed soon) but can be run at any level WAN or LAN based on Security Classification Guidelines and facility certification. WISSARD was Navy's primary view port and supplier of fixed wing aviation simulation in support of the STOW-Europe test in 1994 and has participated in a number of service specific and joint training exercises and tests since then, in addition to supporting all STOW series of tests as part of the STOW-97 ACTD.  WISSARD's vast capabilities has also supported USAF DMT initiatives and experiments, Battlelab integration, concept developments and numerous CGF improvements and integration for the air and space domains.  WISSARD is as much a capability as a facility.  WISSARD-like distributed simulation facilities at AFRL, Force Protection Battlelab, and even the Theater Battle Arena (TBA) use WISSARD capabilities to evaluate JointSAF in their large scale battlefield representations and "what if" applications.  WISSARD capabilities can be networked with any DIS or HLA compliant simulation.  4.2	Joint Warfighter Experiment-9901J9901 was an experiment series featured in seven distinct weeks of simulation events.  The experiment was conducted for US JFCOM (United States Joint Forces Command).  Its purpose was to explore new approaches to Joint Experimentation in the context of future attack operations.  STOW participation in this study supported JAWP (Joint Advanced Warfighting Program) and the JFCOM J-9 branch.  The experiment's focus centered on investigating how postulated future surveillance systems could be used to defeat mobile theater ballistic missile launchers in 2015.  The study’s objective was to provide an environment and tools that would allow analysts and operators to discover new insights into attack operations, not produce a statistical evaluation of system effectiveness.In addition, a variety of advanced munitions carried by the future air platforms were developed.  The critical munitions characteristics modeled for the experiment included range, airspeed, accuracy, mid-course correction capability, and probability of kill for various targets.  Munitions simulated glide and powered capabilities (including hypersonic), unitary and cluster warheads, and various guidance modes including GPS, INS, and ATR (automatic target recognition).The experiment’s ITO (Integrated Air Tasking Order) encompassing all phases from operational planning to trial execution was also developed.  The simulation took into account the intelligence prepared battlespace (IPB) and how it effected trial execution, including initial aircraft positions, SCL (standard conventional loads), and aircraft cycle times.Warfighting experiments have been around for a long time but this time the intent was to look into the future, using simulation, to investigate and gain insights into the utility and feasibility of new concepts.  Additionally the goal was to model or emulate new technology and see how sensitive the concepts were to the introduction of new hardware or software solutions.  Two other very important objectives were to allow for a robust and intelligent Opposing Force-played with HITL, and to investigate how a player cell could manage the information and add value to the concept.  Thus the challenges for the simulation developers were significant and interesting and all of the work was to be done on a very short time line. (Dehncke)4.3	Fleet Battle Experiment-Foxtrot (FBE-F)The Fleet Battle Experiment (FBE) program is in full gear, working directly with the numbered fleet commanders to test current and future warfighting concepts, technology, and doctrine for the navy.  The final piece of the puzzle is to inject knowledge management into the doctrine development process that immediately captures the lessons learned from the fleet and fleet battle experiments and reflects this knowledge in timely doctrine/tactics/techniques and procedures.  The process for concept development and maturation through experimentation involves and directly affects navy doctrine as well as the implications for joint and combined operations.  Once a potential operational concept is proposed, its effect on current doctrine is analyzed, and as the concept matures so does the associated future doctrine.  If during the execution of an experiment, results indicate that a change in current doctrine is warranted, and current capabilities will support the change, the new doctrine can be implemented.  For example, "initial reports from the recent Fleet Battle Experiment-Foxtrot indicate new doctrine is necessary to assure timely maritime access.  Navy Warfare Development Center (NWDC) will initiate new doctrine to capture this change, if the final analysis supports initial findings.  Navy doctrine is dynamic and NWDC will work toward timely promulgation." (COMNAVWARDEVCOM Msg 17 Dec 99).FBE-F examined current and future weapons in a "what if" scenario in a Time Critical Target (TCT) environment.  In addition to the experimental aspect, FBE-F combined with Operation ARABIAN MACE allowing USN and USAF operational personnel time to hone their warfighting skills.  FBE-F was instrumental in increasing STOW and JointSAF capabilities in the C2ISR arena.  Future FBEs will continue to capitalize on the foundations being built in these iterative "what if" applications in fleet and joint operations worldwide.4.4	Operation ALLIED FORCE Many will argue about the conduct of the Kosovo Operation.  War was never declared on Serbia, but military strikes were imposed in an attempt to alter their behaviors.  Once again, this is not a political science discussion, but one on M&S "what if" applications.  Operation ALLIED FORCE may provide an ideal prototype for future M&S "what if" use.  It is ideally suited based on the amount of information collected before, during and after hostilities.  The Kosovo Operation certainly exhibited a very wide application of air and space power, one where weather had a direct effect on the outcome.  It had two very distinct air-lines of operations.  There was a strategic line operating against Serb Air Defenses, C2, supply routes and infrastructure, resources, and ground and police forces.  The second line was against tactical forces stationed and operating in Kosovo.  Both lines had to successful to achieve the NATO goals and these operational lines attacked both ground mobile targets as well as fixed targets.  Finally, in this Kosovo "what if" prototype, the enemy knew for months they would be attacked and prepared accordingly.  Though bean-counting was not a true measure of performance (MOP), it certainly provides a variable for follow-on cost-effectiveness examination.  Most of the post hostility damage assessment was accomplished in Kosovo while some aerial reconnaissance was accomplished in Serbia.  What is not known is the actual damage to mobile targets in Serbia and the actual number of troops killed in combat.  Of the over 3000 missions flown over Kosovo, nearly 2000 pilot reports of mobile targets were evaluated with multiple (two and three) sources correlated on each strike.  Data collection requirements included video tapes from missions as well as the official press footage to combined with Mission Reports.  The extensive reporting for Kosovo Operations validated strikes and showed (Clark):Target		Strike Success		Multiple Hit			DecoyTanks				93	 of 181				19						9APCs				153 of 317			26						5Vehicles			339 of 600			37						5Atry/Mortar		389 of 857			46						64.5	Proposed Kosovo Scenario ReconstructionCertainly, we don't want to reconstruct a scenario to then have Regis Philbin ask, "Is that your final answer?"  "What if" applications should allow easy changes to numerous variables.  Initially a few specific scenarios should be selected then additional areas are added in on-going analysis.  Some "What If" variables to be modified are:	ATO execution	Weather	Threat reactions	C2ISR platform availability (increased or decreased)	UAV to cockpit information (Sensor to shooter enhancements)	Highlight decoy versus live targets	"New" sensors	"New" weaponsPhase I		Data Collection, Selected Air War Scenario Reconstruction and ValidationPhase II		What If ImplementationPhase III	Expanded Capabilities (Leave Behind and/or Recurring Training Course, Expanded Kosovo Scenarios, Additional What If Scenarios for Information Warfare and Two Week Air Campaign, etc)Phase IV	Integration and Networking with USAF Battlelabs, TBA, TACCSF, PRIMES Lab, AFRL Labs, and the USAF DMT Program.To date, the USAF has only elected to reproduce a video using legacy visualization technologies.  The video representation does not include any "what if" applications.  There is initial movement to continue JointSAF evaluation and use for follow-on C2ISR and weapons/weapons platform "what-if" applications.  Careful evaluation is needed to understand what the models represent in the real world and neither demonize nor deify any model, but determine how to provide the most robust simulation system.  This simulation must be capable of modification and inclusion of C2ISR assets and provide a level of granularity to determine effects on each entity whether a single infantry soldier or complex theater operations with 20,000 entities.  STOW and JointSAF still remains the best simulation and synthetic environment available to provide the necessary resolution for "what if" applications.5.	Simulation Fidelity to Evaluate OutcomesThough thousands of entities can be replicated and placed in a battlespace for force-on-force evaluations in many different M&S systems in use today, they all do not have the entity-level resolution and granularity necessary to assess outcomes.  For the philosophically challenged (and a small leap of faith) we use STOW/JointSAF and take an Occam's Razor approach to analysis and peel away the onion layers until we find the simplest solution or outcome and discover what it tells us about an event.  It is a careful evaluation of ground versus perceived truth as Man-in-the- Loop (MITL) is used and timed events are altered.  But even though timed events are deterministic, chance and luck still play very much in war and even Occam could find his razor a little dull when luck is involved.  MITL simulators networked with constructive simulation allows for that chance.  Simulation fidelity is a must.  Even history can teach us the physics of a bullet in flight.  Just a millisecond may determine whether it hits it mark or misses.  Opportunistic Events based on perceived truth evaluated with ground truth are available in the STOW JointSAF combination.  STOW with its entity-based resolution provides the ability to evaluate valid outcomes for collecting and benchmarking data for future analysis.  This fidelity comes in many forms including tools such as Bomb Damage Assessment Probe, Soar Situation Awareness Panel, STOW Network News and the After Action Review System used for outcome analysis.  5.1	Bomb Damage Assessment (BDA) ProbeThe BDA Probe uses detonation, fire and entity-state information plus dynamic terrain data collected from the HLA environment.  This data is processed to compute a variety of BDA parameters on target vehicles, munitions, multi-state objects (MSO), and the ‘firing’ vehicle.  These parameters are stored in two files: one read into a text editor and the other read into a spreadsheet.  During processing, DIS PDUs are also created.  For each detonated munition, an entity-state PDU is created for the munition, launch vehicle/platform, vehicle targets, and “probe” so their position and orientation can be displayed.The BDA Probe is placed on a target of interest such as a SAM site or airfield and describes detonations within a prescribed distance from the object.  Once the detonation occurs, then a mission report can be sent identifying "seen' detonation and damage to the MSOs.  Further efforts are now underway to use the BDA Probe and apply to the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) models for an engineering level damage analysis.  5.2	Situational Awareness PanelThe Situational Awareness (SA) Panel is a GUI aiding the observation, use, and development of TacAir-Soar intelligent agents that control simulated military aircraft.  The SA Panel allows a human operator or engineer to view various representations of an intelligent agent's current perception, awareness, goals, and intentions during an exercise.  Currently, the SA Panel includes four sub-displays, each containing a different class of information.  The sub-displays include the active goal display, the milestone display, the aircraft status display, and the agent awareness display.Figure 1:  Situation Awareness PanelActive Goal Display:		TacAir-Soar artificial intelligence agents always have an active hierarchy of goals that they are trying to achieve, which are derived from the agent's current (and past) situational awareness, and the agent's long-term knowledge of the air combat domain.  The Active Goal Display shows the agent's current stack of active goals and sub-goals, so a human observer can match external behavior of the agent's aircraft to the internal intentions of the intelligent agent.  The S.A. PANEL allows the user to mouse-click on the individual goals in order to view amplifying information associated with each goal and is an excellent method for doctrinal analysis as an AAR tool and for developing and debugging new behaviors.Milestone Display:	As the agent executes its mission, it logs various milestone events together with a time stamp in the Milestone Display.  Examples of milestones are the acquisition and identification of a new contact, beginning an intercept, selecting and firing missiles, etc.  This information allows a human observer a quick view of the agent's history, making it easier to interpret and evaluate the agent's current behavior in context.Aircraft Status Display:		The Aircraft Status Display simply shows some of the cockpit-interface information that is available to the agent for reasoning.  Examples are the aircraft's current altitude, speed, heading, etc.Agent Awareness Display:	This is perhaps the most sophisticated and useful display in the S.A. PANEL.  The Agent Awareness Display provides a plan view of the immediate area around the agent (up to 200 miles).  The view includes graphical representations of the agent's awareness of other contacts in the simulation environment.  The display is similar to a radar display, but it does not limit the contact information to active radar contacts.  Rather, it displays a representation of any other ``being'' (be it a synthetic force or a human operator or warfighter) with which the agent has had contact visually, via radar, or via radio.  When appropriate the display indicates position, speed, heading, etc., information for each contact.  It also shows which agents are known to be friendly, bandits, hostile, or unknown.  This visual display of the agent's current understanding of the environment is an invaluable tool for judging the quality and reasons for the agent's externally observable behavior.  This aids training exercise operators as well as engineers5.3	STOW Network News STOW Network News (SNN) records and displays raw STOW simulation events for real time analysis of the simulation execution.  SNN provides an excellent capability to up to the second weapons impact and result information for initial analysis events like a "hot wash" or BDA tabulations.  SNN applies to all weapons impacts.  This web-based technology can be networked with other sites in order to extract the data during on-going exercises and evaluations.  SNN can be presented in text-files, 2-D or 3-D imported representations with other applications or GUIs.  In addition, weapons effects are currently portrayed, however other variables such as sensor detection, vehicle angle or dynamic movements, and logistics information can be easily viewed.  5.4	After Action Review System (AARS)The STOW AARS is critical to the success of any experiment as it provided an enhanced set of tools for query, analysis and presentation of event data. Replay of critical events in 3D was possible as was a faster than real time replay in 2D.  J9901 statistics on military performance measures, killer/victim scoreboards, attrition rates and other Measures of Effectiveness (MOE) were designed and made available in response to requests from the JAWP Assessment Team.  (Dehncke)  Figure 2:  STOW After-Action Review System6.	ConclusionsThere are many ways to look at reconstruction in M&S.  Some may look at recent efforts as either eye-candy publicity or a Rorshach Blot.  It is the 'what if" capability that replaces viewing at a video production with discovering outcomes through careful observation to ascertain needed changes in tactics, weapons, and manpower to counter threats. ."  B.H Liddell Hart said:  "The only thing harder than getting a new idea into the military is to get the old one out.  It is still dangerous to rely on a Course of Action based on similarities with past conflicts; the only constant is change!  The objective in DMT should not just prepare folks for war, but make them understand it and anticipate it. Reflex actions are non-rational response to stimuli. Today's combat training is extremely complex with the many sensors, communication links and multi-mode fire control systems among the numerous participants in a combat arena.  Mastering one's weapon system is only one part of the equation for survival in battle and many times survival is based on reflex action.  To combat threats today, warriors must counter a sophisticated threat also capable of processing enormous amounts of information for targeting them.  As warriors maneuver through the battlespace they must use the skills and reflexes learned in training.  USAF training has entered an exciting phase where virtual and live can be combined with constructive simulation. Distributive Mission Training (DMT) is simply the newest simulation capability adopted by the Air Force and is already under review by the Navy.  DMT's wide applications for U.S. Armed Services and nationalities cover areas from unit to theater level mission team training.  Though the USAF beddown focuses initially on fighter and C2 platforms, its applications touch all warfare disciplines including service component combat planners, intelligence specialists, and those responsible for operational level warfare execution.  All quarters will benefit from the added flexibility and realism DMT will provide.  It is the interaction among numerous participants worldwide which makes this an exciting training prospect.  Networking manned cockpits worldwide and providing the necessary connectivity for reporting up and down the chain of command takes training to a new level.  No longer is it just the excitement of putting manned simulators in “life-threatening” situations, but networking with the individuals who put them in these situations and extend the playing field to theater mission rehearsals is a great benefit.  Replaying old battles may provide outstanding laboratories for learning since the real outcomes are known and can be validated.  The "what if" provides the catalyst for learning and building experience without the danger involved with "live" hostilities.Military events however insignificant at the moment of execution can have far reaching implications as the dominoes fall backwards.  The "what if" applications also provide an opportunity to visualize the outcomes if they fall forward.STOW represents the state of the art in distributed simulation and provides a robust architecture for C4ISR integration and executing the numerous variables for a "what if capabilities. 7.	ReferencesAronson, Jesse, Radgowski, Tom, (1997), Lessons Learned in Developing the STOW AAR System.Budge, Larry D. MG (Ret) (1997), Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) 97 Overview.Callander, Bruce D., The New Expeditionary Force, AIR FORCE Magazine, September 1998, 54-56.Ceranowicz, Andy, PhD  (1998), STOW 97-99.  Clark, Gen Wesley K., (16 Sep 1999), Press Conference on the Kosovo Strike Assessment.  Dahmann, J.S. (1997), The Department of Defense High Level Architecture.  Proceedings of the 1997 Winter Simulation Conference, 142-149.Dehncke, Rae, Morgan, Todd W., (1999) Virtual Simulation and Joint Experimentation STOW and Joint Attack Operations, Fall SIW-079.Grier, Peter, From the Battlelabs, AIR FORCE Magazine, September 1998, 48-50.Kreisher, Otto, To Protect the Force, AIR FORCE Magazine, November 1998, 30-34.Laird, John. E., PhD, Coulter, Karen J., Jones, Randolph M., Kenny, Patrick G., Koss, Frank, Nielsen, Paul E. (1997), Integrating Intelligent Computer Generated Forces in Distributive Simulations:  TacAir SOAR in STOW-97.  McKenzie, Major Kenneth F., Jr., An Ecstasy of Fumbling: Doctrine and Innovation, Joint Force Quarterly, Winter 1995-96.Miller, D., Miller, T., Cornish, C., Rourke J., and Cauble, K.  (1998), STOW Southwest Asia Terrain Data Base, 98-SIW-165.Oakes, Michael R. (1998), Augmenting Air and Space Dominance: The Future of Combat Training.Paz, Benjamin D., Hudson, Irwin L. (1996), ModSAF Credibility.8.	Author’s BiographyMICHAEL OAKES is a senior systems engineer with BMH Associates, Inc.  He holds a B.S. in Aeronautical Engineering, M.S. in Aeronautical Sciences, and an M.A. in National Security and Strategic Studies.  He was responsible for the evolution, bed-down, and deployment of high priority classified special access required programs.  He is a retired USAF fighter pilot with over 20 years of experience in the Pacific, European, and Southwest Asia theaters of operations and is a USAF F-15 Fighter Weapons School Graduate.  Mr. Oakes was the WISSARD Lab Test Director for the STOW-97 ACTD.  He maintains domain expertise as a commercial airline pilot and continues to provide modeling and military domain expertise for Air Synthetic Force development used in JointSAF technologies. 