SBA Collaborative Environment Conceptsfor Mission and Product AreasJames E. CoolahanJohn F. KeaneCharles H. SinexJohns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory11100 Johns Hopkins RoadLaurel, MD 20723-6099240-228-5155, 240-228-8886, 240-228-5617james.coolahan@jhuapl.edu, john.keane@jhuapl.edu, charles.sinex@jhuapl.eduKeywords:SBA, Simulation Based Acquisition, Architecture, Collaborative EnvironmentABSTRACT: During 1998, the Joint Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) Task Force, chartered by the Acquisition Council of the DoD Executive Council for Modeling and Simulation (EXCIMS), prepared an SBA Roadmap.  A key operational architectural construct proposed in the SBA Roadmap is the Collaborative Environment (CE), which is defined in the context of SBA to be an enduring collection of subject matter experts (SMEs) supported by interoperable tools and data bases, authoritative information resources, and product/process models that are focused on a common domain or set of problems.  Six levels of potential CEs were introduced in the SBA Roadmap, with two key levels being the mission area and product area levels.The purpose of this paper is to present some concepts for mission area and product area CEs, building upon the high-level descriptions contained in the SBA Roadmap.  The discussion highlights the necessary involvement in CEs of the many stakeholders in the acquisition process, particularly those such as logisticians, operators, and maintainers whose involvement earlier in the acquisition process is necessary to achieve reductions in total ownership cost and enhanced system supportability. For example, with reductions in the DoD logistics infrastructure, logistics must be considered as an integral element in all CE levels to ensure that systems and platforms meet total ownership cost goals and will support tactical, operational and strategic missions under all circumstances.  The paper also describes essential elements of CEs, application of CEs to mission area analysis and system development, and similarities and key differences between CEs focused on mission areas and those focused on product areas.  A discussion is also provided on the relationships between CEs and proposed SBA systems architecture constructs, including the reference systems architecture for CEs, Distributed Product Descriptions (DPDs) and the DoD/Industry Resource Repository (DIRR).1. BackgroundIn 1997, the Acquisition Council of the DoD Executive Council for Modeling and Simulation (EXCIMS) developed a vision for Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA), that included the following goals:substantially reduce the time, resources, and risk associated with the entire acquisition process; increase the quality, military worth, and supportability of fielded systems while reducing total ownership costs throughout the total life cycle; and enable Integrated Product and Process Development (IPPD) across the entire acquisition life cycle.  In March, 1998, the Acquisition Council established a Joint SBA Task Force to develop a roadmap for DoD’s SBA implementation.  Over a six-month study period and a three-month review period, the Task Force developed a notional architecture for SBA and a roadmap of recommended actions to implement SBA in DoD, both of which were documented in the Task Force’s report in December, 1998 [1].  The roadmap included several architecture concepts, including the Collaborative Environment (CE).  Six levels of potential CEs were introduced in the roadmap, with two key levels being the mission area and product area levels.  The purpose of this paper is to present some concepts for these two levels of CEs, building upon the high-level descriptions in the roadmap.2. Review of SBA Architecture ConceptsThe notional SBA architecture, as defined in the roadmap, consists of three views as specified in the C4ISR Architecture Framework [2]: the operational view, the systems view, and the technical view, as illustrated in Figure 1. EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1. Three views of architecture.In the roadmap, five principal SBA architectural concepts were proposed:Collaborative Environments (CEs);the Collaborative Environment Reference Systems Architecture (CERSA);Distributed Product Descriptions (DPDs);the DoD/Industry Resource Repository (DIRR); andData Interchange Formats (DIFS).A high-level description of these architectural concepts may be found in [3].  The first of these, CEs, are operational architecture concepts.  The next three (the CERSA, DPDs, and the DIRR) are systems architecture concepts, and the last, DIFs, are technical architecture concepts.  Some developmental concepts for DPDs, their use in the acquisition of systems, and their relationships to the other SBA architecture constructs are presented in [4].  The remainder of this paper will discuss CEs and their relationships to the SBA systems architecture constructs, and will focus in particular on mission area and product area CEs.3. Overview of Collaborative Environments3.1 Collaborative Environment DefinitionAs defined in [1], a CE, in the context of SBA, is “an enduring collection of subject matter experts (SMEs) supported by interoperable tools and data bases, authoritative information resources, and product/process models that are focused on a common domain or set of problems.”  Of particular note in this definition are the phrases “enduring collection” and “focused on a common domain or set of problems.”The fact that a CE comprises an enduring collection of resources implies that it is not an ad hoc creation.  It exists throughout the life cycle of a system, such as a specific fighter aircraft (system CE), throughout the collective life of a related family of products, such as aircraft (product area CE), or throughout the need for a given type of mission, such as strike warfare (mission area CE).  The fact that a CE is focused on a common domain or set of problems means that there is not a single “one size fits all” CE for all DoD problems and acquisition programs, but that CEs must be tailored to solve problems in specific areas.3.2 Essential Elements of Collaborative EnvironmentsRegardless of the domains or sets of problems that individual CEs are focused upon, all CEs can be expected to have some essential common elements:a defined purpose for which the CE is intended to be used;the involvement of SMEs from all functional disciplines that are stakeholders in the domain or set of problems that the CE is focused upon;availability of a set of interoperable models, simulations, tools, and data appropriate to the domain or problem set;mechanisms for electronic collaboration over a distance for exchange of information, access to authoritative data, and execution of simulations.a systems architecture framework for the CE, derived from a common reference such as the CERSA;an agreed upon set of processes for configuration management and for Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A); an agreed upon set of standards, rules, and local conventions (i.e., technical architecture), to which all CE users and components adhere.coordinated policy, planning, and investment strategies to ensure continuing support of the CE.3.3 Acquisition Process Stakeholder InvolvementCEs focused on aspects of the DoD acquisition process must necessarily involve SMEs from all of the functional disciplines associated with that process, as well as from areas often considered outside of the traditional acquisition process.  These areas include:requirements generation,combat development,acquisition policy,program management and leadership,earned value management,contract management,funds management,systems engineering,software acquisition management,test and evaluation,manufacturing and production,logistics,operations, andtraining.3.4 Relationships to SBA Systems Architecture As a key operational architecture construct, CEs are closely tied to the constructs of the SBA systems architecture.  Figure 2, taken from [4], and derived from [1] and [2], shows a top-level view of the SBA systems architecture and an exploded view of the CERSA.  This figure depicts the relationship between CEs and the CERSA, DPDs, and the DIRR.As noted in section 3.2 above, for each CE, there will be a systems architecture framework, derived from a common reference.  The CERSA shown in the figure provides such a reference.  However, for each CE, there need not be an instance of every type of component shown in the CERSA.  Additionally, for each CE, the specific components used in a given type may differ from the specific components used for that type in another CE.  The intent of the CERSA is to highlight the component types and the opportunities for interface standards so as to better enable cross-domain tool reuse and data sharing, while providing CE developers with a high degree of flexibility regarding specific implementation approaches.Figure 2 also shows that an individual CE, based on the requirements of a program manager or other user of the CE, may draw upon the DIRR to access or obtain copies of resources needed in the CE.  The DIRR provides a web-technology-based distributed repository of tools, information resources, and generic infrastructure components for use within CEs.  Tools, resources, and components developed for the first time by, or upgraded by, individual CEs can be made available to other CEs through the DIRR.  This can be done without physically “releasing” a tool/resource/component from the CE simply by making access information available in the DIRR, linking the appropriate local CE node to the DIRR, and instituting appropriate access controls.A DPD, as defined in [1], is a distributed collection of product-centric information that is interconnected via web technology into what appears (to the user) to be a single, logically unified product representation.  DPDs, as shown in Figure 2, can be thought of as being simultaneously “contained within” both the DIRR and the CEs which access them.  As both the DIRR and DPDs are distributed collections of information, only access controls differentiate which CEs, and which users within those CEs, have DPDs, or parts thereof, available to them.  A more detailed treatment of how individual CE users can gain access to user-selectable views of DPDs can be found in [4].3.5 Levels of Collaborative EnvironmentsAs a way of initially defining a structure for CEs, the SBA roadmap proposed six levels of CEs, ranging from strategic, at the highest level, to subsystem, at the lowest level.  Although the divisions between levels are not clear-cut, this basic structure provides a means of classifying CEs according to their primary purposes.  Figure 3, derived from [1], shows the six levels of CEs, and highlights the middle two levels. EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure 3. Potential levels of collaborative environments.The top two levels of CEs in Figure 3, strategic and operational, align with the levels of conflict described in Joint doctrine publications.  The next level, mission area, represents a tactical level of conflict, where multiple systems are brought together to perform specific missions or functions.  Mission area CEs are particularly important in supporting analysis in the mission area early in the acquisition process.The bottom three levels of CEs in Figure 3, product area, system, and sub-system, pertain more specifically to the development, production, and support aspects of system acquisition.  A product area CE permits collaboration across several similar systems (e.g., aircraft), whereas a system CE would be focused upon a specific system (e.g., a specific strike aircraft, such as the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF)), and a sub-system CE would focus on a specific sub-system (e.g., a radar or an engine).  It should be noted that several CEs, including those at different levels, may all require access to a single DPD.  Similarly, a single CE will likely require access to several DPDs.  Figure 4 shows an example of two CEs – a mission area CE focused on strike warfare and a product area CE focused on aircraft – that each require access to certain aspects of a joint strike aircraft DPD in addition to (at least) two other DPDs that have relevance in their individual areas.  The mission area CE, shown as a cloud on the left side of Figure 4, needs access to higher level information from the DPDs (shown as pyramids) of the joint strike aircraft, the Army missile system, and the Air Force C2 system, in order to perform mission-level simulations of strike operations.  The product area CE, shown as a cloud on the right side of Figure 4, utilizes lower level engineering data from the strike aircraft, the Air Force transport aircraft, and the Army trainer aircraft to perform structural analysis on system designs, for example.The mission area and product area levels of CEs provide significant opportunities for cross-program sharing of data, information, and knowledge.  The junction between the mission area and product area levels is also a significant point at which the performance simulations associated with a given type of product must be supported by the product design characteristics.  For this reason, these two levels will be explored further in the remainder of this paper.4. Mission Area Collaborative Environments4.1 Distinguishing CharacteristicsSection 3.3 outlined some essential elements of CEs that are applicable to all levels of CEs.  Different levels of CEs, however, will have different distinguishing characteristics that derive from the purposes for which they are intended.Mission area CEs will typically have the following distinguishing characteristics:a purpose associated with a specifically defined mission area;a set of users, tools, resources, and infrastructure capable of supporting mission area analysis, concept of operations (ConOps) development, and tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTP) development;access to DPDs of systems from different product areas that are required for the particular mission;an orientation more toward operational performance simulation and utility analysis rather than product data manipulation.Although mission area CEs will certainly need to be employed at the “front end” of the acquisition process, they will also be useful during acquisition of specific systems.  Product designs formulated in system and product area CEs can be introduced into mission area CEs to perform operational utility assessments, and the results fed back to the lower level CEs for refinement.  Thus mission area CEs and product area CEs can be used iteratively during system design evolution. 4.2 Potential Mission Area CEsCombat units are arranged and maneuvered in relation to each other and to the enemy “to fight and win engagements and battles” [5].  This tactical level of military conflict, where multiple systems come together to perform a variety of combat functions, consists of multiple mission areas, many of which span multiple Services/organizations.  Throughout the Services, the actions performed at this level of conflict are often referred to as “functions,” “tasks,” “operations,” or “missions.”  For the sake of this discussion, they will be referred to as “missions.”Joint doctrine defines a mission as the “task, together with the purpose, that clearly indicates the action to be taken and the reason therefore” [6].  Within the DoD acquisition community, the term “mission area” refers to that “segment of the defense mission established by SECDEF.  Each component has mission areas (e.g., Navy – Anti-Surface Warfare, Army – Ground Warfare, etc.) for which it must equip its forces” [5].Given the above definitions, a partial list of potential mission area CEs might consist of the following:suppression of enemy air defenses,special operations,strike warfare,fire support,interdiction,close air support,ballistic missile defense,air defense,mine countermeasures,anti-surface warfare,anti-submarine warfare,combat search and rescue,psychological operations, andreconnaissance. 4.3 Example – Strike WarfareFor the purposes of discussion, consider the example of a CE for strike warfare.  The assumptions are that a Joint Force is in place, and that strike warfare is one of the missions assigned to the Joint Forces Air Component Commander (JFACC).  At this level, it is considered best to allow the Services the opportunity to integrate within the CE based on their actual (or perceived) capabilities.  The more closely this integration mirrors real-world Joint/Service doctrine and operations, the better.  Figure 5 shows three levels of CEs that are pertinent in this case (one level up and one level down from the mission area), with the arrows indicating that the mission area CE and several product area CEs can be used in an iterative fashion.Figure 5.  Three levels of CEs centered on strike warfare.As stated in [1], a CE is sustainable only if supported by the proper set of people, processes and tools.  Depending upon the level of analysis required, a strike warfare CE might consist of representatives from the following communities, among others: warfighters,mission planners,targeters/weaponeers,program managers,engineers,testers, andtrainers.A wide variety of tools and databases would be needed to support analyses in this mission area CE (not completely enumerated here).  These would include representations of blue/allied and threat systems.  Representations should not be limited to platforms and weapons.  In order to fully understand how a particular system would interact and contribute to the strike warfare mission area, representations of sensor and command and control (C2) systems should be included as well.4.4 Application to Mission Area AnalysisA well-structured mission area CE will support a variety of applications, one of which is mission area analysis (MAA).  An example of such an analysis, as related to strike warfare, might consist of an analysis to determine requirements and contributions of a new strike aircraft.  This analysis would commence with high-level mission requirements as handed down from the JFACC.  Representations of current systems (aircraft, ships, and missiles) would be brought together and an analysis performed in which shortcomings in current capability would be determined.  Requirements for a new strike aircraft – range, payload, stealth, sensors, etc. – could be identified and passed to engineers and analysts working within a product area CE for further analysis.At the product level, analysts can determine the feasible region based on numerous variables (cost/performance trades, etc.).  These parameters can then be fed back to the mission area CE for a “second run” to fine tune a new system’s contribution to the overall strike effort, as shown by the arrows in Figure 5.4.5 Application to LogisticsTactical missions imply fairly short duration events, on the order of a day to several days, so that all, or most, of the of the supplies, equipment, personnel and munitions are already in theater.  At most, shipments of minor amounts of materiel might still be in-transit outside the theater.  The major challenge at this CE level is to correctly simulate the future logistics operating mode.  As part of the Joint Vision 2010 concept for future warfighting, forward buildup of logistics supplies will be minimized and the location and status of supplies in transit, including the in-theater transit phase, will be monitored to ensure rapid delivery of supplies [7].    Under this concept, referred to as “lean logistics,” many of the repair items that might be required during combat will be kept in CONUS and rapid strategic transportation used to move that material to the theater on an “as needed” basis.  This new logistics mode requires transportation assets to move materiel and repair items both in-theater and from CONUS to the theater.  This mode also requires the use of systems like total asset visibility to monitor the status and location of items in transit and the use of decision support tools to develop modified shipment plans as problems develop. The transportation side of the simulation is fairly straightforward.  This portion of the simulation requires the simulation of transportation from the factories or warehouses in CONUS to the airports of embarkation, the strategic airlift from CONUS to the theater, and the hand-over to the theater-level logistics transportation models.   There are a variety of models available in the logistics community that can simulate these various path segments.  There may be issues about how easily these different logistics models can be linked together in a simulation and whether the transportation plans being simulated can be modified during the simulation.   The bigger challenge is to model the asset visibility and decision support systems.  These systems are being developed as operational systems, but no significant effort has been made to develop models to simulate their performance.  There are also questions about linking models, once they are available, of asset visibility and decision support tools with the existing logistics transportation models.There are two major operational logistics issues that also arise at this mission level of analysis.  The first issue is whether the intra-theater transportation assets allocated for this mission are sufficient to move the allocated supplies and munitions to the units requiring them.  This is primarily an in-theater transportation allocation problem for the theater commander.  The second operational issue is how to handle the need for additional supplies or repair parts, or even replacement of fighting units, depending on battle damage and the course of the mission.  If the additional materiel is available within the theater, the questions are whether the CINC will release the materiel for use and whether the transportation system can provide its delivery to the fighting units in time.  However, if many of the repair items required are located in CONUS, the larger question is whether transportation assets in CONUS and strategic transportation assets to move that material to the theater are available and can meet the schedules.  The same questions raised earlier about interfacing the transportation models with models of the total asset visibility system and the logistics decision support tools still apply.5. Product Area Collaborative Environments5.1 Distinguishing CharacteristicsProduct area CEs will typically have the following distinguishing characteristics:a purpose associated with a specifically defined product area;a set of users, tools, resources, and infrastructure capable of supporting research, development, production, testing, and evaluation;access to DPDs of systems with similar high-level characteristics or functions;an orientation toward product model development, testing, and engineering/engagement simulation.Just as mission area CEs can be employed during the system design evolution, product area CEs can provide the engineering basis for performance simulation of existing systems during mission area analysis.  Designs formulated in product area CEs can be introduced into mission area CEs for operational utility assessments, with results fed back to the product area CEs for refinement.5.2 Potential Product Area CEsProduct area CEs encompass the full range of types of products that the DoD requires to perform its collective missions.  The set of product area CEs that are most natural to implement and efficient to maintain is likely to evolve with time.“Horizontal” decisions will need to be made as to what products of similar scale are sufficiently similar in construction or function to be classified in the same product area, and which are sufficiently different to be classified in different product areas.  For example, are all air vehicles (fighters, transport planes, trainers, helicopters and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs)) sufficiently similar to be in the same product area?  Or is an appropriate product area “fixed wing manned aircraft”?Similarly, “vertical” decisions will need to be made as to what constitutes a system or product, and what constitutes a sub-system.  For example, it may be appropriate to consider “radars” as a product area, although a radar is a sub-system on an aircraft.  It should be anticipated that there will be multiple “sub-levels” or overlapping levels of product areas.At a simple level, one could use the Real-time Platform Reference Federation Object Model (RPR-FOM) [8] as an example of an attempt to classify products as entities for simulation purposes.  Even here, there is a mix of scale, with platforms (having sub-classes of aircraft, ground vehicles, surface vessels, etc.) at the same class level as munitions, radios, and sensors.  A more likely classification scheme would be based on DoD responsibilities for the acquisition of systems.As an incomplete “starter set” of product areas, one can consider the following list to include potentially appropriate product areas:aircraft (manned),unmanned aerial vehicles,spacecraft,ballistic missiles,cruise missiles,surface ships,submarines,amphibious vehicles,ground vehicles,guns,munitions,command/control systems,communications systems,radars,sonars, andoptical sensors.Obviously, one could envision product areas that would represent sub-classes of the above classes of products.  In some cases, this might be appropriate (for example, to distinguish between combat and non-combat aircraft).  However, one does not want to so narrow the scope of a product area that it encompasses only a single system, because at that point, the benefits of cross-program sharing of data, information, and knowledge are no longer gained.5.3  Example – AircraftFor purposes of an example, consider the case of aircraft, and assume that the product area of “aircraft (manned)” as listed in the previous section represents the scope of the product area.  Thus, UAVs are excluded, but helicopters are included.  Sections 3.2 and 5.1 can be used as a guide in defining the elements and characteristics of this product area.Purpose: The purpose of this product area CE would be to support research, development, production, testing, and evaluation of the following types of aircraft:fighters,bombers,reconnaissance aircraft,command and control aircraft,helicopters,transports/tankers, andtrainer aircraft.Stakeholders: The stakeholders in such a broad product area CE would be many and diverse, including:Operators (pilots, navigators, etc.)	Aerospace engineersMaintenance technicians		Mechanical engineersAir component commands		Electrical engineersAircraft program managers	Software engineersContract specialists		Cost analystsDevelopmental/operational testers	LogisticiansAircraft manufacturers		Production engineersTraining specialists		Research scientistsConfiguration managers		Network managersSystems architecture framework and components: Using the CERSA as the systems architecture framework, some example component models, simulations, tools, and data for this product area CE would be:User environment:Graphical user interfacesImmersive 3D displaysHand-, head-, and eye-actuated display view controllersWeb browsers (Netscape, Internet Explorer, etc.)Acquisition support tools:Word processing, spreadsheet, and presentation programsScheduling tools (Microsoft Project, etc.)Configuration management toolsEnterprise resource planning (ERP) softwareVideo teleconferencing (VTC), groupware, whiteboardsComputational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations6-degree-of-freedom aerodynamic simulationsJoint Modeling and Simulation System (JMASS)Manufacturing process flow simulationsCockpit simulatorsHigh Level Architecture (HLA) object modeling toolsDesign data translation toolsStructural analyzers (NASTRAN, etc.)Total ownership cost (TOC) modelsCAE/CAD/CAM toolsLogistics planning toolsExpert system design optimization toolsResources:DPDs of individual aircraft in the product areaAtmospheric and weather databases and modelsAir combat scenario databasesTarget modelsData element dictionariesAcquisition planning documents (ORDs, TEMPs, etc.)Computer system security plansM&S VV&A plansAcquisition policy documentsSimulation, Test & Evaluation Process (STEP) guidelinesRecommended practices documents (VV&A, etc.)Product model data exchange standard documentsM&S standards (HLA, etc.) documentsHLA Simulation Object Models (SOMs)Technical manuals for acquisition support toolsInfrastructure:Desktop personal computersGraphics processorsSpecial-architecture computers (e.g., for CFD, etc.)Local- and wide-area networks (LANs/WANs)Latency/bandwidth-managed simulation networksNetwork protocols (TCP/IP, UDP/IP, etc.)Encryption devices for classified informationAccess control devices (firewalls, etc.)Computer-aided collaboration facilitiesCAE/CAD/CAM facilitiesDistributed cockpit simulator facilitiesLocal and distributed operating systemsDistributed database management servicesDPD user-selectable view servicesHLA Runtime Infrastructure (RTI)Software development frameworksElectronic collaboration mechanisms: The previous list of systems architecture components alluded to collaboration tools and networks.  For the aircraft product area CE, one would expect to have a need for electronic mail, video teleconferencing, file sharing and access, electronic whiteboarding, DPD and DIRR access, and distributed simulation.  Networks to support such activity fall into three classes, based on bandwidth and latency considerations:low-bandwidth LANs,wide-bandwidth WANs, andwide-bandwidth, low-latency networks.The first is capable of supporting applications such as electronic mail and local file sharing.  The second would be required for distributed collaboration applications such as video teleconferencing, and for the transfer of large amounts of data, such as for DPD access.  The third would be required in those cases where low latency is need, such as in real-time distributed simulation applications.Processes: The previous list of systems architecture components also alluded to documentation of processes.  As a minimum, the aircraft product area CE would have the following classes of processes:configuration management processes,M&S VV&A processes,design engineering processes,manufacturing processes,cost analysis processes,test and evaluation (T&E) processes,logistics processes,contract management processes, andtraining processes.Technical architecture: As also alluded to in the systems architecture component list of documentation, a number of standards, rules, and conventions are applicable to the aircraft product area CE.  Just a few classes of standards that would be applicable are:overarching standards (e.g., Joint Technical Architecture);product model data exchange standards (e.g., Standard for the Exchange of Product Model Data (STEP));environmental data exchange standards (e.g., Synthetic Environment Data Representation Interchange Specification (SEDRIS);software data exchange formats (e.g., CASE Data Interchange Format (CDIF));atmospheric data standards; andergonomics standards.Coordinated policy, planning, and investment strategies: Adhering to a “centralized planning, decentralized execution” approach requires that all stakeholders do their part to ensure the continued viability of a collaborative environment.  The aircraft product area CE would probably place more stress on the current DoD culture and funding processes than most other CEs.  Not only is there a large number of functional disciplines, but aircraft are procured by all of the Services.  Thus, if no centralized organization were established to manage and fund the aircraft product area CE, a significant number of organizations would need to budget for and defend the necessary resources to maintain a viable CE over time.Application to LogisticsAt the product area CE level, where the development of a product like an aircraft from many different sub-systems (e.g., radars) is addressed, many complex logistics issues arise.  Unlike the mission area CE, where time durations are fairly short and logistics issues are limited primarily to transportation of existing materiel, the product area CE is much broader.  The time scale now includes the entire life cycle of the product, and the logistics issues span the range from product construction and maintenance to user training and, eventually, to decommissioning and disposal.  All of these factors include trade-offs between the life cycle cost of that system versus its expected performance.  Specific logistics issues for a product like an aircraft that need to be considered in the product area CE include:Assembly of the aircraft from the component systems and sub-systems, which technically could include the commercial logistics systems used by the manufacturers to support their assembly lines and product shipments.Maintenance and repair of the aircraft after its acceptance by DoD.  Military personnel might handle these tasks, in which case the related military logistics systems need to be simulated as well.  Alternatively, the task of maintenance and repair might be subcontracted to private industry as part of the DoD move toward privatization.  In that case, the commercial logistics systems would need to be simulated.Just as in the case of the mission area logistics analysis, the performance of asset visibility systems and rapid re-planning systems might be included in the product area simulation.  Although the time urgency associated with warfare is not present, many of the manufacturers now routinely use capabilities such as in-transit visibility of deliveries and shipments in their normal course of business.Training of the military operators is another element of the problem that needs to be simulated.  Training on new systems, and maintaining skills on existing systems, can be a fairly expensive portion of life cycle costs.  To some degree, many of these training costs would be handled at the lower levels of system and sub-system, but their overall cost still gets added up at the product level.  It should be emphasized that costs are not just dollars, but also include time taken from other activities.Final decommissioning and disposal of the aircraft at the end of its useful life.  This component should be a fairly small one, primarily addressing the breakdown of the product to its component systems.  The detailed disposal of those systems would really be handled at the system and sub-system CE levels.The logistics simulation challenges in this CE can be significant.  Many more processes are required, and models to simulate those processes do not exist in many cases.  Linking these models in a complex simulation, and verifying and validating their accuracy, are also challenging issues that need to be addressed. 6. SummaryThe development and use of collaborative environments will be a critical part of the implementation of SBA.  The SBA roadmap provided a high-level description and a proposed method of classification of collaborative environments into six levels.  Of the six levels, the mission area and product area collaborative environments provide significant potential for cross-program sharing and reuse.  This paper has expanded upon the notional description of collaborative environments provided in the roadmap, and provided additional detail on the components and uses of mission area and product area collaborative environments.  Examples have been given for a strike warfare mission area and an aircraft product area, and the applicability of collaborative environments to mission area analysis and logistics has been discussed.  As more DoD and Industry activities begin to focus on SBA implementation, it can be expected that the concept of a collaborative environment will evolve and that more concrete examples of collaborative environments will be produced.7. References[1]	A Roadmap for Simulation Based Acquisition – Report of the Joint Simulation Based Acquisition Task Force, Acquisition Council Draft for Coordination, December 4, 1998.[2]	C4ISR Architecture Framework Version 2.0, C4ISR Architecture Working Group, Department of Defense, December 18, 1997.[3]	R. Lutz and J. Keane, “An Architecture for Simulation Based Acquisition,” 1999 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 1999.[4]	R. R. Lutz and J. E. Coolahan, “Developmental Concepts for Digital Distributed Product Descriptions,” 1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 1999.[5]	DoD Acquisition Glossary of Terms, Appendix B, 8th Ed., Defense Systems Management College, May 19, 1997.[6]	Joint Publication 1-02, “Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms,” Joint Chiefs of Staff, Department of Defense, March 23, 1994 (as amended through June 29, 1999).[7]	Joint Vision 2010, Joint Chiefs of Staff, Department of Defense, July 1996.[8]	RPR-FOM, Version 1.0 Draft 2, Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization, Inc., 1999.Author BiographiesJAMES COOLAHAN is the Assistant to the Director for Modeling and Simulation at the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory.  In his 27 years at  JHU/APL, his technical activities have included modeling and simulation, test and evaluation, and the development of oceanographic data acquisition systems.  In 1998, Dr. Coolahan provided leadership for the technical team supporting the Joint Simulation Based Acquisition Task Force.  He is a past Vice-Chair of the SISO Test and Evaluation Forum.  Dr. Coolahan holds B.S. and M.S. degrees in aerospace engineering from the University of Notre Dame and the Catholic University of America, respectively, and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from the Johns Hopkins University and the University of Maryland, respectively.JACK KEANE is a member of the Senior Professional Staff in the Joint Warfare Analysis Department and a section supervisor in the Joint Information Analysis Group at JHU/APL.  He received a B.S. degree in electrical engineering from The Virginia Military Institute in 1980 and a M.S. degree in operations research from the Naval Postgraduate School in 1993.  In 1997, he joined APL’s Joint Warfare Analysis Department after finishing his career as a Naval officer and working several years in the private sector.  Mr. Keane has focused on affordability analysis, modeling and simulation, force studies analysis, and operations analysis.  In addition to his work with the Joint Strike Fighter Program Office, he has served as a member of the technical team supporting DoD’s Joint Simulation Based Acquisition Task Force, as a lead analyst on the POET validation team for Wargame 2000, and on numerous studies involving force composition and command and control.CHARLES SINEX holds a Ph.D. in Nuclear Physics from Rice University.  He is currently a program manager with the Joint Warfare Analysis Department at the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD.  Dr. Sinex is a member of the American Geophysical Union and the SISO Logistics Working Group. EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure 4. Example of potential relationships between CEs and DPDs. EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure 2. Top-level view of SBA systems architecture, with exploded view of the CERSA.