Modelling Human Behaviour (Factors) in Decision Making Uwe K.J. DompkeITIS at the University of Federal Armed Forces MunichWerner-Heisenberg-Weg 39 85579 NeubibergGermanyTel.: x49-89-6004-2826FAX: x49-89-6004-2268E-mail: dompke@informatik.unibw-muenchen.deEdgar HeinekenGerhard-Mercator University DuisburgDepartment of Psychology47048 DuisburgGermany Tel.: x49-203-379-2541FAX: x49-203-379-3333E-Mail: heineken@uni-duisburg.deAlexander von Baeyer IABGEinsteinstr. 2085521 OttobrunnGermanyTel.: x49-89-6088-3061FAX: x49-89-6088-4029 E-mail: baeyer@iabg.deKeywords:Human Behaviour Representation, Behaviour, Human Factors, Decision Making, Computer Generated ForcesABSTRACT: The paper describes an architecture developed in a study for German MOD to integrate the modelling of human behaviour (factors) in decision making in the simulation environment using HLA. A prototype of this system is under development. First experiences with a demonstrator will be presented. The in this study used modelling approach for human behaviour (factors) in decision making is based on the Activation-Trigger-Schema(ATS)-System developed by Norman. The paper will describe this approach and its application to a decision making problem in peace support operations. IntroductionIndividual action patterns and their underlying psychological processes (“Human Factors”) are beginning to receive attention for the simulation in following scenarios:Command and control of military groups and units in combat (e.g. influence of the different personalities of military leaders on the decision making) Individual behaviour especially in not foreseen and non typical situations in Operations Other Than War (OOTW) scenarios Actions and reactions in “information warfare” scenarios with psychological impact of information, communication, and mediaDistributed exercises with Computer Generated Forces (CGF) supporting the response cellsUp to now only a few implementations of Human Factors exists. The models used must be understandable by the military user, scientific reliable, and to be implemented. (The problem of validation of such models is described in paper 00S-SIW-135).Chapter 2 describes an architecture to integrate Human Factors in simulation systems based on HLA. This approach is used in a German study to develop a demonstrator.A modelling approach for human behaviour in decision making must be based on scientific theory to support the acceptance by the military user. No overall scientific model of human behaviour in military decision making exists up to now. The nucleus of this modelling must be a model of the decision making process taking into account psychological influences.The paper highlights an action theory based  framework for implementation of human factors in simulations. The key concepts of this framework are presented and the core modeling principle, a modified Activation-Trigger-Schema (ATS) system (see Norman [1]), is outlined.Chapter 5 gives an outlook on the ongoing study.Human Factors Architecture and Demonstrator LayoutHuman Factors simulation in decision-making is seen as part of the C2-Module. One way to couple the C2-module with the simulation system is to use the Runtime Infrastructure (RTI) that is defined as part of the High Level Architecture. This architecture allows to keep the human factors simulation as an own module which makes it much easier to develop, test and validate and to maintain this part of the simulation. Situation reports and orders are exchanged between C2-module and simulation. Human factors in decision making have only an indirect impact on the situation by given orders. Figure 1 shows this general layout.Figure 2 shows the layout of the demonstrator developed in the German study.The ATS-system is the core of the behaviour model. It works on the perceived situation. This perceived situation is updated by the ATS itself based on reports communicated over the HLA interface. The Graphical User Interface (GUI) with the Common Operational Picture (COP) allows the user to interact with the system and to compare real situation and perceived situation.. The software for the demonstrator is based on COTS products.Another GUI COP system is used as development environment. 3	Action Theory as the Appropriate Framework for Modelling Human Activities„There is nothing so practical as a good theory!“ This word of Kurt Lewin, great man of action psychology, in particular carries weight especially when human activity in different situations has to be represented in simulations. Action theory offers an appropriate modelling framework. It refers to a couple of approaches dealing with the mental regulation of goal-directed (motivated) action. On its focus is also the organization of the regulating processes as requested for simulation human activities in natural contexts. The action theory bridges the gaps between cognition and action and between cognition and motivation (see Heineken, 1996). Actions are understood as elementary components of each activity. They are conscious and determined by the anticipated result. Actions differ from each other with respect to their goals. They may be decomposed into their subordinate operations, which are dependent components of action. Activity seems to be organized in a hierarchical manner, although it is implemented sequentially. It has a hierarchical deep structure and a sequential surface structure. Behind each action there is a need - the motive of action. Under certain circumstances those needs, i.e. the need of achievement or the need of security, lead to the intention to reach the respective goal by an appropriate action. An activity results from an  intention and its inherent goal. The goal organizes the activity and activates the necessary knowledge structures in the cognitive system. The intention to reach a goal initiates the action, and accomplishing the goal stops the action. A military unit to run a patrol, for example, leads at the platoon leader to the intention to fulfil the mission. The intention activates the corresponding military knowledge and starts a well ordered series of operations. When the mission is fulfilled the action is stopped. If the platoon, however, is confronted with sudden gunfire of snipers a disruption of the action is possible, because the leaders intention to give security to the platoon determines a new action. Until the platoon leaders security goal is accomplished, the patrol mission is resumed.  For the implementation of this theoretical approach in a human factors simulation the problem of modelling the process of intention remains, which initiates the action.4	Integration of the Activation Trigger Schema (ATS) System in the Action Theoretical FrameworkNorman (1981) presented a cognitive, schema-theoretical explanation of action slips using an Activation Trigger Schema (ATS) system, which is based on network models in memory research. The ATS-principle illustrates how an action is initiated by a given situation. Schemata are knowledge structures that can be differentially activated and triggered by stimuli of a situation. They represent a kind of knowledge organization in memory, which is needed to execute familiar tasks or to behave adequately in familiar situations. In an OOTW scenario such a schema could be e.g. a list of tasks which have to be accomplished to prepare a platoon for a patrol. In the latter case the schema is a „script“ - a kind of screen-play, which provides certain roles and scenes as slots. Schank & Abelson (1982) distinguish different parts of a script: plans, scenes and MOPs (memory organization units). Plans comprise the knowledge about intentions and goals. Scenes represent the general structure of the situation, in which the action will take place. Each scene is part of a superordinated MOP.  Schemata are knowledge structures that can be differentially activated and triggered by stimuli of a situation. They represent a kind of knowledge organization in memory, which is needed to execute familiar tasks or to behave adequately in familiar situations. In an OOTW scenario such a schema could be e.g. a list of tasks which have to be accomplished to prepare a platoon for a patrol. In the latter case the schema is a „script“ - a kind of screen-play, which provides certain roles and scenes as slots. Schank & Abelson (1982) distinguish different parts of a script: plans, scenes and MOPs (memory organization units). Plans comprise the knowledge about intentions and goals. Scenes represent the general structure of the situation, in which the action will take place. Each scene is part of a superordinated MOP.  Norman assumes that an action is initiated and controlled by situational trigger. Unfortunately,  there is no motivation and correspondingly no dynamic in Norman’s ATS system. However, for modelling human activity the ATS system can be integrated into an action theoretical framework.  For the purpose of simulating the dynamic of actions it is therefore assumed that a situation activates motives and that it is the resulting  motivation  (intention to reach a certain goal) that triggers the knowledge structures (schemata, scripts) appropriate for reaching the goal. The script containing a „plan“ which comes closest to the goal of the strongest motivation is executed. In the patrol mission mentioned above the need of achievement is stimulated by the command to run a patrol and the need of security is stimulated by gunfire of snipers. The corresponding motivations (the intention to reach the achievement goal or to reach the security goal) trigger the respective knowledge structures. If the actual security motivation is stronger than the actual achievement motivation than the script "to seek cover" is triggered because it becomes closest to the goal of the security motivated platoon leader. The selection of a script in the course of a persons activity in a defined situation is  determined by three factors:the stimulus pattern of the situation,the persons motive structure andthe persons available knowledge (scripts).The sequential order of the persons operations results from the hierarchical-sequential structure of the activated  script.Figure 3 shows the described ATS-system in an overview.5 	OutlookA first implementation of the demonstrator is available. This demonstrator is used for a proof of concept. This demonstrator uses a script of situations  to show the course of action and possible alternatives during the decision making process. Each situation is described by the related objects and their state. Each military leader has some preferences regarding the motivation of their decision making. This is related to some motives like security, leadership, etc.A basic assumption is that the military  decision maker has some schema to react on a given situation. The choice of a specific schema depends on how this schema is related to the specific situation and how this schema relates to the motivation of the military decision maker. Both aspects are taking into account when choosing the respective decision by the military leader.6	ReferencesNorman, D. A. (1981). Organization of action slips. Psychological Review,  88, 1-15.Schank, R.C. & Abelson, R.P. (1982) Dynamic Memory.  New York: Cambridge University Press.Heineken, E. (1996). Wissen und Handeln  In BWB (Hrsg.). Handbuch der Ergonomie. München: Hanser.Ollesch, H. & Heineken, E. (1998). Advantages and Limitations of Computer-based Scenarios as Learning Tools. CiP98 Conference Proceedings, York: CTI Center for Psychology, University of York.Richard W. Pew, Anne S. Mavor: Modeling Human and Organizational Behavior, National Academy Press, Washington D.C. 1998Authors' BiographyUWE K.J. DOMPKE is secretary of the Institute for Technology of Intelligent Systems (ITIS) at the University of Federal Armed Forces Munich. He is the Study Director for NATO Research and Technology Board Long term Scientific Study (LTSS) SAS-017 on Human Behaviour Representation, LTSS/48 on CGF and NATO LTSS/40 on CAX. He gives lectures at the computer science department of the University of Federal Armed Forces in Munich on Human Behaviour Representation.ALEXANDER VON BAEYER is system analyst and program manager for human factors research at the IABG Land Systems Branch in Ottobrunn, Germany. He was and is member of various NATO Research Groups and EUCLID programs. He is Deputy Study Director for NATO SAS-017 on Human Behaviour Representation.EDGAR HEINEKEN is full professor of psychology at the Gerhard-Mercator University in Duisburg, Germany.  His main fields of research are: Computer simulations in Leadership Training, Virtual Reality in Psychological Research, Psychology of Memory and Cognition. “Human Factors” as term is here not used only for ergonomical  issues. All influences on decision making by human behaviour (e.g. experience, anxiety) are seen here as “Human Factors”.Figure 1: Human Factors ArchitectureTriggerSchema StrengthMotive StrengthPersonActionEventFigure 2: Demonstrator LayoutHuman FactorsRTISchemataOrdersSituation EMBED OrgPlusWOPX.4  C2-ModuleSimulationSchemaSituationMotiveFigure 3 ATS-system PerceivedSituationDevelopmentGUI COPHLAInterfaceRTIATSRealSituationGUI COP