Problems of Validating Computer-Simulations of Human Behaviour Uwe K.J. DompkeITIS at the University of Federal Armed Forces MunichWerner-Heisenberg-Weg 39 85579 NeubibergGermanyTel.: x49-89-6004-2826FAX: x49-89-6004-2268E-mail: dompke@informatik.unibw-muenchen.deEdgar HeinekenGerhard-Mercator University DuisburgDepartment of Psychology47048 DuisburgGermany Tel.: x49-203-379-2541FAX: x49-203-379-3333E-Mail: heineken@uni-duisburg.deAlexander von Baeyer IABGEinsteinstr. 2085521 OttobrunnGermanyTel.: x49-89-6088-3061FAX: x49-89-6088-4029 E-mail:  HYPERLINK mailto:baeyer@iabg.de baeyer@iabg.deKeywords:Human Behaviour Representation, Behaviour, Validation, VV&A, Human Behaviour SimulationABSTRACT: Validation of Human Behaviour Simulations requires a variety of approaches to cover a broad range of scientific aspects.A multiple criteria set must be defined and will contain:Expert judgements on the representatively of  the simulated reality for real  situations  (external validity)User Judgements  on the Face Validity ( Content-Validity)Judgement on the Correspondence of  the model implemented in the simulation with the Scientific Theory(Construct Validity)Cause of Simulation Output by the implemented Human Behaviour Model (Internal Validity).The validation process must start with the validation of the process model by observable behaviour reported in the scientific literature and in the experience of military experts. The next step is the evaluation of the Computer Simulation by comparison of input and output regarding the sensitivity of the implemented human behaviour-model (among others different Inputs have to cause different outputs). The paper will describe the multiple criteria set and the validation process in general. An application of this approach to an ongoing German MOD study on Human Factors will conclude the paper.IntroductionSimulations are now used in a lot of different applications like exercise and training or analysis. Validation in the sense how well the model implemented in the simulation represents reality is a critical issue for the use of such simulations.  Very seldom  the simulations used include some human behaviour representation. In this case the validation of  the simulation is a very complex matter and is up to now only partly done. Pew states “Depending on the characteristics of the model, its size, and its intended use, adequate demonstration of validity may not be possible.” (see [4]). The reason for this lies in the characteristics of human behaviour models:inherent nonlinearitylarge space of parameters and possible responsesabstract, non-readable representationA simulation of complex human actions in complex environments is to date not possible due to a lack of comprehensive psychological models. Computer Simulations of human behaviour in complex environments comply more with the characteristics of computer-based scenarios. They do not simulate in the narrow  sense real-life bat provide a plausible representation,  a condensed version of real-life. Complexity and the underlying structure of the simulated reality are preserved, key features are even emphasized.The validation of such kind of human behaviour simulations  requires a variety of approaches to cover a broad range of scientific aspects. Validation must be an integral part of the development process to guarantee that used models are based on accepted theories . The validation of  the simulation based on the output can only be a second step. Different concepts of validity are used  in the field of  Experimental Psychology  and in the Psychological Test-theory (chapter 2). Based on these concepts a multiple criteria set must be defined (chapter 3). The validation process and its application to an ongoing study are described in chapter 4. A summary and an outlook is given in chapter 5.Concept of Validity The Concept of Validity is generally used byExperimental MethodologyPsychological Test-theory2.1	Experimental MethodologyIn the Experimental Methodology an experiment is validated regardingInternal Validity andExternal ValidityAn experiment is internal valid if changes in the outcome of an experiment are only caused by systematic changes of the experimental treatments  and not by other  uncontrolled variables.An experiment is external valid if the results of the model are representative for persons and situations outside the experimental lab. Psychological Test-theoryIn the Psychological Test-theory the validity of a test refers to the accuracy of inferences made from test scores. .  Quantified is this validity by a correlation coefficient which measures the degree of  correspondence between the test result and the feature to be validated. An high correlation coefficient means that the test is able to measure what it pretends to measure.The Psychological Test-theory distinguishes between three kinds of validity:Content Validity (Face Validity) Prognostic or Criterion-Related ValidityConstruct ValidityThe Content Validity is given if the  items of the test represent the contents which correspond to the objectives of the  test. This kind of validity is also called face validity, when the objective of the test are in correspondence with the test objectives mentioned by the test persons.The Criterion-Related Validity means the degree of correspondence of the test score with  a criterion. If the result of a test corresponds to the respective criteria what means that this criteria can be forecasted by the test the criteria validity is satisfied.The construct validity refers  to  the meaning of the test scores with respect to psychological constructs, as for example "intelligence", "aggressivity" or "extraversion". If hypotheses about constructs (not only specific criteria as in criteria validity) can be supported by test results the construct validity is high. Such a construct allows to conclude on the different variables. A comparison of the used constructs with the respective literature and theory supports the validation.Application to Human Behaviour SimulationsThe psychological concepts of validity can help in  some  limits to validate Human Behaviour Simulations (computer based scenarios). The concept of criterion related validity in the stricter sense is not well suited for Human Behaviour Representation. To compare the behaviour of simulated persons with real existing persons is very hard, because this real persons must have the same detailed characteristics. Better suited  is here the concept  construct validity.  Human Behaviour is simulated in a computer based scenario with respect to psychological constructs like anxiety, aggression, motivation etc. The simulation    is valid in this sense  when a correspondence of the psychological model implemented in the simulation  with e an scientifically accepted model can be stated, when the individual behaviour under certain circumstances as simulated in the computer based scenario is scientifically plausible.  Generally Human Behaviour  Simulations should  be equally internal and external valid and should have a high content validity  Validation human behaviour Simulations  needs  a multiple criteria set..3.	Multiple Criteria Set Following criteria should be included:Judgement on the correspondence of  implemented theoretical constructs with the Scientific Theory (Construct Validity)Expert Judgements on the representativeness of the simulated reality with real life (External Validity)Face Validity judged by the user( Content Validity)Cause-effect relationships  are in correspondence with the relationships expected on the basis of the implemented Human Behaviour Model (Internal Validity)3.1	Judgement on Scientific Plausibility(Construct Validity)Judgement on the scientific plausibility must be already part of the development process. This means that starting from a clear analysis of the to be represented behaviour with its parameters etc. the right scientific theory for representation is chosen. The implemented constructs like motivation, anxiety have to imply actions of the simulated persons that can be seen in reality too. Construct validity will be tested by expert rating. This might happen e.g. in the form of peer reviews and includes the proof of simulation algorithms and implementation (internal validity). Judgement on the identity with scientific theory is of course a problem in areas where no accepted theory exists. In this case it is necessary to make a clear statement on this issue and to publish and discuss new approaches in the scientific community. SIW and the CGF and behaviour conference are the main places for such a discussion. Also electronic conferences could be used.Expert Judgements on the Representativity for real Military  Situations (External Validity)In computer based scenarios the reality is more or less condensed or aggregated in a restriction on the important factors and their interactions. External valid is a scenario or representation when it is representative for the military reality and therefore transferable to other military situations. Such an external validity could be evaluated empirical by a rating of  military experts.3.3	User Judgements  on Face Validity (Content Validity)In analogy to the test theory a representation would be valid if the user trained with such  simulation has the feeling that the simulated reality corresponds in certain aspects real life.  This face validity can be rated by test persons.3.4	Cause of Simulation Output by  the implemented  Model (Internal Validity)Internal valid is the representation if the outcome of the simulation is only depending on the implemented model (no side-effects) and the input parameters. Internal validity can be tested by parameter variation in specific test cases. Here still exists the problem that in some very complex representation not all test cases can be tested in a given time. Application of the Validity Concept in German MOD Study “Human Factors in Military Decision Making”The German MOD study “Human Factors in Military Decision Making” deals with the representation of  human behaviour in military decision making. This includes the modelling of the personality of the decision maker with aspects like anxiety, aggression, training, motivation, and experience. To model these aspects an own approach based on the activation-trigger-system (ATS) was developed (see paper 00S-SIW-137).In this study a demonstrator will be developed. For the validation of this demonstrator as proof of concept the above discussed multiple criteria set will be used. The Human-Factors-Demonstrator includes a psychological model of the decision maker. The validation process start with the validation of the psychological process model by observable behaviour reported in the scientific literature and in the experience of military experts. This is done in form of a peer review with scientific experts not engaged in the development of the model (Construct validity). Next step is the evaluation of the model by comparison of input and output regarding the sensitivity of the model (among others different inputs have to cause different outputs) (internal validity). This is done by specifying test cases and running simulations with it.In the model implemented objects with their psychological attributes and criteria are representative for the modelled situation in reality. External validity will be judged by experts (empirical approach). This is done by military experts from the German Office for Studies and Exercises which were not engaged in the development.A user judgement on face validity will be done with test persons from different user groups when the demonstrator is fully operational.5.	ReferencesU. Dompke, A. v. Baeyer: Prospectus Long Term Scientific Study on Human Behaviour Representation, Ottobrunn, 1999Richard W. Pew, Anne S. Mavor: Modelling Human and Organizational Behaviour, National Academy Press, Washington D.C. 1998E. Heineken, H. Ollesch: Advantages and Limitations of Computer-based Scenarios as Learning Tools. Paper presented in CIP98, York (UK), 1998S.Y. Harmon, S.M. Youngblood: Validation of Human Behaviour Representations, SIW Spring 1999Authors' BiographyUWE K.J. DOMPKE is the secretary of the Institute for Technology of Intelligent Systems (ITIS) at the University of Federal Armed Forces Munich. He is the Study Director for NATO Research and Technology Board Long term Scientific Study (LTSS) SAS-017 on Human Behaviour Representation, LTSS/48 on CGF and NATO LTSS/40 on CAX. He gives lectures at the computer science department of the University of Federal Armed Forces in Munich on Human Behaviour Representation.ALEXANDER VON BAEYER is system analyst and program manager for human factors research at the IABG Land Systems Branch in Ottobrunn, Germany. He was and is member of various NATO Research Groups and EUCLID programs. He is Deputy Study Director for NATO SAS-017 on Human Behaviour Representation.EDGAR HEINEKEN is full professor of psychology at the Gerhard-Mercator University in Duisburg, Germany.  His main fields of research are: Computer simulations in Leadership Training, Virtual Reality in Psychological Research, Psychology of Memory and Cognition.