Conceptual Modeling of Foreign Command Decision ProcessesMary S. TamucciSterling Software, Inc.Applied Systems Division5205 Leesburg Pike, Suite 1200Falls Church, VA   22041-3800(703) 824-4025mary.tamucci@falls-church.sterling.comDon TimianSterling Software, Inc.Applied Systems Division5205 Leesburg Pike, Suite 1200Falls Church, VA   22041-3800(703) 824-4020don.timian@falls-church.sterling.comS. Kay BurnettNational Ground Intelligence Center220 7th Street, N.E.Charlottesville, VA  22902804-980-7884skburne@ngic.osis.govKeywords:Behaviors, Command Decision Modeling (CDM), Command Decision Process (CDP), Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS), Foreign Ground Force Representation, Information Operations (IO), Mission Space Models (MSM), Models and Simulations (M&S), Threat Modeling, and Joint Warfare System (JWARS)ABSTRACT:  In order to ensure accurate computer representation in a model or a simulation, a conceptual model is developed.  A conceptual or Mission Space Model (MSM) is the primary component of the Department of Defense’s (DoD’s) Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS) program and can be defined as “an abstraction of the real world that serves as a frame of reference for simulation development.”  To the extent possible, MSMs are simulation-independent, subject matter expert, warfighter-based descriptions of those entities, actions, and interactions occurring in the real world and, as such, can have application to multiple simulations.In 1997, under the auspices of the National Ground Intelligence Center (NGIC), Sterling Software began an effort to develop – for select “template” armies – a set of threat MSMs of brigade, division, and corps commanders’, and their respective staffs’ Command Decision Process (CDP).  An initial set of CDP-based, threat MSMs has been developed for a division commander and staff for one of the “template” armies.This paper will describe Sterling Software’s CDP work to date and how it fits into the DoD’s CMMS objective to create an overarching set of MSMs.  Also discussed will be the application of this work to support Information Operation (IO) analysis and a potential project to instantiate a set of CDP-based, threat MSMs into the Joint Warfare System (JWARS).1.	IntroductionModels and Simulations (M&S) are used throughout the Department of Defense (DoD) to support course of action analysis, mission planning, mission rehearsal, training, and the development of tactics and doctrine, as well as materiel and force development.  In all U.S. Army and DoD M&S applications, it is essential that both friendly and threat force representations are sufficiently realistic to ensure the credibility of the simulation’s results.This realistic representation is facilitated when Verified and Validated (V&V) Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS), or Mission Space Models (MSMs), are available.  For the modeling of brigade – and perhaps even battalion – through corps headquarters, a necessary pre-cursor is a set of MSMs that describes that headquarters’ Command Decision Process (CDP).The intent of this paper is to propose a methodology for simulation developers to use when building CDP-based, threat MSMs.  Specifically, in Section 2, we will describe DoD’s objective to develop an overarching set of Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS).  In Section 3, we will introduce Template3 (pronounced Template-Cubed), the underlying concept behind the National Ground Intelligence Center’s (NGIC) efforts to develop a set of CDP-based, threat MSMs.  In Section 4, we will describe how this project’s threat MSMs are built and V&V’d, as well as report on three reoccurring decision data structures or patterns that appear to be part of at least one “template” country’s CDPs.  In Section 5, we will quickly discuss the application of MSMs to support Information Operation (IO) analysis.  And, in Section 6, we will conclude by describing a potential project to instantiate a set of CDP-based, threat MSMs into the Joint Warfare System (JWARS) program.2.	Conceptual Models of the Mission Space2.1	The DoD Modeling and Simulation Master PlanIn late 1994 and early 1995, the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) conducted a baseline assessment of all DoD M&S.  From this assessment, DMSO identified six DoD-wide M&S objectives that were, in October of 1995, published in DoD’s first M&S Master Plan; DoD 5000.59-P, Modeling and Simulation Master Plan [4].For each objective, DoD 5000.59-P identifies key issues and actions [4].  Because no single model or simulation can meet all of the needs of the M&S community, the objectives do not identify any specific solution.  Rather, each objective identifies those aspects that:are common across all M&S (both military and non-military); foster credibility and re-use [or cost avoidance]; and,where appropriate, ensure interoperability.2.2	Conceptual Models of the Mission SpaceThe value of a warfare [or combat] simulation is directly related to the credibility of its representations of real-world military operations; equipment and systems; and environmental factors [2].  DoD 5000.59-P establishes CMMS as the second component of the DoD M&S Technical Framework [2] & [4].  As such, CMMS is the common starting point and eventual real-world baseline for consistent and authoritative M&S representations [2].Put another way, CMMS provides simulation-independent, warfighter-based, descriptions of the real world.  CMMS does this by linking Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) with simulation developers and users via:actual subject matter descriptions in the form of knowledge acquisition products;a common repository for use and re-use; anda technical framework for integration and interoperability of the knowledge acquisition products registered in the common repository [1].Known as MSMs, these subject matter descriptions are the primary components of DMSO’s CMMS program [6].  Intended to describe how a specific task or action is conducted, MSMs – via a hierarchical form where each subordinate level, sub-process, or function provides greater detail – are the first abstraction of real world processes [5] & [6].3.	Representation of Foreign Ground Forces3.1	BackgroundIn December 1991, with the collapse of the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact, the bipolar world that had existed since 1945 came to an end.  This  bipolar  world – which  was  probably an historical anomaly – was quickly replaced by a multi-polar world that witnessed a growth and intensification of regional conflicts, shifting political alignments, and the rise of a host of new regional and transnational issues.During the Cold War, the preoccupation of most Western analysts was the Soviet Union.  Developments in the post-Cold War world have made it increasingly clear that to continue to focus analytical resources on developing and refining a monolithic set of threat MSMs is, at best, a poor use of limited resources.  With the emergence of both new countries and new threats, it is clear that many nations and transnational issues need to be studied.  At the same time it is unrealistic to expect analysts to develop a discrete set of threat MSMs for each country’s military forces.3.2	ConceptIn response to this challenge, in late 1997, NGIC hypothesized that a set of generic representations of foreign ground forces or “templates” could be built based on two assumptions:There exists a small sub-set of “template” countries (about a half dozen) who have influenced the organization and doctrine of most of the world’s armies.A foreign country’s ground forces will fight much like the country from which it buys its equipment (i.e., tanks, infantry fighting vehicles, artillery, etc.).Sterling Software was contracted to explore this hypothesis.  And, as a result of an initial review, recommended that the second assumption be modified to read “how a foreign country’s ground forces will fight can be characterized by three elements:  who supplies its equipment; who it models its force structure after (e.g., the number and types of brigades and battalions in a division); and whose Doctrine, Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (DTTP) it uses – with respect to when its senior leaders attended command and staff college (i.e., in the 1970’s the foreign military officers who attended the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College (CGSC) were taught the Active Defense and in the 1980’s that same country’s next generation of officers learned Air-Land Battle).”  Known as Template3, this concept allows a manageable set of threat MSMs to be created that describe how most of the world’s armies fight.In addition, Template3 allows for more flexibility than traditional approaches by first understanding that there is diversity in the extent to which a given threat country adheres to the pattern of a “template” country.  For example, a threat country might be a “close fit” to a specific “template” country’s DTTP, but only a “loose fit” with regards to its force structure; perhaps because the threat country has a much larger military.  Secondly, Template3 recognizes that some nations, because of their unique history, their geopolitical and economic situation, or other factors, may have developed a totally new force structure, a revolutionary weapon system, a unique DTTP, or some combination.3.3	Proof of ConceptThe Template3 concept was proven by construction of a set of activity diagrams that described behaviors at battalion and below for two different Battlefield Operating Systems (BOS):  Fire Support and Maneuver.  Six Template3 countries were identified for the Fire Support BOS and seven Template3 countries for Maneuver.  Fire Support activity diagrams were developed for 16 tasks/missions for one Template3 country.  For a second Template3 country, activity diagrams were developed for 13 Fire Support missions/tasks.A similar analysis was conducted for Maneuver.  For the same two Template3 countries, activity diagrams were developed for over 50 missions/tasks.  These activity diagrams were then used as the foundation for development of a conceptual model for a threat country – selected by NGIC – whose ground forces had acquired most of its equipment from one of the two Template3 countries and whose force structure and DTTP closely resembled that of the other Template3 country.  This conceptual model was then reviewed by NGIC’s SMEs and determined to be a valid representation.3.4	ExampleLet say that we want to model the ground forces of Country X.  Using DMSO’s Unit Order of Battle Data Access Tool, available via the Defense Intelligence Modeling and Simulation Resource Repository (DIMSRR; (http://cmsrr. dia.smil.mil/ [SIPRnet] or http://199.75.73.39/ [Internet]), we learn that most of Country X’s equipment – along with the appropriate crew, squad, section, platoon, and company/team training packages – came from the U.S. and that Country X’s force structure is very similar to the U.S. Army.  In addition, we know that Country X’s officer corps is trained using manuals that are almost literal translations of those used by the former Soviet Union, and – from the late 1950’s thru the early 1980’s – Country X often sent its “fast-burners” to various Soviet staff schools.  However, starting in the late 1980’s, when Country X began to purchase equipment from the U.S., very few of its senior officers have attended foreign staff schools.Using the original hypothesis, one would expect Country X’s ground forces to fight just like the U.S. Army.  However, because Country X’s DTTP is based on thirty years of Soviet military influence, it should come as no surprise that Country X doesn’t fight like the U.S. Army, it fights like the Soviet Army with U.S. equipment.  In other words, because they have U.S. equipment, Country X at the platoon and company/team level tends to fight like the U.S. Army and at the battalion, regiment (i.e., brigade), and division level, it tends to fight like the Soviet Army.  (But, simplistically speaking, if we could jump forward in time, say thirty or forty years (e.g., the time it takes for an officer in Country X to go from lieutenant to general) and, Country X continued its relationship with the U.S., one might expect to see Country X’s DTTP to transition from Soviet to U.S. based.)Therefore, in order to quickly create a discrete set of threat MSMs for Country X, all we need to do is to combine V&V’d MSMs that describe:the Soviet Army’s, circa 1970, CDP at battalion, regiment, and division level together withhow a circa 1990 U.S. equipped force (at the platoon, and company/team level) fights (See Figure 1).4.	Creating a Mission Space Model4.1	Knowledge Acquisition & EngineeringAs shown in Figure 2, the creation of a MSM can be viewed as a series of five analytic steps [3] & [5].  The first two steps – develop focused context and gather information – fall under the heading of knowledge acquisition.  The remaining three steps – formalize data, construct MSMs, and V&V MSMs – can be described as knowledge engineering.Johnson [5] defines focused context as “the scope, resolution, and fidelity required for the development of a consistent set of MSMs.”  As stated earlier, for NGIC’s Conceptual Modeling of Foreign Command Decision Processes project, the focus is on the brigade, division, and corps commanders’ and their respective staffs’ CDP.  And, as one would expect, the project’s authoritative data sources consist mainly of manuals for the “template” armies’ and SME interviews.4.2	CORECORE version 2.1, a systems engineering software packaged developed by Vitech Corporation (http://www.vtcorp.com/homepage. html/), is the Computer Aided Systems Engineering tool being used to construct the MSMs of a Template3 army’s CDP.  While intended to provide automated support to system engineers during the knowledge acquisition and knowledge engineering phases of a project, CORE’s schema lends itself well to the capture of essential CDP MSM elements:processes, inputs, outputs, entities, conditions, and controls.4.3	Command Decision Process Mission Space ModelOver the last year, for a third Template3 country, conceptual models of corps and division CDP were developed for three missions; offense, defense, and withdrawal.  The DTTP were modeled through analysis of the division commander’s and staff’s Deliberate Planning Process (DPP).  This DPP exhibits two major decision loops.  One loop includes the analysis, by the commander and staff, of the corps headquarters’ order; the development of the commander’s initial intent and concept of the operation; and the selection by the commander (after staff input) of the appropriate course of action.  The second loop focuses on developing the division’s operations order and, folding back into the order, changes recommended by subordinate unit commanders.Within this division CDP, complete MSMs have been developed for four high pay off functions; Prepare Planning Instructions, Prepare the Intelligence Situation Estimate, Conduct Analysis of Mission Order, and Decide Course of Action.  In the process, we have observed three reoccurring decision data structures or patterns that appear to be part of this Template3 country’s CDP process:Discrete – characterized by a series of independent OR’s (where the answer could be yes or no, or a discrete selection from a list) (See Figure 3);Spectrum – characterized by a set of OR’s nested in parallel AND statements (where the answer falls somewhere between one of two extremes) (See Figure 4); andCascade – characterized by a series of related OR’s that lead to a single answer (where a list of options leads eventually to a single answer based upon existing conditions) (See Figure 5).4.4	Verification and Validation PlanA five part V&V plan is being implemented as an integral part of this project:Internal structured reviews are conducted periodically to verify references and ensure agreement within the team on interpretation.Independent verification of each MSM.Only validated sources, provided by NGIC, are being used.Each MSM element has embedded documentation (See Figure 6).And, an SME validation is planned for later this year.Needless to say, once V&V’d, these threat MSMs will be made available to all potential users via DMSO’s CMMS Resource Center ( HYPERLINK http://38.241.9/ http://38.241.48.9/) and the DIMSRR.5.	Application of MSMs to Support Information Operations (IO)U.S. Army Field Manual 100-6 Information Operations [11], states that "IO integrate all aspects of information to support and enhance the elements of combat power, with the goal of dominating the battlespace at the right time, at the right place, and with the right weapons or resources."  Therefore, key to IO is knowing what information is needed for decisions, the Command and Control (C2) links over which it will travel, and how the information is to be used.Because, at each level of command, different decisions are made for different reasons, a MSM developed for an army's brigade, division, or corps level CDP can provide an IO modeler, as well as an IO analyst, with key inputs and outputs.  Thus, MSMs can help a simulation developer identify how best to model IO effects on a brigade’s or a division’s CDP when a key input – say because of electronic warfare – is either unavailable, incomplete, or incorrect (i.e., the input has been spoofed).  MSMs can also provide a simulation developer with information on the ripple effect that a late or incorrect, higher headquarters’ output may have on a subordinate’s ability to successfully conduct an attack or defense.For an IO analyst, CDP-based MSMs can help identify what C2 outputs to attack, as well as possible inputs to spoof or deceive.  In addition, CDP-based MSMs can also help an IO analyst determine the timing of a deception because they contain clues as to when a decision or a key input is required.6.	ConclusionsBoth the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) and JWARS Operational Requirements Documents specify that each simulation will support course of action analysis, mission planning, and mission rehearsal [7] & [8].  Obviously, a set of V&V’d, CDP-based, threat MSMs – available to the JSIMS and JWARS developers via one of the M&S community’s automated repositories (e.g., DMSO's CMMS Resource Center or the DIMSRR) – is key to improving M&S commonality and credibility, as well as M&S re-use/cost avoidance.  But because NGIC’s efforts to model the CDP of those Template3 countries who have influenced the organization and doctrine of most of the world’s armies is fairly immature (as compared to the work that has been done over the last ten years to model the behaviors of Soviet and U.S. company/teams and platoons), simply building the MSMs in CORE and putting them “up on the library shelf” is not sufficient.  Early on in the JSIMS or JWARS development process, an initial set of CDP-based, threat MSMs need to be instantiated as a prototype.In addition, when modeling the CDP in a simulation, it is important to remember that the CDP is not “always” linear.  Depending on the time available to execute the CDP, the personality of the commander, and the level of training of the staff, a commander and/or the staff may skip or modify one or more CDP steps.  Thus, given our current ability to model human behavior when simulating the CDP, it may be necessary to put a human-in-the-loop to determine – based on the scenario – which CDP steps to modify or skip (e.g., in a hasty attack, there is often not sufficient time to perform a detailed terrain analysis).This is why the Army’s Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Intelligence and NGIC have started to team with JWARS to instantiate a set of Template3 MSMs.  This effort will not only result in JWARS having a more realistic threat representation, but it will also provide necessary feedback on how to make the Template3 MSMs easier for a software developer/engineer – who, more likely than not, has had little military experience – to understand and use.  In addition, this prototype effort may also help to identify information and fidelity standards needed by the by simulation community – specifically the Simulations Interoperability Standards Organization ( HYPERLINK http://www.sisostds.org/ http://www.sisostds.org/) Human Decision-Making and Behavior Representation Forum and the Army’s M&S Standards Category for Command Decision Modeling [9] – to represent the CDP.7.	AcknowledgementsThe authors gratefully acknowledge support of the work for in this paper by the U.S. Army National Ground Intelligence Center under the Intelligence and Support Command Contract, Number:  DASC-0198A0001.  In addition, the authors would like to thank the other members of Sterling Software’s CMMS team:  Mr. Dean Danielson, Mr. Steve Daskal, Mr. Greg Lannon, and Mr. Everett Nelson, as well as the feedback and assistance provided by Dr. Michael Hieb and Mr. William Dunn (AB Technologies), Dr. Tom Johnson (Innovative Management Concepts), and Mr. Paul Kelley (Army Test and Evaluation Command).8.	References [1]	DMSO Information Paper, “Conceptual Models of the Mission Space”, ftp://ftp.dmso.mil/pub/documents/initiatives/cmms/cmms_information_paper_short.pdf, 1998. [2]	DMSO Information Paper, “Conceptual Models of the Mission Space”, ftp://ftp.dmso.mil/pub/documents/initiatives/cmms/98s_siw_infoprp.pdf/, 1998. [3]	DMSO Information Paper, “Conceptual Models of the Mission Space and Data Engineering Toolset”, ftp://ftp.dmso.mil/ pub/documents/initiatives/cmms/cmms_imc_paper_long.pdf, 1998. [4]	DoD 5000.59-P, DoD Modeling and Simulation Master Plan, http://www.dmso. mil/documents/policy/msmp/index.html/, 1995. [5]	Johnson, T.H.: “Mission Space Model Development, Reuse, and the Conceptual Models of the Mission Space Toolset”, Paper 98S-SIW-155, 1998 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1998. [6]	Johnson, T.H. and Might R.J.:  “Requirements Analysis, Mission Space Models, and the CMMS:  What’s This All About?”, Article Fall 1999 MSIAC M&S Online Journal, http://www.msiac.dmso. mil/journal/cmms.html/, 1999. [7]	JSIMS Joint Operational Requirement Document,  HYPERLINK http://www.jsims.mil/alliance/library/ http://www.jsims.mil/alliance/ library/, 1999. [8]	JWARS Joint Operational Requirement Document, http://www.dtic.mil/jwars/ pdflib/ord_27.pdf, 1998. [9]	McGlynn, L.E. and Timian, D.H.:  "Army Model and Simulation Standards - Tools in the SBA Kit Bag" Paper 98F-SIW-265, 1998 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1998.[10]	Sheehan J., Prosser, T., Conley, H., Stone, G., Yetz, K., & Morrow, J.: “Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS):  Basic Concepts, Advanced Techniques, and Pragmatic Examples”, Paper 98S-SIW-127, 1998 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1998.[11]	U.S. Army Field Manual 100-6, Information Operations, http://www.adtdl. army.mil/cgi-bin/atdl.dll/fm/100-6/toc.htm, 1996.[12]	Vitech Corporation (http://www.vtcorp. com/), CORE v2.0 Users Reference Guide, 1998.Author BiographiesMARY TAMUCCI is a Senior Program Manager at Sterling Software.  She has over twenty five years experience in advanced simulation technology applications, providing system analysis, modeling and simulation, and engineering support for military C4ISR systems.  She has engaged in a broad spectrum of system design and development programs, including analysis of military operations, combat control database design, requirements analysis, command center operations, decision support systems, and usercomputer interaction. Mrs. Tamucci’s experience includes system performance modeling and assessment, algorithm development, and system test and evaluation.  She has developed undersea acoustic environment models and has designed models and simulations of submarine combat control and acoustic systems and military intelligence sensor systems.  Mrs. Tamucci has a Bachelor of Science degree in Physics from the University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth and a Master of Science degree in Ocean Engineering from the University of Rhode Island.DON TIMIAN is a System Analyst at Sterling Software.  Prior to joint Sterling Software, Mr. Timian served over 20 years in the United States Army.  While in the Army, he served as an Operations Research and Systems Analyst/Simulation Specialist in all three of the Army’s M&S domains; Analytical Concepts and Requirements (ACR), Research Development and Acquisition (RDA), and Training Exercises Military Operations (TEMO).  Just prior to retiring, Mr. Timian was assigned as Deputy, Policy and Technology Division, Army Model and Simulation Office where he helped to develop a pair of prototype interfaces to link M&S and C4I systems via common C4I components.  Mr. Timian’s has a Bachelor of Arts degree in Chemistry from the University of Arizona and a Master of Science degree in Operations Research from Kansas State University.KAY BURNETT is a Senior Physical Scientist at the National Ground Intelligence Center (NGIC).  Ms. Burnett joined NGIC (then the U.S. Army Foreign Science and Technology Center) as a foreign computer technology analyst in 1985.  In 1995, she moved to NGIC’s Modeling and Simulation Office where she coordinates support to Army and DoD M&S programs.  Ms. Burnett has a Bachelor of Arts in Mathematics Education from Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, a Master of Arts in Teaching-Mathematics from James Madison University, and a Masters of Engineering in Systems Engineering from the University of Virginia.Figure 4.  In the Defense, an Example of a Spectrum Decision Structure that Portrays how a Division Staff Identifies the Purpose of its Mission.Figure 3.  In the Defense, an Example of a Discrete Decision Structure that Portrays how a Division Commander Determines his Intent.Figure 1.  Template3Figure 2.  The Five Analytic Steps in Creating a Mission Space ModelFigure 5.  In the Offense, an Example of a Cascade Decision Structure that Portrays how a Division Commander Determine the Division’s Scheme of Maneuver.Figure 6.  An Example of the Embedded Documentation for the Function “Issue a Warning Order”