Extending the JSIMS Terrain Common Data Modelto Support Virtual SimulationsAnnette JanettDr. Dale D. MillerLockheed Martin Information SystemsAdvanced Simulation Center3605 132nd Ave. SE, Suite 400Bellevue, WA 98006(480) 595-0220 / (425) 957-3259 HYPERLINK mailto:Ajanett@lads.is.lmco.com ajanett@lads.is.lmco.com,  HYPERLINK mailto:ddmiller@lads.is.lmco.com ddmiller@lads.is.lmco.comJohn NordstromEvans and Sutherland600 Komas DriveSalt Lake City, UT 84108(801) 588-1891 HYPERLINK mailto:Jnordstr@es.com jnordstr@es.comDr. Paul A. BirkelThe MITRE Corporation1820 Dolley Madison BlvdMcLean, VA 22102(703) 883-6399 HYPERLINK mailto:pbirkel@mitre.org pbirkel@mitre.orgKeywords:terrain data model, terrain, synthetic natural environment, requirements, data modelABSTRACT: The Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) Terrain Common Data Model (TCDM) represents the first formal data model for a simulation system which explicitly characterizes the features and attributes of the terrain environmental representation. It characterizes the feature organization into militarily meaningful coverages, their geometric representation, military functional uses, default values for attributes, and lineage metadata, each tied to requirements as articulated by JSIMS subject matter experts. The Synthetic Environment Data Representation and Interchange Specification (SEDRIS) Environment Data Coding Specification (EDCS) provides the syntactic and semantic  foundation for the TCDM.JSIMS is a joint task force aggregate level constructive training simulation. As such, is based on a level of resolution of terrain features commensurate with those drawn on 1:250,000 scale hardcopy map products. With only very basic system-level requirements for 3D visualization, there is no requirement to integrate terrain features into the 3D terrain surface, and the JSIMS Synthetic Natural Environment (SNE) has no representation of polygonal geometry and visual textures for buildings, bridges, or other 3D models.This paper describes extensions to the JSIMS TCDM to support the higher resolution requirements of platform-level constructive simulations such as the OneSAF Test Bed program (based on ModSAF 5.0 – Modular Semi-Automated Forces), and virtual simulations such as the Combined Arms Tactical Trainer (CATT) program, including Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT). These classes of simulations typically have resolution requirements for terrain feature density and variety similar to those found on 1:50,000 (or larger) scale mapping and analysis hardcopy products.In contrast to JSIMS, while the visual systems represented by the CCTT Manned Modules contain visually dense and diverse sets of feature types, the associated Synthetic Forces (SF) systems collapse these diverse sets of feature types into a few basic classes. As a result, they lose the ability to distinguish between, e.g., a church and a warehouse containing military supplies (critical for targeting and battle damage assessment). The TCDM extensions described herein apply to the union of the virtual and constructive (SF) systems in preparation for future extensions to SF systems which will incorporate this more diverse classification and attribution schema. This will not only result in a “fairer fight” among virtual and constructive simulations, but will increase the richness and verisimilitude of the perceived terrain environment for SF systems. The latter is a critical next-step on the road to quality representation of feature-rich urban environments. An important side-effect of this effort has been the development of an explicit multi-resolution terrain feature representation.Areas of extension to the JSIMS TCDM include: replacement of aggregate features with individual features, attribution extensions sufficient to distinguish among visual representations of similar features, addition of attribution for the visual (e.g., color), infrared and other electromagnetic bands, and extensions to the surface trafficability descriptions.IntroductionThe design philosophy behind the Terrain Common Data Model (TCDM) has been presented at the 8th Computer Generated Forces (CGF) and Behavioral Representation Conference [1]. The JSIMS TCDM was developed jointly by the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) Synthetic Natural Environment (SNE), the DARPA Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) Worldwide Terrain Database generation effort, and the Joint Warfighting Simulation (JWARS) SNE.Representing the first formal data model for simulation systems characterizing features and attributes of the terrain environmental representation for low to medium resolution aggregate-level constructive simulation, the JSIMS TCDM [2] is based on a level of resolution of terrain features commensurate with 1:250,000 scale hardcopy map products. JSIMS has only basic system level 3D visualization requirements and there are no requirements to integrate terrain features into the 3D terrain surface. The JSIMS natural environment has no representation of polygonal geometry or visual textures for bridges, buildings or 3D models.In its design for JSIMS, the TCDM specifically did not address high resolution terrain needs, virtual simulations, or air/ocean/space environmental domains. In this paper we explore these important areas of TCDM extension and discuss current research and TCDM extension issues.TCDM Focus For purposes of ease of subject matter evaluation, and for ease in extending the feature organization, the JSIMS TCDM is divided into militarily meaningful coverages as shown in Figure 1. Each coverage captures all or a portion of a functional use, and includes a consistent collection of attributes based on specific analysis/reasoning requirements in support of military models.Attributes used throughout the TCDM are defined using the SEDRIS Environment Data Coding Specification (EDCS) [3], providing the syntactic and semantic foundation as well as the lineage to several National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) attribution schemes.Figure 1  TCDM CoveragesWho are the customers for the TCDM? There are five important customer groups, each with their own design requirements.Requirements Specifiers: The TCDM should make both the data elements, and their implied/planned uses, clear to both Subject Matter Experts (SME) and military modelers.Military Model Developers: The TCDM should clarify data elements, data element relationships and what variations in data values need to be considered when implementing those interactions (e.g., what is the range of enumerated types of surface material, vegetation type, or building use).SNE Developers: The TCDM should detail the data content and relationships explicitly available in the Terrain Data Base (TDB) transmittal for populating the runtime database. The TCDM feature organization and attribution should first and foremost be designed to support runtime queries and models such that the terrain compiler need only reformat the data and does not need to reorganize (or worse yet, create) data.SNE Data Providers: The TCDM provides a vehicle for clarifying terrain data requirements and engaging NIMA and other providers of authoritative terrain data with the intent of influencing future data products and processes to more closely match M&S terrain requirements.Potential Federates: The TCDM can establish a clear relationship between data model elements and specific reasoning behaviors in military models.It is helpful to note that these customers span the SNE Conceptual Reference Model (Figure 2) [4]. This Reference Model serves as a basis for the development of the JSIMS TCDM.Figure 2  SNE Conceptual Reference ModelSignificant Inputs to ExtensionAs previously stated, the JSIMS TCDM represents data for low to medium resolution constructive simulations and does not include high resolution terrain needs, virtual simulations, or air/ocean/space environmental domains. Nor does the JSIMS TCDM include sensor attributes, visual textures, 3D models, or polygonal geometry.Immediate concerns for TCDM extension include virtual simulations, medium to high resolution simulations, and sensor attribution. Accordingly, TCDM extension efforts have included analysis of terrain data model requirements for existing and future systems:CCTT SAF and Manned Modules, and UKCATT. The UK CATT Technical Specification [4] provides general feature information for the UK CATT SAF systems. The UK CATT SEDRIS Image Generator Content [5] document provides attribution details related to the image generator and sensor capabilities. CCTT subject matter experts were also consulted.OneSAF Testbed (based on ModSAF). Interviews with OneSAF developers and subject matter experts were conducted.OneSAF. The OneSAF Operational Requirements draft documents were reviewed and interviews with subject matter experts were conducted. These are described later in this paper.Evans and Sutherland (E&S) Visual System. Visual systems as used in CCTT and high-resolution terrain needs for platform-level virtual simulations (explicit geometry, textures, additional terrain features) were evaluated.STOW constructive and virtual simulation platforms. Experiences from STOW were applied to the TCDM.Paint-the-Night. The Paint The Night (PTN) Infrared (IR) SEDRIS Mapping document [6] provides excellent sensor attribution details that are being added to the TCDM.Environment Federation. The Environmental Federation Dynamic Terrain [8] design and development allowed us to gather dynamic terrain capabilities in SEDRIS terms and incorporate them into the extended TCDM.One of the final results of the TCDM Extension is a new document containing a detailed Feature Set Analysis (FSA) As can be seen in Figure 3, portions of a draft TCDM Extension Feature Set Analysis, we describe two features, a processing plant and a road. Attributes for both features are detailed in the FSA, and each feature has new proposed attributes (unchecked attributes are new).In the remainder of this section, we detail specific areas of analysis that are contributing to TCDM extensions.Image generator analysisTo what degree of detail should the TCDM identify features and attributes used for image generation systems? The image generators used in virtual simulators employ many detailed attributes for visualization such as 2D overlays, varied screen resolutions, textures, polygons and haze. While these are all valid image generation attributes, they are not easily identified by SMEs as requirements for features and are too low level for the data model desired. They are therefore not included in the extended TCDM.Image generator databases often contain a rich collection of 3D models to provide a varied visual environment. The TCDM extension must be able to distinguish among these models by classification and attribution. Miller [8] describes how such models are described in a networked HLA environment.OneSAF Operational Requirements andSubject Matter ExpertsIn September, 1999, meetings were held at Ft. Leavenworth, Kansas with Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) to discuss extensions that would be relevant to OneSAF operational requirements. Prior to the meeting, we received and reviewed the OneSAF Operational Requirements Document [9] (finding it very broad) and prepared questions for the SMEs. A few of these questions are included here:With what detail will the movement of dismounted infantry be modeled as affected by “micro-relief” (e.g., rugged boulder fields) and extreme vertical slopes (e.g., escarpments, ravines)?Should ground movement result in “disturbed soil/vegetation” (e.g., multi-pass surface degradation, tire/tread tracks, broken vegetation)? If so, to what degree and permanence?To what degree should the effects of ground cover on ground movement be considered (e.g., detailed models of vegetation type, stem diameter, stem spacing, underbrush density)?What are the key characteristics of underground features, which may support individual movement (e.g., tunnels, subways, sewer systems, pipelines, etc.)? What information is required about their portals?What structure-associated features should be moveable (e.g., windows, doors, awnings)?Figure 3  Feature Set Analysis with New Attributes (unchecked items)During our meetings, we individually addressed each feature contained in the Digital Topographic Data (DTOP) specification [15] and the existing JSIMS TCDM. Based on the OnsSAF SME meetings, we can qualitatively describe the scope and detail needed by OneSAF through the following examples: Power Plant: The power plant feature is important for mission rehearsal. For large structures such as this, one concern is exterior lighting (esp. hazard lights). Also, for logistics, attributes such as power plant capacity and how it is connected to the power grid would be important. Further, power grid attributes such as sources, sinks, and switches should be identified as these are critical in Military Operations Other than War (MOOTW) including Stability and Support Operations (SASO).Camp: OneSAF expects to be concerned with refugees and population movement. Important attributes include capacity of camp and types of population inside the camp.Building: Buildings must be capable of being entered/exited and one must be able to look inside through windows or openings. Openings such as mouse holes should be creatable and usable. Different resolutions of buildings are needed. One should be able to fly over a city and see general buildings with meaningful landmarks. Upon moving closer, one should be able to interact with buildings. Helicopters can land on them, troops can rappel onto them and enter buildings. Interoperable buildings should contain extensive detail. Doors should be able to open and close. Windows, skylights, and small openings that may be used for ingress/egress should all be accurately depicted. Porches, floor traversability, exterior lights, shadowed surfaces are all important factors. Interior clutter including desks, tables, and chairs should all be modeled.Transportation: In addition to the usual road network, important considerations for transportation systems include railroad, commuter lines, and subways. Detailed information needed includes bridge capacities, sidings and siding capacities, switches, and multiple tracks. While there is not a need to model construction, reconstruction or repair, OneSAF will need to know when transportation systems are broken and when they have been repaired. Rail yard capacities are important. Power lines alongside rail lines are important. Road connectivity, traffic models, surface material and road capacity are important. OneSAF needs to know which roads can support heavy vehicles. Road shoulders are important as the absence of shoulders implies potential turn-around problems for large vehicles. Modeling of civilian traffic including large volumes of traffic is important. Road signs are not important and are not needed.Extensions to the TCDM to support the range of detail prescribed by OneSAF SMEs would be monumental and at this time premature, given that the detailed operational requirements are as yet incomplete. The discussion, however, helped to scope and focus our TCDM extension objectives, and allowed better understanding of SME objectives for OneSAF. Based on these OneSAF SME discussions, the need for a multi-level of detail TCDM structure became more apparent. To this end we began development of a well-specified hierarchical relationship between features that will be incorporated into the extended TCDM [10].CATT Manned Modules Requirements and Subject Matter ExpertsAnalysis of the vector source data used in creation of the CCTT Primary 1, 2, and 3 visual databases identified a number of features not found in the current JSIMS TCDM. The following features, derived from a standard E&S feature mapping document, are present in these three databases, and will be added to the TCDM:AE020	Light Fabrication Industry*AF020	ConveyorAL220	US-SteepleAP020	US-InterchangeAQ058	Constriction / ExpansionAQ065	CulvertAT090	AntennaBC010	BeaconBH000	Inland WaterDA020	Barren GroundDA030	Land AreaDA031	Land RegionEC015	ForestGB060	Runway Radar Reflector*Not contained in the EDCS, currently.It is important to note that this analysis was only conducted on the vector source data for the CCTT visual databases. When complex features in these databases, such as basis sets, are decomposed, more features will undoubtedly be added to the list of features not found in the JSIMS TCDM. Some of the features, such as the AE020 (light fabrication), could be mapped to other classification codes, such as AE010 (assembly plant), reducing the number of unmatched features.Further investigation of the CCTT feature attributes, as well as the spatial size and dimensionality of features, is needed before conclusively determining what features and feature attributes need to be added to the TCDM to meet CCTT simulation needs. This is an ongoing area of investigation. The September 1999 meetings held at Ft. Leavenworth also had the purpose of discussing extensions that would be relevant to CCTT. While the CCTT SMEs did not require the extremely fine detail that the OneSAF SMEs required, they did indicate that a variety of additional feature attributions would be necessary to add to the TCDM. The need to support a single tank manned module, as opposed to the platoon level that the TCDM is currently designed for, was the driving factor for these extensions. Dismounted infantry reasoning, such as attribution to indicate whether a feature is climbable by a soldier, also played a role in their extension requests. Additionally, they indicated that increased spatial resolution in the databases is necessary to support their mission.Environment FederationThe Environment Federation project is a DMSO-sponsored effort examining the use of the SEDRIS and STOW environmental capabilities in a run-time HLA federation. The project seeks to make runtime environmental data exchanges more broadly re-usable in M&S. It project also serves to demonstrate of the scope and nature of dynamic environment and terrain modeling capabilities that are available today. Much of the Environment Federation specific details including some TCDM extension details are described in [8]. The Environment Federation contributes to TCDM Extensions in the areas of:Attribute extension for some features including buildings and existing engineering works such as the barrier and cross country barrier features,Explicit specification of engineering works features (e.g., dragons teeth, ditches, craters) described later in this paper, andReconciliation of model library entries and TCDM point features, including additional attributes required.Other Programs and Relevant WorkOne extension to the JSIMS TCDM with which we have particular concern is sensor attribution. Given the needs of virtual simulation and constructive simulation, we received support from the Paint-The-Night team and Evans and Sutherland sensor representatives to help with analysis of sensor attributes. Details on our work in this area are presented in Section  REF _Ref472222741 \r \h 4.5, below.Extensions to the JSIMS TCDMTCDM extensions will support the higher resolution requirements of platform-level constructive simulations such as the OneSAF Test Bed (based on ModSAF 5.0), and virtual simulations such as CATT, including CCTT. These classes of simulations typically have resolution requirements for terrain feature density and variety similar to those found on 1:50,000 (or better) mapping and terrain analysis hardcopy products.Changes to the 300 meter RuleThe JSIMS TCDM is dominated by company-level planning for platoon operations. Based on JSIMS SME input, terrain regions smaller than 300m by 300m (or 90,000 m2) will not affect cross-country movement of a platoon. Characterization of the terrain into elements smaller than 300m in length or 90,000 m2 in area is of no benefit to JSIMS.In contrast, the OneSAF Test Bed and virtual simulations of the CATT and CCTT programs operate at a higher resolution than JSIMS. While we first considered not defining a minimal terrain region size (which may be an appropriate approach for urban area infantry operations), upon TCDM analysis, it was concluded there is a characterization size that could be used to extend the TCDM in a consistent manner. Terrain regions smaller than a city block in size will not generally affect cross-country movement of today’s constructive simulations. Smaller regions result in a “flow” around the feature. City block sized regions however, require military model planning of the maneuver. The TCDM extension to support virtual simulations and OneSAF constructive simulations will therefore revise the 300m by 300m rule discussed above to an 80m by 80m rule.Support for High Resolution FeaturesIn many instances, the TCDM specifies point feature expansion to an areal feature rather than allowing for both areal and point features. For our extensions, we do not wish to eliminate point feature data if the point feature data exists in the source product, so the TCDM has been extended to include point features where in JSIMS they are represented by larger areal features.Additional feature evaluation will be conducted based on source data and SME input to ensure the TCDM contains features needed for virtual and constructive simulations. At a minimum we expect to extend the TCDM with the following point features:AC040	Oil / Gas FacilitiesAH033	Defensive Position Defilade*AH080	Military AreaAL210	Snow Shed / Rock ShedAM030	Grain ElevatorAN060	Railroad Yard / Marshalling YardAP042	Crater*AQ090	Entrance / ExitAQ130	TunnelBB010	AnchorageBB190	US-Pier / Wharf / QuayBD000	US-Underwater Danger / HazardBD001	Mine - NavalBD100	Pile / Piling / PostBD120	ReefBH040	Filtration Beds / Aeration BedsBH050	Fish Hatchery / Fish Farm / Marine FarmDB145	Miscellaneous ObstacleDB160	Rock Strata / Rock FormationEC030	TreesGB005	US-Airport / AirfieldMH100	Mine – Land** Change request submitted to add to EDCS.Several linear features have also been identified for insertion into the extended TCDM, including:AH038	Wire Obstacle*AL060	Dragon TeethAL070	FenceBD000	US-Underwater Danger / HazardBD120	ReefEC030	TreesEC040	US-Cleared Way / Cut Line / FirebreakGB005	US-Airport / AirfieldGB015	US-Apron / Hardstand* Change request submitted to add to EDCS.Attributes for the Specification of ModelsAttribution of features will be enhanced during the TCDM extension process. The typical point feature in the JSIMS TCDM includes attributes as shown in this example:AC040, Oil and Gas Facilities (POINT)AOO_	Angle of OrientationDGEN	Damage, GeneralHGT_	Height Above Surface LevelLEN_	Length / DiameterSTC_	Source Type CodeUID_	Feature Identification NumberWID_	WidthWhile these attributes are adequate for constructive aggregate simulations such as JSIMS, virtual simulation systems require additional detail. For example, given these attributes along with an EDCS classification code (AC040), one needs to select the appropriate visual model for display. In this case, the virtual simulator may have several potentially applicable oil or gas facility models available for display: a basis set of a generic facility, an oil pumping facility model, and a petroleum facility model. The JSIMS attributes shown above do not allow differentiation between these different models. To recognize this need, we expect extensions to the TCDM to include for every point feature:PFT_	Point Feature Type (enumerations: vertical structure, horizontal structure, geo-specific location, basis set, multiple elevation structure)** Change request submitted to add to EDCS.Additional attributes to be applied to point features on a case by case basis:BFC_	Building Function Code PRO_	Product Category NAM_	Name (to be used for geo-specific features)We also expect extensions to be made to the BFC_ and PRO_ enumerations lists. Further details and examples showing TCDM point feature reconciliation against model library entries are described in [8].Given these extensions, the Oil/Gas facility with a PFT_, BFC_, and PRO_ allows for selection of, say, a basis set or a vertical structure, and allows differentiation between Oil/Gas Facilities producing different products. However, some of these types of features, particularly basis sets and geo-specific features, may need additional information when used in the TCDM.Geo-specific features, by their very nature, will require additional information specifying exactly what specific feature they represent (e.g., the Kuwait City “Grande Mosque” instead of “Religious Structure”). Because geo-specific features are likely to be named, we propose using their name, along with an appropriate PFT_ enumeration as the distinguishing attribute to identify the specific feature.Basis SetsA basis set generally refers to a model or collection of models, used repeatedly to populate geo-typical areal features in virtual databases. Some forms of basis sets, such as the Evans & Sutherland Themel Sets®, combine collections of 3D models carefully matched to self-tessellating ground texture patterns [13]. These self-tessellating collections of models are then used to represent areal features. There may be many variations of self-repeating basis sets, each designed to self-tessellate and also correctly tessellate with the other variations. Basis sets are a geo-typical, as opposed to a geo-specific, method of populating the terrain database.Self-repeating basis sets may be very simple (e.g., a single-polygon fixed-height canopy to represent a forest) or very complex (e.g., an industrial built-up area made up of a collection of complex factories, warehouses, streets, signs, and other assorted clutter). Like most 3D models in a virtual database, basis sets will also incorporate multiple levels of detail (LOD) for display processing efficiency. High LOD representations, meant to be seen at close range, will be much more detailed than lower LOD versions of the basis set.Since basis sets can be considerably more complex than most point features, basis set specification is also likely to be more complex. Because each instance of a basis set has a single vector offset into the database, the basis set. is typically treated as a point feature. However, because basis sets may contain not only many individual models, but also multiple LOD representations of those models, specifying them with a simple set of feature codes and attributes is problematic. The composite nature of basis sets, with their often diverse groupings of individual features, suggests that they should be specified in an aggregate manner [10].Sensor AttributionOne of the most obvious extensions needed within the TCDM is support for sensors. Determination of exactly what attributes are needed for sensor model support as well as how to populate the attributes with validated data however, is complex. To date, SNE attribution for a sensor model may vary dramatically between virtual simulations, sensor specific models, and SF systems. SF systems may, for example determine sensor detection from a contrast parameter computed by examination of texture maps developed for the visual subsystem. If the contrast of a target differs significantly from the background, the sensor detects the target.Virtual simulations employing several viewing modes (of which sensor is one of several) may implement a sensor scene by flipping a switch resulting in activation of a new set of texture maps and or 3D models for the scene. More advanced virtual simulations and sensor specific simulations employ attribution of scene elements and use computationally expensive sensor models to render the scene. These simulations, too, can range from complex accurate sensor models requiring many sensor attributes as input, to simplistic models employing only a few key attributes as input. Figure 4 shows out-the-window and sensor texture maps used to generate thermal textures for the Evans and Sutherland Harmony image generator. Figure 5 is a scene showing a tank with hot barrel, engine, and wheels from an Evans and Sutherland image generator used in virtual simulation applications.Figure 4  Out-the-window and Sensor Texture mapsFigure 5  Tank with hot barrel, engine, and wheelOur objective is to provide sufficient sensor attributes in the synthetic environment to support a range of sensor simulation models in typical use within the M&S community for virtual and constructive simulation, as well as for those expected in the near term. To this end, we focus on two reasonably well documented efforts: Paint-The-Night with its SEDRIS Mappings, and CATT Evans and Sutherland Virtual Simulator Image Generator capabilities.The CATT SEDRIS Image Generator mapping and the Paint The Night SEDRIS Mappings both identify sensor attributes for their respective programs in SEDRIS terminology. These were compared and found to have significant overlap of attributes. Meetings were held to agree on a common set of thermal attributes. Based on extensions to the Paint The Night thermal attributes, we present here a common set of thermal attributes that may be applied to any feature or material:Temperature code top surfaceTemperature code bottom surfaceTemperature top surfaceWind speed top surfaceTemperature bottom surfaceAir flow bottom surfaceSurface reflectivity specularConvection coefficientThermal conductivitySpecific heatDensity materialThicknessReynold’s numberStanton numberSurface absorptivity solarLongwave emissivity (3-inf μm)Longwave-IR emissivity (8-12 μm)Midwave-IR emissivity (3-5 μm) Near-IR (.7-1.3 μm) reflectivity (diffuse)Reflectivity visible red (diffuse)Reflectivity visible green (diffuse)Reflectivity visible blue (diffuse)Methods for the derivation of these attributes from authoritative sources have yet to be defined, but clearly (and minimumally), detailed material composition attribution will be required.Feature AggregationIn order to support future extensions with even greater resolution such as OneSAF or the Marine Corps Urban Warrior, there is a great need to support within the TCDM varied levels of feature aggregation. As noted in the discussion of basis sets, there currently exists the need for specifying features that are aggregations of many other features. This topic is further discussed in [10].Figure 6  Battlefield Elements TCDM Coverage, showing extensions (bulleted)Engineering WorksObstacles and defensive positions are incorporated into the JSIMS TCDM as areal aggregate abstract features that are useful for simulations such as JSIMS. CATT constructive forces and the DARPA Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) constructive forces both demonstrate the usefulness of individual vehicle defensive positions and obstacles and require more attributes than currently defined in the JSIMS TCDM. As part of the TCDM extension effort, engineering works features have been added with additional attribution in the extended TCDM. These extensions are based on information obtained from the Environment Federation project [8] and the CCTT Environment Architecture [12].In Figure 6, we depict the TCDM Battlefield Elements coverage, consisting of features not normally contained in NIMA feature data sets, but critical to modeling combat engineering operations on the battlefield. The bulleted items in this figure are part of our TCDM extensions.While several extensions to the Battlefield Elements coverage are indicated, they are generally of two types, defensive positions and obstacles.Defensive PositionsOne specific engineering works extension to the TCDM is for defensive positions. The JSIMS TCDM identifies groups of defensive positions rather than individual positions. OneSAF Test Bed, CCTT SAF and virtual simulations, however, require detailed vehicle defensive positions. Synthetic Force military behavior models require attributes that allow for proper use of a any particular defensive position. Figure 7  Tank entering fighting positionFigure 7 shows a tank driven by constructive simulation entering a fighting position. Synthetic Force behaviors need to know where the entry and exit are and where the hide positions are within the position. Due to the military significance of defensive positions, it is necessary to specify these special attributes explicitly rather than force the constructive simulation to infer them (whether at runtime or within the terrain compiler). The TCDM extensions include the defensive position as a complex feature composed of other descriptive features identifying defilade positions and entry/exit points.ObstaclesThe JSIMS TCDM data model defines obstacles in a generic sense. Attribution is minimal and obstacles are grouped using either the Barrier or Cross Country Barrier features. Obstacles and the breaching of obstacles are important SF behaviors and also involve intricate visualization capabilities in the virtual simulator. SF reasoning behaviors differ greatly upon encountering different obstacles in the SNE. In order to ease SF reasoning and to better represent the varied attribution of different obstacles, we are extending the TCDM to include specific obstacles as individual features as shown in Figure 8. Figure 8  Obstacles for TCDM Extension (bullets indication EDCS change submission)IssuesBased on program documentation and SME interviews, we expect to continue extending the TCDM to better support M&S applications. While the TCDM defines the data model and even describes default attribute values where applicable, the TCDM can not populate the database with actual authoritative values. We continue to be concerned with population of data, and are in the process of reporting to NIMA and others a recent evaluation of available source data as compared to the M&S requirements defined by the JSIMS TCDM (an aggregate simulation data model). The study results are disappointing. Given that the needs of virtual and constructive simulation are of much higher resolution than those JSIMS, the potential data shortfall is probably much worse than indicated by the study.It is important for the M&S community to develop a shared concept of terrain data modeling, if not the specific TCDM described here. For the reasons set forth previously, the result should increase both pre-simulation and runtime interoperability, decrease the cost of terrain database production, and increase the likelihood that NIMA will meet more M&S requirements in future digital data production.An area of concern involves the use and specification of textures. The relative contrast between features is often used for target identification by SF simulations. Correlation with feature-associated textures is therefore vitally important to interoperability between constructive and virtual simulations. In virtual simulations, with texture providing both feature details and color, texture has additional effects. Even if texture is not used in constructive simulation, it is important that information about certain textured features in the virtual simulation be shared with the SF. For example, the doors and windows of buildings may exist only in the texture map applied to a feature in a visual database. However, the location of these building apertures is also important to a dismounted infantry SF simulation. Likewise, roads in a city basis set may exist in the visual simulation only as texture. Without knowledge about the location of these roads, on-road vehicle movement reasoning in the SF cannot be performed.How the texture on features should be specified in the TCDM remains an issue. While there do exist industry standards for specifying how texture is applied to individual polygons [14], extending those standards to the TCDM presents problems for a variety of reasons. Texture is rarely applied uniformly to an entire feature; rather, individual polygons are each textured differently. Different image generators have different capabilities regarding on how texture is applied (e.g., what color depth can be displayed, and how many texture maps can be simultaneously displayed). The actual texture maps used on a feature need to be specified along with the information on how they are applied to the individual polygons of the feature.ConclusionsThese extensions to the TCDM are an ongoing process. Support within the M&S community to develop a shared concept of terrain data modeling is critical to achieving many of the benefits of this work (beyond those accruing to the specific simulations currently being modeled).Potential benefits of such formal terrain data modeling activities are:Increased pre-simulation and runtime data inter-operability,Decreased cost of terrain database production,Increased terrain database reuse, andIncrease in the likelihood that more M&S requirements will be met in the future data source materials (e.g. NIMA FFD and MSDS).We encourage the M&S community to promote the design philosophy and specific data models of the TCDM.  We suggest that extensions to the TCDM might be productively pursued in community organizations such as the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO), and the Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation (CGF-BR).AcknowledgmentsThe authors wish to acknowledge STRICOM and the Synthetic Natural Environment project (an Army Science and Technology Objective). We thank Ms. Pamela Woodard and Mr. Bernard Gajkowski of STRICOM for their technical, moral, and financial support.References [1]	P. Birkel et al.: “The Terrain Common Data Model (TCDM): A Joint Effort of JSIMS, STOW, and JWARS”, In Proc. 8th Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation, Paper 8TH-CGF-004, May, 1999.[2]	Lockheed Martin Information Systems, Advanced Simulation Center, Bellevue, WA and The MITRE Corporation, McLean, VA, and SAIC, Orlando, FL : “JSIMS Terrain Common Data Model, Revision 1.2a”, 27 July, 1999 [3]	ISO/IEC WD18023 Environmental Data Coding Specification (EDCS), see also HYPERLINK "http://www.sedris.org/wg8home/index.htm"http://www.sedris.org/wg8home/index.htm.[4]	Birkel, Paul A., “The SNE Conceptual Reference Model”, In Proceedings of the Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 1998, 98F-SIW-018.[5]	Science Applications International Corporation, 12479 Research Parkway, Orlando, Florida 32826-3248: “CDRL-A002: SEDRIS Task Report: Technical Specification/Content Agreement for CCTT/UK CATT Database Requirements”, 18 August 1999, Document Number: SAIC-99/7521&00; Contract Number: N61339-99-C-0031; Prepared For: US Army STRICOM, Attn: AMSTI-EC (Larry Grosberg), 12350 Research Parkway, Orlando, Florida 32826-3224 [6]	Mark Johnson, Evans and Sutherland: “UK CATT SEDRIS Visual Database Content Requirements, Version 0.5”, Synthetic Environment Conversions[7]	JRM Enterprises, Inc. Technical and Defense Services, Suite 1A, 1 Hemlock Court, Fredericksburg, VA 22407: “SEDRIS Thermal (IR) Sensor Support Paint-the-Night” (PTN) IR Database to SEDRIS Mapping Document”[8]	D. Miller et al.: “Dynamic Terrain in the Environment Federation”, Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Paper 00S-SIW-115, March, 2000[9]	“One Semi-Automated Forces (OneSAF) Operational Requirements Document (ORD) Version 1.1 DRAFT”, 16 August 1999[10]	D. Miller et al.: “Multiple Resolution Terrain Features”, Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Paper 00S-SIW-101, March, 2000[11]	Evans & Sutherland Computer Corporation, Salt Lake City, UT: “FACC Mapping Document (ccttfh_sed_esidmap)”, 18 November 1999[12]	J. Crowley, Micheline Hunt, “CCTT SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE DESIGN NOTE SYS-34D Synthetic Environment Protocol”, 10/04/95, Integrated Development Team[13]	Evans & Sutherland Computer Corporation, Salt Lake City, UT: “ESIG-U Database Construction Course”, 3 June 1999[14]	Neider, Jackie, et al.: OpenGL Programming Guide, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts 1993[15]	National Imagery and Mapping Agency, “Performance Specification Digital Topographic Data (DTOP)”, MIL-PRF-0089037, October 1998.Author BiographiesAnnette Janett is a senior software engineer with Lockheed Martin Information Systems Advanced Simulation Center. She has led development teams in the development of the OpenScene visualization system, and DARPA and USATEC projects Dynamic Terrain and Objects in a Virtual World and Dynamic Virtual Worlds. More recently she has led development efforts on the DMSO Dynamic Terrain in the Environment Federation project. Ms. Janett has been a contributor to distributed simulation and synthetic environments since 1986 and her experience includes ground and air virtual simulation systems, constructive simulation systems, distributed simulation networks, environmental capabilities in distributed simulation, real-time image generator design and development, data modeling for distributed simulation systems, and SEDRIS production and consumption.DR. DALE D. MILLER is the manager of Advanced Technology Development for the Advanced Simulation Center group of Lockheed Martin Information Systems. He led the projects Dynamic Terrain and Objects in a Virtual World and the Terrain Database Generation & Technology for Synthetic Environments both sponsored by DARPA and USATEC. He was also the technical leader for the terrain database and terrain data fusion development for the WARSIM Program. Currently he leads the STRICOM Common SNE and DMSO Dynamic Terrain in the Environment Federation projects. Dr. Miller received his Ph.D. in Mathematics from the University of Washington in 1976. Since then he has contributed to the areas of DIS and its successor, HLA, data models for terrain representations, real-time computer graphics, computer image generator design, adaptive filtering, image processing, feature extraction, machine vision, and optical character recognition.PAUL A. BIRKEL is a senior principal scientist for The MITRE Corporation. He currently provides technical support to DMSO in multiple environmental areas including the Synthetic Environment Data Representation and Interchange Specification (SEDRIS) and Environmental Books on the Shelf (EBS) projects, the STRICOM Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) and OneSAF Program SNE activities, and the Army SNE Science and Technology Objective. In addition he provides technical support as needed to other DoD M&S and C4ISR programs via the US Army Topographic Engineering Center (USATEC).JOHN NORDSTROM is the software engineering manager of Terrain Tools for the Integrator Modeling Tools group at Evans & Sutherland. He has worked at Evans & Sutherland since 1986 and has been involved in a wide variety of visual database and modeling tools efforts. Rather than re-presenting much of that information here, we expect the reader to already be familiar with the TCDM design philosophy as laid out in the referenced paper. Evolving requirements for interoperation with unmanned air vehicle virtual simulators, however, may ultimately require the support of many of the representations described herein. This dimension is based on the standard in many US cities of 20 blocks per mile. BFC_, for example, does not currently allow characterization of an office building.00S-SIW-112