Mapping in the 21st Century* A Geospatial Information Revolution *Mr. John Liebsch National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA)12310 Sunrise Valley DriveReston, VA 20191-3449(703) 264 3104liebschj@nima.mil COL William Pierce, USADirector, TRADOC Program Integration Office-Terrain DataFort Leonard Wood, MO 65473(573) 563 4086piercew@wood.army.milKeywords:NIMA, Geospatial information, requirements, traditional maps, Foundation Data ConceptABSTRACT: This article outlines the National Imagery and Mapping Agency’s (NIMA) transition from mapmaker to provider of geospatial information and describes how this change will support the Army’s terrain visualization efforts. This is a revolutionary approach to provide geospatial information to warfighters.  The approach is referred to as the Foundation Data Concept that relies on a readiness and responsiveness strategy to move away from many standard products toward an information management environment.  "From ARMY Magazine, (September 1999). Copyright (1999) by the Association of the U.S. Army reproduced by permission" 1.  IntroductionThroughout the 20th century, there have been major changes in our National Security Strategy and the military forces that support it.  The threats have changed, warfighting strategies have evolved and equipment capabilities have increased with every leap in technology. Although the Army has relied on paper maps for mission planning, rehearsal, and execution, maps have remained relatively unchanged during this period. Traditional maps are about to undergo a revolutionary change. The Need for Digital Geospatial InformationMaps, which are two-dimensional representations of geospatial information, must fulfill several requirements.  They must: provide a common view of the battlespace; be current, accurate and accessible; and support automated terrain analysis.  The paper map has been an essential tool in the successful accomplishment of countless operations for decades.  However, as the Army transitions to a digital force, the map as we know it has limitations that diminish its utility.3.  Limitations of Paper Maps and Charts3.1  Common View of the BattlespaceTo  achieve a common view of the battlespace, all personnel  and systems involved in a given operation  must have the same version of the map, chart, or set of geospatial data. Current mapping products use a variety of datums (earth reference coordinate systems) and sources and may not provide that common view.3.2  AvailabilityGeospatial information from NIMA is not available worldwide.  In fact, the military's entire requirement for Topographic Line Maps (TLM) - the technical name for the 1:50,000-scale map we have used for decades - covers about 22 percent of the earth's landmass.  Additionally, due to fiscal constraints, only the highest priority CINC and service requirements for geospatial information are satisfied.   As a result of these factors, some recent operations have commenced without complete mapping coverage (e.g. Grenada, Somalia and Desert Storm).  While NIMA and local topographic teams have been able to rapidly generate geospatial information in some form useful to warfighters, historic crisis-response processes will not provide our early entry forces with an information edge.   In the future, the need for information dominance with respect to terrain will necessitate a near-global database of geospatial information.3.2  Getting "The" Information The Warfighter NeedsUnder current processes, warfighters select their maps from a menu of standard NIMA products.  Even if a warfighter has a requirement only for roads or rivers, he must wait for production of a standard product.   In effect, the warfighter is held hostage to all of the requirements the "standard" map must satisfy.  He either gets the whole map or no map.  3.3  Automated Decision SupportFinally, paper maps do not have the requisite embedded information necessary to support automated decision processes. In the past, Army topographic units have relied on paper maps and digitized versions of them to manually create tactical decision aids such as cross-country mobility overlays. Generation of this type of product is extremely labor-intensive.  4.  A New DirectionIn 1995, the Defense Science Board, and later the Army Science Board, reviewed the Defense Mapping Agency’s (DMA) potential for meeting its customer’s needs.  These reviews took into account the challenge of declining budgets, worldwide deployments, and DMA's mission to provide geospatial information.  The boards recommended that DMA develop a new means to support the services with geospatial information.  Navigating Through the "Fog" of Change - The 21st Century Map  DMA, and its successor organization, NIMA, have worked with the military services for the past two years to address the recommendations.  They collectively developed a revolutionary approach to provide geospatial information to warfighters.  This approach is referred to as the Foundation Data Concept.  It relies on a readiness and responsiveness strategy that moves away from many standard products toward an information management environment.  This strategy calls for establishment of near-global coverage of foundation data (FD) which includes medium resolution elevation, feature, and imagery and navigation data for an improved Readiness posture. 4.2  Components of Foundation DataElevation Data The elevation component, called Digital Terrain Elevation Data (DTED 2), contains elevation data at 30-meter resolution.  It provides elevation data nearly equivalent to the contour interval on a TLM.  4.2.3  Feature InformationThe feature component, called Foundation Feature Data (FFD), provides information on transportation, vegetation, boundaries, surface drainage and populated areas. 4.2.4  Stereo ImageryThe stereo imagery component, called Digital Point Positioning Data Base (DPPDB), is a one-meter resolution data set that supports precision targeting and feature extraction.4.2.5  Monoscopic ImageryThe monoscopic imagery component, called Controlled Image Base - 5 Meter (CIB-5) is a five-meter resolution data set that supports battlefield visualization and feature identification.4.2.6  Nautical InformationThe nautical information component is NIMA's Digital Nautical Chart (DNC).  4.2.7  Aeronautical InformationThe aeronautical component is derived from NIMA's Digital Vertical Obstruction File and Digital Aeronautical and Airfield Information File. 5.  Revolutionary Changes5.1  Revolutionary Change #1:  Many “standard” NIMA data sets can be replaced by Foundation Data components, by using either a single component or by fusing multiple components together to take advantage of the unique characteristics of each data set (e.g. fusing imagery and feature data).  The Responsiveness component of the Foundation Data Concept calls for generation of higher resolution elevation, feature, and imagery data called Mission Specific Data Sets (MSDS).  If a commander determines that Foundation Data do not contain geospatial information of sufficient resolution for a planned operation, he/she can request higher resolution imagery, elevation and feature data.  This request will either be satisfied in theater or passed to NIMA.   NIMA will generate MSDS by “thickening” the pre-existing Foundation Data with the detailed information required to support specific mission requirements.  5.2  Revolutionary Change #2The Foundation Data concept will enable commanders to specify exactly what they want on maps. The  Foundation Data Concept makes the phrase “Standard NIMA products” obsolete.  6.  Impacts to the ArmyThe Foundation Data Concept supports the Army’s terrain visualization efforts in several ways.  6.1  It will provide a Common Operational Picture of the Battlespace.  Foundation Data and Mission Specific Data are tied to the same earth reference system (i.e. WGS-84 datum).  This means that when one data set is overlaid on top of another, all features will line up with one another.  For example, the imagery component can be draped over elevation data to provide a three-dimensional view of the battlespace.  Although Foundation Feature Data lacks the feature density of the 1:50,000 scale TLM, when combined with imagery and elevation data, the warfighter will get a comprehensive view of the battlespace. 6.2  It supports automated decision making and analysis processesFoundation Feature Data are attributed data.  Thus, features will have embedded information such as road width, tree stem diameter and bridge length which facilitate automated decision-support functions such as automated route selection and cross-country mobility analysis.6.3  Foundation Feature Data and  Mission Specific Data will be tied to the same data structure Allowing that data to be used for Command, Control, Communications, Computer, and Intelligence (C4I) systems, Modeling and Simulation, and hard-copy map production. 6.4  The Foundation Data concept will improve production of current and timely digital geospatial information  This geospatial information can be updated  more rapidly  than traditional hard copy maps. In addition, Mission Specific Data Sets produced for one operation or command will be integrated into the data base.7.  Work In Progress - NIMA’s EffortsNumerous initiatives are underway to develop the requisite information necessary for the Foundation Data Concept to be realized. NIMA is initiating a multiyear program to build Foundation Data and is constantly looking for more cost-effective means to collect information (such as high-resolution elevation data and vegetation information) that historically has been very expensive to generate.   In addition, NIMA and the Defense Information Services Agency (DISA) are developing the Joint Mapping Tool Kit (JMTK), which will facilitate the display and manipulation of FD and MSDS on the Army Battle Command System (ABCS).7.1  Army’s Definition of MSDSThe concept of a warfighter-defined custom “digital map” is a major change from the way the Army has used maps in the past.  A warfighter’s area of interest and required resolution of the data assist in defining MSDSs for imagery or elevation.  The difficult part of defining MSDS, however, is selecting the features.  The current data structure supports many possible thematic layers (such as obstacles and vegetation) that contain over 200 features.  The TRADOC Program Integration Office for Terrain Data, in conjunction with the Army’s Topographic Engineering Center and NIMA, has developed five packages of MSDS.  These packages have varying levels of features and attributes that planners can select without having to select every feature.  NIMA produced both digital and hard copy products of these packages for evaluation by the Army.  While these packages will not meet the needs of all users, they serve as a point of departure for operational forces when planning time is constrained. 8.  SummaryThe changes brought about by the transition from traditional mapping data to the digital geospatial information inherent in the Foundation Data Concept are revolutionary. As with all revolutionary changes, the Army faces several challenges associated with implementing the Foundation Data Concept, including training the force, devising the means to request and manage MSDS, and data dissemination.  The future is encouraging because the Foundation Data Concept will enable warfighters to get the specific geospatial information they need when they need it. It will also enable the warfighter to truly “see the terrain” and to attain an information edge over any adversary.References[1]  NIMA IPT, Geospatial Information Infrastructure Master Plan, Version 1.0,  Volumes 1-4,  GPO, 1997 Author Biographies  Mr. John Liebsch  Mr. Liebsch currently leads the Integration and Marketing Team at the National Imagery and Mapping Agency  (NIMA).  He has held numerous NIMA staff positions to include NIMA’s Army Customer Support Team lead and NIMA Liaison to the U. S. Strategic Command.  Mr. Liebsch is a graduate of the Army War College (1997) and the Armed Forces Staff College (1987).  He holds a master’s degree in public administration from Shippensburg University (1997) and a bachelor’s degree in geography from South Dakota State University (1980).Colonel William G. Pierce is currently the director of the TRADOC Program Integration Office for Terrain Data.  In this capacity, he is the Army’s centralized manager for the coordination and synchronization of all Army digital terrain data requirements.  Colonel William G. Pierce was commissioned in the Corps of Engineers upon graduation from the United States Military Academy in June 1974.  He holds a Masters and a Ph.D. in Civil Engineering from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and a Masters in Military Arts and Sciences from the Command and General Staff College.  He is also a licensed Professional Engineer in Virginia.	