THE DOD MODELING AND SIMULATION INTEGRATED NATURAL ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMJuan A. PérezDefense Modeling and Simulation Office1901 North Beauregard StreetSuite 500Alexandria, VA   22311-1705   USA703.998.0660jperez@dmso.milJohn G. HughesMITRE Corporation1820 Dolley Madison Blvd.McLean, VA, 22102-3481703.998.0660jhughes@dmso.milKeywords:Integrated Natural Environment, Synthetic Environments, SNE,SEDRIS, MEL, ESG, EBSABSTRACT: Responding to increasing demand for environmental representations in DOD models and simulations, the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) in concert with the Modeling and Simulation Executive Agents (MSEAs) for Terrain, Air and Space, and Ocean developed the proposed DOD M&S Integrated Natural Environment (INE) Strategy.  A necessary element of the strategy that provides an execution venue is the recently established DMSO INE Program.  The program will focus on providing integrated authoritative representations of the atmosphere, space, oceans, and terrain to the M&S community that will improve consistency and interoperability.  In the last few years, DMSO investments led the progress in broad-scope technology and standards through focused projects, namely: Master Environmental Library (MEL,) Environmental Scenario Generator (ESG,) and Synthetic Environment Data Representation and Interchange Specification (SEDRIS).  This paper describes the underpinnings of the INE Strategy, the ongoing projects that provide the building blocks and the plans to demonstrate an end-to-end INE capability which will deliver an integrated natural environment for use by High Level Architecture (HLA) federations in simulation exercises.IntroductionThe Integrated Natural Environment (INE) Program is a new organization at the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) reflecting the increased emphasis DMSO is placing on the development of integrated natural environmental representation technologies for M&S applications. This paper will provide an overview of the INE Program, the INE Strategy and the individual projects that make up the INE Program with emphasis on the FY00 activity. 1.1 INE Program OverviewThe Integrated Natural Environment Program focuses on providing integrated authoritative representations of the atmosphere, space, oceans, and terrain to the M&S community that will improve consistency and interoperability. A fundamental long-term technical objective of the INE Program is the implementation of the INE Strategy through the development of technologies and end-to-end proof-of-concept demonstrations.The INE Program is made up of six projects including the Master Environmental Library (MEL); Environmental Scenario Generator (ESG); Synthetic Environment Data Representation and Interchange Specification (SEDRIS); Environmental Books on the Shelf (EBS); Requirements/Common Data Model; and Integration Experiments (IE).  These projects will be described in Section 3 of this paper.INE StrategyThe long term goal of the INE Strategy is to enable the automated generation of an integrated natural environmental representation that is internally consistent, cost effective, authoritative and meets the requirements of the M&S developer/ customer.At the heart of the INE Strategy is the concept that an infrastructure of common services, scenario generation capabilities, and interchange mechanisms can be standardized to produce integrated authoritative representations (ARs) of the natural environment.  The INE infrastructure including the interconnectivity between its components is shown in Fig. 1.Figure 1  Major components of the INE StrategyThe process begins with a customer using an interface with the various common services to communicate their scenario requirements in their own terms.  Environmentally aware users will then be able to search and order data for the user application using an on-line Library Service capability.  When some or all of the environmental representation data needed to meet the user's requirements is not already available "off-the-shelf", then scenario composition and generation technologies are needed to take the user's requirements, translate them into technical environmental terms, and figure out how to generate the data (what models to run, etc.) to facilitate the production process.  Operational providers will then generate part or all of each scenario using their Just in Time (JiT) production resources.  They will use the models that they have and retain complete configuration control over their production processes.  To achieve inter-domain integration, a process controller orchestrates the production flow such that the appropriate models run in the correct sequences to ensure physical consistency between the various domain parameters, including user required derived parameters.  Atmosphere data, for example, goes to the ocean provider so that the surface winds and waves are correlated, e.g., consistent; or atmosphere data goes to the terrain provider so that the temperature, precipitation, and snow cover are consistent. At press time documentation detailing the INE Strategy is in final stages of review by the environmental MSEAs. Implementation of the INE Strategy is contingent upon the continued development of the technological functionality required for the process described above including: (1) Library Services and Scenario Composition capabilities (linked to the user via Common Services);  (2) Scenario Generation Process Controller;  (3) Scenario/ Data Base production capabilities; and (4) Common interchange/transmittal mechanism.  The following projects are underway and making significant contributions to developing the necessary functional capability.3.    The INE Program Projects3.1 Master Environmental LibraryThe MEL facilitates discovery, access, subscription, and delivery of authoritative environmental information, products, and data to supply models and simulations for training, analysis, and acquisition through a single user interface to numerous DoD and non-DoD resource sites.  The MEL promotes interoperability among simulation users by facilitating common usage of environmental information, products, and data.  Several Service projects deliver only one type of environmental data to only one Service, but MEL transcends the boundaries between various Services and the four environmental domains (Air, Space, Ocean, and Terrain).Fig. 2  MEL Three Tier ArchitectureThe MEL uses a three-tiered architecture that includes user sites, a central Access Site, and multiple Resource Sites. Figure 2 describes the MEL architecture.  The user sites use commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) web browsers to connect to the Access Site where they can query metadata that has been created at the Resource Sites and stored at the Access Site.  The metadata is information about the environmental data sets maintained at the Resource Sites.  The Access site at the Modeling and Simulation Information Analysis Center (MSIAC) in northern Virginia hosts the MEL Access Site Software (MASS) on an (SGI) server running UNIX and Netscape Server software.  The Resource Sites constitute a number of platforms at different locations running various forms of UNIX and the MEL Resource Site Software (MRSS).  The MRSS provides the capability for extraction of data, subscription services, and data delivery either directly to the requester or to an "ftp" site for download.  MEL currently has several operational unclassified Resource Sites with others in the final stages of coming online.  MEL is implementing a prototype classified system consisting of an access site at the MSIAC and a Resource Site located at a government facility, for query, order, and distribution of restricted environmental data.The metadata used by the MEL complies with the Federal Geographic Data Committee (FGDC) Content Standard for Digital Geospatial Metadata.  The use of this standard will ultimately allow MEL users to browse and query environmental data held in multiple Federal data servers across the country.  MEL has also worked with the Open Geographic Information System (GIS) Consortium and international community on the development of the International Standards Organization (ISO) metadata standard for geospatial data.  In FY00, efforts will continue in standing up new resource sites and supporting existing resource sites to make environmental data available to customers. During FY00, software will be upgraded across the network of sites.  Proposed FY00 software include a minimal suite of metadata tools, a limited Government Information Locator Service (GILS) metadata prototype, SEDRIS Transmittal Format (STF) capability, software development testing, and the necessary standard and on-line documentation.3.2 Environmental Scenario GeneratorThe Environmental Scenario Generator (ESG) will provide the Modeling and Simulation customer an automated capability to generate, in a timely manner, an integrated, physically consistent environmental (atmosphere, ocean, space and terrain) scenario, in a standard transmittal format, that meets specified requirements for region, time frame, and environmental conditions.FY00 is the first full year of development of the ESG project, but the third year in the evolution of the former Air and Space Natural Environment Modeling and Simulation Executive Agent (ASNE MSEA) Weather Scenario Generator (WSG). The focus of WSG was the development of intelligent mining of atmospheric data archives to locate data that would meet the requirements of simulations; if the required data elements did not exist, the ability to derive those elements would be accomplished by applying additional data transforms. Ten years of atmospheric data archives were initially made available for data mining and the ability to derive additional atmospheric data was demonstrated.  Over the past year, it became clear that this effort needed to be expanded to incorporate the oceans and terrain as well. In FY99, an additional 10 years of atmospheric data archives were made available for mining and the ability to use these archives to produce tailored, physically consistent, atmospheric data sets using numeric modeling techniques was developed.  In addition, space and ocean data archives began to be added for data mining.  The ESG-development system provided two atmospheric-only data sets for Joint Warfare System (JWARS) to use in its development efforts to support the Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR).The objective of the ESG in FY00 is to build on the initial capability developed up through FY99 in several areas that incrementally advances the capabilities across the system components. In FY99, an initial scenario generation template (SGT) for data needed to produce authoritative representations was developed and is now available.  The SGT will be improved as additional requirements are identified.  For example, interface capabilities needed for space weather will be incorporated under this task.  The INE Strategy Process Controller capability will guarantee an integrated environment by orchestrating the production of data sets produced at distributed locations—the right data from the right place used in the right model(s) in the right order.  Work includes initial development of data communication mechanisms and processes required to achieve inter- and intra-domain consistency.The INE Strategy requires the establishment of a Just-in-Time scenario data set production capability that will allow operational providers of environmental data to respond to an ESG production request to generate an integrated environmental scenario data set, based on customer-specified time, location, and conditions. In FY99, the ESG demonstrated a proof-of-concept to generate an atmospheric scenario data set in a just-in-time manner, using a Navy atmospheric model.  In FY00, ESG will demonstrate Just-in-Time scenario data set production capability at an actual operational site, Air Force Combat Climatology Center (AFCCC), using a numerical model to generate high resolution atmospheric, climatological M&S data sets on-demand when these sets do not exist in the MEL.  In addition ESG will demonstrate a proof-of-concept using space models to produce a just-in-time space scenario data set. 3.3 Synthetic Environment Data Representation and Interchange SpecificationThe DoD community needs an environmental data representation and interchange mechanism that not only satisfies the requirements of today's systems, but can be extended to meet future data sharing needs.  The SEDRIS Project was established to solve the following pre-runtime M&S data interchange problems associated with representation of the physical environment: No standard data model; limited support to heterogeneous simulation; indeterminate interchange mechanism; and expensive data base conversion.  SEDRIS provides the exchange specification suite that supports the INE Strategy.While initially focused on meeting the needs of the M&S community, addressing the above issues also addresses related interchange and reuse issues encountered by data base producers and operational consumers. Additionally, the unambiguous definition characteristics of the data representation model, data dictionary, and data coding specification support runtime use in building simulation and federation object models supported under the High Level Architecture for simulations. The resulting interchange mechanism mustAllow for standard representation of, and access to, existing simulation and operational environmental data bases;Support data bases containing integrated terrain, ocean, atmosphere, and space data, that allow for a consistent representation and transition between domains; andAllow for the increased utility and reuse of legacy environmental data bases, while remaining sensitive to data representational needs of visual, sensor, and constructive simulation systems.The SEDRIS Project Objectives are to:Articulate and capture the complete set of data elements and associated relationships needed to fully represent the physical environment.Support the full range of simulation applications (e.g., computer-generated forces, manned, visual, and sensor systems) across all environmental domains (terrain, ocean, atmosphere, and space).Provide a standard interchange mechanism to pre-distribute environmental data (from primary source data providers and existing resource repositories) and promote data base reuse and interoperability among heterogeneous simulations.A formal effort began in 1994 and has maintained a primary focus on technology development.  SEDRIS major components are developed by bringing technical experts in environmental modeling and simulation together, focusing activities on practical solutions, achieving consensus, then implementing and testing through experimentation.  The project has been characterized by a growing participation from U.S. and international organizations.Initial efforts have included development of a data representation model and related interface specification to address the environmental representation requirements of the terrain, ocean, atmosphere, and space domains and 3-D models of man-made and natural objects. Continuing SEDRIS Project efforts in FY99 included completing initial development of the SEDRIS write API and defining the SEDRIS Transmittal Format. Development of SEDRIS standardization documentation was initiated following procedures and content outlines developed by the International Standards Organization (ISO).  Training materials and related government and commercial SEDRIS training courses were developed and presented. In FY00, the SEDRIS project is focusing on maturing the SEDRIS capabilities and support mechanisms to apply SEDRIS to the INE Strategy and to broader use across the M&S community. This includes the following:Fielding of SEDRIS interchange components to include training support.  The development of formal documentation of SEDRIS specifications.  The initiation of a formal standardization process.  Continued verification through a series of interchange experiments (ocean and atmospheric data, and terrain (features, geometry, topology)).  Generation of new tools and conversion applications.  Building marketing packages and business models to influence both government and industry in the M&S, command and control, and Geographic Information Systems areas. Core technology development efforts in FY00 include investigating runtime support options in both the data coding specification and the data representation model plus the associated data dictionary.  FY00 efforts will also address the development of standard object templates (skeleton objects) to assist data providers in more efficiently and rapidly generating SEDRIS transmittals.  SEDRIS will also fully develop and field a major public release to serve as a standardization baseline.  The resulting interchange mechanism has been tested through a series of experiments that include interface with MEL.The SEDRIS effort will offer a full range of education and outreach activities including training classes to support the full range of deliverables; maintaining the Website and Help Desk functions; developing video and CD media to promote SEDRIS knowledge and use; and hosting SEDRIS Technology Conferences. In addition, SEDRIS will establish an initial set of Cooperative Research and Development Agreements (CRDAs) to promote SEDRIS capability in commercial tools and data base generation systems.  Another SEDRIS FY00 activity is to investigate how to extend the current SEDRIS Associate Process into a more formal Consortium to further promote industry and international involvement and technology support.3.4 Environmental Books on the ShelfThe Environmental Books on the Shelf (EBS) project supports the INE Strategy by demonstrating and promulgating both MEL-accessible/SEDRIS-available worldwide low-resolution terrain databases, and associated terrain database development technology capable of meeting both low- and medium-to-high resolution constructive and virtual simulation requirements.  The developed worldwide low-resolution terrain datasets include separate archives of  “cleaned and deconflicted” feature data, elevation data, and 3D models/textures, as well as an additional archive of integrated feature, elevation, and 3D model/texture data as an integrated Triangulated Irregular Network (iTIN).  These datasets are based on a well-documented Terrain Common Data Model (TCDM) that uses SEDRIS “unambiguous representation” technology components.Historically, terrain datasets are neither available on a worldwide basis in a seamless and artifact-free form, nor as a worldwide integrated database. Similarly, federations have had limited environmental interoperability and no (even low-resolution) datasets “off the shelf” to support basic scenario agility.  Additionally, source data provider restrictions have made the dissemination and ready access to terrain data sets via the MEL difficult for many M&S programs not prepared to use restricted terrain data access mechanisms.The EBS project, by using releasable data sources coupled with well-understood COTS and GOTS technologies developed in FY96-99 in the DARPA STOW and JSIMS programs, will produce and archive in MEL a worldwide collection of terrain data sets and integrated terrain databases.  This multi-gigabyte archive will be readily accessible to federation- and federate- developers within the M&S community as SEDRIS Transmittal Format (STF) datasets discoverable through the MEL. Both JWARS and JSIMS have indicated that these datasets meet their worldwide terrain requirements, and a number of Service-specific synthetic force simulations expect to be able to use this terrain data repository to meet near-term scenario development requirements.The associated integrated terrain database generation capability, in addition to being used to generate these worldwide low-resolution data sets, will also be capable of producing as-needed “industrially funded” medium-resolution integrated terrain datasets of diverse applicability.  This capability will be transitioned to the government (U.S. Army Topographic Engineering Center) in the first quarter of FY01 for use in scenario-development for M&S applications.FY00 is the first year of development in the EBS project.  Future years will address the development and archiving of similar worldwide M&S datasets to “jump start” federation- and federate- developers in the area of reusable environmental data sets which are MEL-accessible and SEDRIS-available.During FY00 the project will focus on production technology enhancements such as:Integrate the WARSIM Terrain Data Fusion System (TDFS) and the DARPA STOW Worldwide Terrain Database (WWTDB) process software components.Extend these techniques to support full use of National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) Vector Map Level 0 (VMAP0), the Global Land Cover Characteristics Data Base (GLCCDB), bridge attribute inferencing and deconflict elevation data with shoreline for both inland and ocean water bodies. Develop 3D model and texture library in SEDRIS Transmittal Format (STF).  Enhance integrated TIN generation for global use.  Develop and test STF export capability for separate GIS feature and elevation data sets, as well as integrated feature, elevation, and 3D-model/texture data set.  Enhance and integrate a quality assessment tool (the Synthetic Environment Evaluation and Inspection Tool (SEE-IT)) into the production process.In addition, EBS will develop tools to generate and deliver SEDRIS Transmittals including:Prepare and test worldwide feature STF and elevation STF.  Prepare and test 3D model library.  Generate integrated terrain database and prepare and test integrated terrain STF.  Prepare MEL metadata.  Deliver STF and metadata to appropriate MEL resource site.3.5 Requirements/Common Data ModelOne of the major functions of the environmental MSEAs is to bridge the M&S communities with the DoD and other environmental data producers by developing an understanding of the environmental data requirements of M&S users and represent these to the data producers.    Over the past few years, efforts have been made by the environmental MSEAS to accomplish this.As part of the JSIMS program, the WARSIM program under the Army has taken on the responsibility for the synthetic natural environment representation.  In this role they have developed what is called the Terrain Common Data Model (TCDM) which articulates the data needs of the JSIMS users in a form that drives both the data production for scenario development and the runtime representation of environmental effects.  The TCDM includes the terrain data needs for joint, multi-Service constructive high-level warfare training for all the Services.   The Army is now building on the TCDM to incorporate the needs of platform level training as represented in the Army OneSAF program.The development and use of a comprehensive data model which articulates the range of data required for a class of users, along with the representation of the data using SEDRIS supported mechanisms (e.g. the Environmental Data Coding Specification) appears to offer a very useful approach for describing requirements in a technical form useable by both producers and users.This task will build on the experience with the TCDM to both generalize this data model and apply the concept to the other environmental domains in a cooperative effort among the environmental MSEAs with common data model technical support.3.6 Integration ExperimentsThe majority of the effort discussed to this point has focused on the development of technologies to support the implementation of the INE Strategy and its various components. This project is primarily focused on supporting the execution of a proof-of-concept end-to-end demonstration of the INE Strategy and its component technologies. This project also supports efforts to enhance, supplement and accelerate the technology development efforts in the other projects in order to make the needed technologies available in a timely manner to ensure their availability for the proof-of-concept end-to-end demonstration. The Integration Experiments project in FY00 will have two components.  One will be a phased testing and evaluation process and the second component will be the development of critical INE technological functionality.The first step will be to conduct a technical evaluation of the INE Concept of Operations (CONOPS.)  The next phase will be a walkthrough “paper” exercise to evaluate the CONOPS in the context of a robust, realistic INE scenario.  A “live” test or end-to-end experiment to produce an integrated data set for a real M&S application will follow.  Documenting of the entire process will complete this effort.  A second component under this project is the development of several critical enabling technologies that will be required in order to conduct an end-to-end “live” test of the INE Strategy in FY00 for a limited, yet plausible natural environment scenario.  These capabilities are described in previous sections of this paper under MEL, ESG and SEDRIS. 4. ConclusionUsing a philosophy of phased technology development culminating in periodic proof-of-concept end-to-end demonstrations, the INE Program will develop and demonstrate the technologies required to implement the INE Strategy. The development of Integrated Natural Environmental representation technologies continues to be a focus of the DMSO Program.Author NoteMaterial used in the preparation of this paper include:Internal INE Program DocumentsDraft INE StrategyAuthor BiographiesJUAN A. PEREZ is the Program Manager for Integrated Natural Environment at the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office.  Prior to this assignment he served in a number of positions at the U.S. Army Topographic Engineering Center.  His technical areas of specialization include Modeling and Simulation Terrain Data Base generation, Digital Topographic Data Standards and Requirements development, Analytical Photogrammetry, and Remote Sensing. John Hughes is the Deputy Program Manager for Integrated Natural Environment. He also supports the program and plans integration activities at DMSO. He has previously supported other various DMSO natural environmental representation activities and has provided support for the M&S S&T portion of the DoD wide Reliance S&T planning process.