ATV System ValidationUsing a Distributed Simulation FacilityDaniel Michel, Daniel Claude, François DubucAEROSPATIALE MATRA Lanceurs Stratégiques et SpatiauxPhone: +33 (1) 39 06 25 98, Fax : +33 (1) 39 06 11 74, E-mail: { daniel.michel, daniel.claude,  LIENHYPERTEXTE mailto:francois.dubuc}@espace.aerospatiale.fr francois.dubuc}@lanceurs.aeromatra.comPeter Shlyaev, Alexander VankovD3 Group GmbHPhone: +49 2225 911 255, Fax: +49 2225 911 256 E-mail: { Peter.Shlyaev,  LIENHYPERTEXTE mailto:Alexander.Vankov}@d3group.com Alexander.Vankov}@d3group.comKeywords:HLA, Surrogate, T&E, Space system validation, ATV, ISS, Milbus 1553, ATM, QoS ABSTRACT: Aerospatiale-Matra Lanceurs (AML) as a prime contractor is  responsible for the validation of the Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV), a spacecraft which shall dock in 2003 to the International Space Station (ISS). During different validation phases, the ATV subsystems will be stressed in order to test their correct operational behaviour, but also to validate any possible worst case scenario. Therefore several sophisticated functional simulation facilities will be involved, some of which are located in various European countries.In 1998, the ATV-DSD (Automated Transfer Vehicle- Distributed Simulation Demonstration) project demonstrated the ability to connect different simulation facilities and test benches through high speed ATM networks within Europe[1,2]. This present paper will present the EDISON project, an initiative implementing a distributed environment based on the HLA and interfacing those test facilities. EDISON (European Distributed Interactive Simulation Over Network) is a project funded by the European Commission (ESPRIT 26347)  involving nine companies and research laboratories.The challenge of the EDISON project is to use the same generic kernel for distributed federations addressing three different simulation paradigms: HardWare In the Loop validation testing, Man In the Loop training simulations, and NUMerical model computations. This paper will focus on the HWIL domain, and present how the EDISON infrastructure enables closed loop testing with real-time performances. After the overall presentation of EDISON, results from the test campaigns based on RTI 1.3v5 will be presented as well as the lessons learned through the project.	Space Systems ValidationThe ATV SpacecraftThe ATV is an unmanned spacecraft developed by the ESA (European Space Agency), to be launched by Ariane-5. It has three main mission goals: to deliver freight (food,  propellant, components and others) to the ISS, to re-boost the station and to take away any waste from the station [3]. In order to fulfil these tasks it has to dock and to de-dock from the station. Its maiden flight is currently scheduled for end 2003, and the probable flight rate is approximately one per year, or per 2 years.The Rendez-VousSensor (RVS)The current specification [4] of the ATV spacecraft includes an optical sensor for the final phase (250 last meters) of the spacecraft’s rendezvous and docking to the ISS. The laser based RendezVous Sensor (RVS) is used to measure the relative dynamics (relative position and attitude with their derivatives in time). Figure  NUMAUTO : The ATV Spacecraft will dock to the International Space Station by end 2003It comprises a sensor head, which scans its field of view by deviating a laser beam using two oscillating mirrors. Laser reflectors mounted on the ISS in a well-known asymmetric shape will send the beam back to the RVS camera. The analysis of the reflected target pattern will provide estimates of the required motion states. The measured data are communicated through a MIL-1553 bus to the on-board computer called FTC (a redundant Fault Tolerant Computer). The RVS is operating at a frequency of 2 Hz, and provides an updated measurement each 500 ms upon request of the FTC which acts as the Milbus controller.Figure  NUMAUTO : The RendezVous Sensor scans its field of view to determine the relative motion state of the ATV wrt ISS ATV-FSF - Functional Simulation FacilitiesThe validation of space systems cannot allow a single failure to occur in the final product as the effort and costs spend on each space mission are very high. Unlike other industrial complex systems in which the validation process often boils down to a life trial an error method, the validation of space systems cannot be done by progressively extending the flight domain. The first flight will immediately face its entire operational environment, and anyone of the possible worst-case scenarios.Prime contractors of such systems use Functional Simulation Facilities (FSF) in order to ensure the proper integration of the components, and to validate the whole system for all flight phases compared to its operational requirements in terms of accuracy, safety, reliability, etc. A FSF is a platform including all the real electric (and sometimes also hydraulic or fluidic) equipment, their links (real cables, wires, data buses, etc) and their real software running on the real hardware. Powerful real-time simulators will close the loop between the commands sent to the actuators and measurements received from the sensors; e.g. the thruster commands will be used to compute the dynamics of the system according propulsion, gravitational, aerodynamic, structural, etc. behaviours in order to generate the responses that would be measured by the accelerators and gyrometers of the IRS (Inertial Reference System).The main concern of such simulation facilities is to put the maximum of the real flight equipment in a representative environment, while still allowing to introduce all the possible failures or contingency scenarios at anytime. High level of technology involved in FSF, its size and complexity usually lead to expensive infrastructures.Figure  NUMAUTO : The ARIANE-5 FSF in its buildingEPOS – European Proximity Operations SimulatorFor the validation of the rendezvous and docking of the ATV to the ISS, a dedicated simulation facility named EPOS -European Proximity Operations Simulator- has been constructed. The EPOS simulation facility located at DLR (Oberpfaffenhofen, Germany) comprises a gantry robot carrying a 3 degree of freedom (DoF) moving table that simulates the dynamic behavior of the ATV on which the real RVS is mounted. On another fixed 3-DoF table the ISS laser reflectors are mounted. The control/command of the EPOS robotic systems allows the user to reproduce the relative position, attitude and velocities of the 2 space vehicles during the last 10 meters of their rendezvous manoeuvre.In addition to the kinematics the optical environment is reproduced with high fidelity thanks to a controlled illumination system that simulates the sun, moon, etc when they either directly hit the RVS or their light is reflected by solar arrays or thermal insulation cover.Figure  NUMAUTO : The RendezVous sensor (RVS) is mounted on EPOS, a gantry robot simulating the relative motion of the ATV with respect to the ISS.Closed loop testingIn order to demonstrate that the rendezvous and docking system meets all its requirements and to validate the ATV system, the highest level of fidelity is required. Consequently the FAS (Flight Application Software) including the GNC algorithms (Guidance, Navigation and Control) shall run in real-time on the real FTC while real RVS optically stressed on EPOS will provide its measurements via real MIL-1553 bus. The EPOS motion shall be controlled in real time by the ATV-FSF, as its other sub-components, based on a common simulation paradigm.As the ATV-FSF facility will be installed in 2001 at Les Mureaux in AML premises in the vicinity of Paris, and the EPOS facility already stands in Germany in the vicinity of Munich, a remote link between these facilities would avoid the necessity of transportation or the duplication of one of them.Thus, a distributed system could be built to remotely interconnect those two simulation facilities. The distributed architecture must be as valid as if both simulation facilities would be present in the same location. The geographical distribution basically cuts the close-loop simulation and consequently introduces additional delays and possible errors. It is essential to minimize these errors down to a certain limit, in order to get the same ATV trajectory and behaviour as the one we would get in a unique centralized test facility.The closed-loop simulation for the validation of the rendezvous and docking scenario consists of following 7 steps described in the following table:Figure  NUMAUTO : ATV closed loop involving FTC-Fault Tolerant Computer and RVS-Rendez-Vous Sensor Step LocationDescription1FTCThe on-board computer performs all Guidance, Navigation & Control (GNC) calculations and computes the thrusters commands21553 data These commands are sent to the PDE (Propulsion Drive Electronics) via the 1553 bus. The FSF receives these data. 3FSFThe FSF computes the resulting ATV-ISS relative position, attitude and motion. The FSF prepares the resulting EPOS commands.4Ethernet data The EPOS commands are sent to EPOS according to a client/server protocol.5EPOSEPOS performs its motion simulating the ATV-ISS dynamics, and generates optical conditions for the RVS.6RVSThe RVS moves with EPOS, it records the ISS target pattern, and computes the relative position, attitude and velocities.71553 data The RVS sends its measurements to the FTC via the MIL-1553 bus.The data which have to be distributed on the wide area network are first the command messages sent to EPOS in one way, and second the RVS measurements sent to the FSF on the way back. The ATV system validation ArchitectureThe two facilities: ATV-FSF and EPOS are exchanging information through three types of communication channels:A MIL-1553 bus supporting operational data exchange between the FTC and the RVS. This bus is a part of the global ATV system bus, and is linked to other ATV equipment such as PDE and GPS. FTC acts as the Bus Controller and implements a deterministic protocol (SPT) customized for ATV.An Ethernet connection supporting the supervision data exchange between the FSF and the EPOS test benches. The FSF acts as a client of the EPOS TCP/IP server.Moreover, the FSF and EPOS respective operator teams also directly communicate together, as they are supposed to be in the same room, or at least in the same building.Figure 7.: The facilities to be connected for the ATV validationThe challenge of EDISON is to support the geographical distribution of these facilities in a closed loop and in real time. One of the key concept to implement the geographical distribution is the ‘surrogate’ that :replaces locally the remote component,communicates with the remote component,respects exactly the same HW and SW interface and behaves exactly as the replaced component would do,gives to the simulator or to the operator the impression that he communicates directly with the other one(s), as in a centralized manner, by compensating possible perturbations involved by the distribution. So, the purpose of a surrogate is to give to a local node exactly the same capabilities as those of the centralized simulation, by hiding the distributionFigure  NUMAUTO : The distributed configuration using EDISONEDISON ArchitectureThe following figure explains how EDISON kernel is interfaced to the specific application paradigms, and how open it is for additional applications and simulation frameworks.Figure  NUMAUTO : The EDISON architectureThe EDISON generic kernel is a layered infrastructure composed of the following generic components: a middleware, a communication framework, groupware tools, a supervisor and a virtual reality framework.MiddlewareThe middleware contains the vital primitives and services necessary to cache the network layer (including network latencies and jitters), such as time management, intelligent distribution (Basic Object Model library), extrapolation and prediction mechanisms (Dead Reckoning library), etc.High Level Architecture (HLA) technology has been preferred to other solutions to ensure better data distribution and filtering, as well as object and time management. This choice is not only due to the technical adequacy of the HLA capabilities to the EDISON requirements, but also to the ongoing standardization process of the HLA. EDISON currently uses the DMSO Run Time Infrastructure (RTI) 1.3v5 as an HLA implementation [5]. Communication frameworkThe communication framework provides network management, Quality of Service (QoS) differentiation and security features when needed. The Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) has been selected as the network technology able to provide the highest requirements of QoS. In other cases with lower requirements, ISDN could also be used as a cheaper solution.Generally speaking, three data flows need to be exchanged with different QoS and security requirements: simulation data with the highest QoS (no cell lost, very small latency, bandwidth depending on the application), supervision data with medium QoS (no cell lost, limited latency constraint, generally small bandwidth), groupware data with the lowest QoS (no severe constraint on cell lost and latency, high bandwidth). EDISON manages the QoS either at IP level by means of routers with 'diffserv' mechanisms (from IPv6 standard) in its version 2 or at ATM level by Virtual Path (VP) differentiation in its current version.GroupwareThe Groupware enables collaborative working among distant teams for both simulation and supervision functions. It could also allow the visualization of the remote simulation platform. It is based on MBONE tools and provides the following features:Video conference,Tele-visualization,Audio conference, White board, Application & data sharing.SupervisorThe supervisor is in charge of starting, controlling and monitoring a distributed session. In particular, it provides the status of each federate involved in the simulation and of the whole operating environment by means of Management Object Model (MOM) data.The supervisor also includes a network-monitoring feature based on the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP). This is shared among the connected users and represents the network status on a synoptic display. Such a feature indicates which links are operative and which are not, which simulation nodes are online and which are offline. It also includes a command feature, which lets the user to configure the connected links, and a debugging feature, which helps the user diagnosing the problems occurred during the session.In EDISON Version 2 it will also drive the synchronisation process based on NTP software.Virtual Reality FrameworkThe Virtual Reality (VR) Framework provides EDISON with all those capabilities needed to obtain Audio & Video (2D and 3D) rendering tools in order to implement suitable representations of predefined/selected simulation data/variables. This Framework provides the virtual reality operator with a virtual view on the simulation results, and in some cases it permits to get a dynamic feedback from him.  Networking InfrastructureTopologyConsidering the particular ATV and EPOS dynamics, the following technical performances have been selected:The end-to-end transmission of simulation and supervision data (1553 and Ethernet busses) between ATV-FSF and EPOS, and between FTC and RVS equipment, shall respect:Round Trip Time (RTT) < 50 msBit Error Rate (BER) < 10-10Bandwidth = 500 kbit/sThe groupware data flow shall be sent independently of the previous simulation data flow, with the following characteristics:RTT < 300 msBER < 10-6Bandwidth = 1000 kbit/sThe network topology used for the experimentation is described on the following diagram. It consists of one ATM Virtual Path opened between AEROSPATIALE and DLR in which two independent Virtual Channels have been set with Quality of Service CBR (Constant Bit Rate). For the simulation data flow, the VC 120 has been used with a traffic shaping set to 531 kbps, for the groupware data flow, the VC 130 has been used with a traffic shaping set to 1062 kbps.Figure  NUMAUTO : Network topology used for the experimentationSynchronization IssueAll the different platforms running simulation federates have been synchronized using the NTP (Network Time Protocol) synchronization tools [6]. The achieved synchronization was better than 1 millisecond between the SGI Octane workstations, and around 10 milliseconds on the PCs running Windows NT. The accuracy of the synchronization is critical in this distributed application as the synchronization of the loop must not be affected by the distribution.EPOS provides the time reference, but unfortunately can not be modified to act as time-server for the NTP software. We measured very accurately the time reference of EPOS, its drift compared to the wall clock time was 115 ms/hour. One SGI/Octane workstation has been set to this frequency using the TIMETRIM system variable. All other workstations in our system have then been synchronized on that SGI/Octane using NTP. The resulting time drift was close enough to the drift of EPOS to allow for distributed simulations during one hour.Network monitoringDuring the simulations the network could be monitored to evaluate its stability and availability of the network.Max In: 550.6 kbit/s (0.4%) 	   Average In: 144.1 kbit/s (0.1%)   Current In: 313.7 kbit/s (0.2%) Max Out: 554.5 kbit/s (0.4%)  Average Out: 92.1 kbit/s (0.1%)   Current Out: 430.9 kbit/s (0.3%) Figure  NUMAUTO : Network monitoring with the MRTG toolThe previous plot has been obtained using the Multi Router Traffic Grapher (MRTG), a tool to monitor the traffic load on network-links [7]. According to AML security rules, the network is automatically switched off between 6:00PM and 8:00AM.The average round trip time provided by ‘ping’ tests is 39 ms, which gives about 20 ms one way between Aerospatiale facility in Paris and EPOS facility in Munich. At first sight this delay of 20 ms is rather big for an ATM network connecting two cities distant of about 1000 km. However the network we used was not a 155 Mpbs backbone network from end to end, it used also E1 lines (2 Mbps), crossed several networks, and does not join in straight line from Paris to Munich.Description of the test campaignApproachSeveral test campaigns have been conducted between AML in France and the EPOS infrastructure at DLR in Germany. The following configuration has been used for these tests:Figure  NUMAUTO : Either the real EPOS or a simulator of it (Proto EPOS) is used to test and measured the chainThe test campaigns have been run in three steps:Step 1-Validation of the communication link: the actual simulation facilities are replaced by protos that act as traffic loggers and traffic generators. This step enables to measure the performance of the overall transmission chain using traffic profile as close as possible to the final exercise.Step 2 Validation of the application: the real EPOS facility is directly connected to the FSF proto as the real ATV-FSF does not exist yet. This step, in turn can be decomposed in two phases, first only the computer system controlling EPOS is connected; this phase permits to validate the integrity of the messages received and their timing (indeed if the data would be corrupted either in time or content, the EPOS could not move). Only when this first phase yields positive results, the real EPOS is turned on and moves accordingly.Step 3-Global validation: the real EPOS is controlled in a distributed mode by the FSF proto from AML using the EDISON environment (WAN+Middleware) qualified in step#1.As neither the real FTC nor the real RVS were available for these tests, the proto approach was used for the 1553 chain.Step 2 and 3 : Simulation with the real EPOS –presentation of the scenariosScenario #1 : 'EPOS characterization'In this scenario, EPOS moves simultaneously along of  all its axes according to sinusoidal commands on every axis. This is not representative of a space mission, but allows for characterizing EPOS by stressing every part with a quite deterministic behaviour. The duration is typically  20 minutes.Figure  NUMAUTO : Input trajectory for the scenario1Scenario #2 : 'ATV-ISS RendezVous and Docking'In this scenario, the EPOS moves according to a typical final rendezvous trajectory: the ATV slowly approaches the ISS target, guided by means of the RVS measurement. The duration is 5 minutes.Figure  NUMAUTO : Input trajectory for the scenario 2Tests with EPOS - resultsEthernet chain results The following typical parameters were measured during the local and distributed sesions.The latency indicates the end to end delay from FSF to EPOS facilitiesThe dataflow indicates the average bandwidth really used, only 4 times 450 bytes packets/s are exchanged.The reliability indicates the percentage of data correctly transmitted.The availability indicates the percentage of exercises successfully performed from the beginning until the end.The following 2 figures show the ATV trajectory [Y(X), Z(X)] measured on the local and distributed platforms during the scenario #2. Each figure contains 3 curves:Curve 1 : the reference trajectory commanded to EPOS,Curve 2 : the real EPOS trajectory, measured on the local platform (Step#2 without EDISON),Curve 3 : the real EPOS trajectory, measured on the distributed platform (Step#3 with EDISON).This figure shows that the different curves are very close.Then, the next figure shows a zoom in Y(X), in order to highlight the non-significant trajectory differences between local and distributed modes.Figure  NUMAUTO : Output trajectories for the scenario #2The trajectories measured by EPOS are very closed to the command, both in local and in distributed mode. The trajectory differences between these modes are really not significant, as the maximum distance between the trajectories is 0.1mm (to be compared with the accuracy of the measurement).Milbus 1553 chain results The geographical distribution of the 1553 chain through EDISON is today not reliable and can introduce an additional delay between 0,5s and 2s that is not compliant with the system requirements.Such poor results for the Milbus chain are due to insufficient quality of the driver delivered by SBS the manufacturer of the 1553 boards. We had to move to SGI IRIX 6.5 because of Y2K, and unfortunately SBS driver for this revision of IRIX is not matured and contains a serious bug. This bug prevents from correctly handling (in the host) of the interruption generated by the 1553 board when a new data has arrived. It has been estimated that with good driver, the same performance as for the Ethernet chain could be achieved.Lessons learnedThe experiment leads to the following major conclusions:Real-Time interaction of HWIL facilitiesEDISON allows interconnecting the ATV-FSF in France with the EPOS facility in Germany. The ATV-FSF is able to remotely control EPOS in real-time, and to get back the RVS measurement for closing the simulation loop. EDISON is globally in line with the expectations and can be used for ATV validation process. SynchronisationEDISON permits to synchronise all the machines participating in a distributed exercise with an accuracy of 1ms, assuming that these machines have a stable clock and a near real time operating systems.Latency The geographical distribution through EDISON introduces an additional delay of around 50ms that can easily be compensated by the Dead Reckoning if necessary. This delay is comprised of:The 20 ms latency of the WAN between AML and DLR with a jitter of 0,1ms. This low latency and low jitter is due to the high quality of the ATM services. The transfer time depending of the size of the message and the bandwidth used, typically 10 ms for 450 bytes (without protocol overhead) message and 500 Kbps virtual channel.The delay introduced by middleware (RTI+surrogate) that mainly depends on the processing achieved and the CPU load.Collaborative workingEDISON allows for collaborative working between French and German engineers during the ATV validation process. Nevertheless, working in a distributed way is not always straightforward, especially for novice users. A few hours of practice could be necessary before finding the same easiness as for usual work with local working colleagues. Furthermore the reliability of Mbone tools on PC/NT is not yet acceptable for an industrial use.One camera was mounted on the EPOS side by side with the RVS, while another one was shooting the whole scene so that remote operators got a very good and comprehensive visibility of the exercise in progress.Provide it becomes more user friendly for naive users and its reliability is improved, groupware is very efficient. But previously knowing the people with whom you work and perform the test campaign is always a plus.SupervisionThe control and the monitoring of a distributed exercise (network, synchronisation, simulation, EDISON itself) is rather complex with the current version of the EDISON supervisor and requires a lot of various and manual steps to start, stop and check every components. For instance, the warm-up and monitoring of an ATM international virtual channel is not straightforward as this technology is not completely plug-and-play in Europe. Many interactions with the different telecom providers are often necessary.For future industrial use, the control and monitoring processes must be simplified and become more user-friendly.Economical aspectNevertheless, this technical feasibility has to be correlated and consolidated with an economical analysis. In fact, there are several ways to perform the system validation of the ATV-ISS rendezvous phase:The transportation of the ATV-FSF to DLR could be the cheapest way, but it unfortunately monopolizes the resources during critical periods. This approach does not offer any flexibility, the scheduling of the validation runs can not be easily changed according to last minute issues (additional run after bug fixing).The duplication of the ATV-FSF or EPOS is a rather expensive solution because some of the equipment are unique. Furthermore this approach also requires the duplication of the related support teamFinally, the distributed approach could be an attractive option, which could be financially advantageous (compared to a duplication of the FSF), and more flexible from an operational point of view.How to assess the interest of distributed simulation for system validationThe following figure illustrates how to analyze the opportunity of distributed simulation for system validation.Figure  NUMAUTO : Distributed system validation feasibility analysisFirst, the dynamics and hardware constraints of the system under test must be carefully analysed, in order to establish the technical feasibility of a Distributed Functional Simulation Facility according to the state-of-the-art technologies identified in EDISON.The additional costs involved by the distribution:Study cost for the whole life-cycle of the distributed FSF (feasibility, definition, design, development, validation, operation and maintenance)Cost of the network depending on the required QoSCost of the components to be procured: network equipment, workstations, HW interfaces, simulation framework, etcCost of the EDISON services and possible adaptations (e.g. surrogate, supervisor)In addition to the non-duplication or non-transportation of some components, other elements may be of significant importance, or even more critical. Among the drivers which are sometimes difficult to evaluate, the following shall be carefully considered:schedule flexibility of the solution, especially in front of contingencies, early or late modifications, availability of the crucial equipment, etc.quasi-simultaneous usage of the System Under Test for different test tasks,the experts involved in the tests remain available for supporting other test facilities, instead of being awaymore realistic validations, due to an easier access to the real components in their dedicated test environment,shorter validation time by involving sooner the best specialists (i.e., the manufacturers themselves) for given sub-systemspreservation of the know-how of the participating partners, no need to provide a copy of your system to foreign premisesConclusionsThe experiments clearly demonstrate that it is technically possible to perform the system validation of the ATV-ISS rendezvous phase by using the EDISON to remotely link ATV-FSF and EPOS facilities. The same generic kernel of EDISON version 1 [8] is qualified and also used for NUM and MIL applications [9].Nevertheless, we fully agree with one of the main lessons learned stated by JADS [10], that the use of Distributed Simulation Facility is not yet a 'Plug and Play' exercise. It requires the active contribution of several specialists to analyse on a case-by-case basis the technical feasibility and then to implement and support the enabling technologies. The EDISON is an attempt to rationalise and industrialise this process by providing re-usable components encapsulating some technologies such as the middleware, supervisor, surrogate, etcAcknowledgmentsEDISON is an European Community ESPRIT project (26347), and is part of the HPCN (High Performance Computing and Networking) domain. The support of the European Commission is gratefully acknowledged.REFERENCES[1] ATV-DSD documentation: http://www-ks.rus.uni-stuttgart.de/ATV-DSD[2] Distributed Space Systems Validation, D. Michel, D. Claude – 98F-SIW-044, Orlando Sept. 98. [3] SSP 50129 ATV/ISS Interface Requirements Document - Issue 1, 03 March 1997[4] AS-TN-1001 Main Characteristics of the Vehicle - Issue 1, Revision A, 11 February 97[5] HLA reference documentation LIENHYPERTEXTE http://www.dmso.mil/projects/hla; http://www.dmso.mil/projects/hla;  LIENHYPERTEXTE http://www.dmso.mil/projects/hla; http://www.sisostds.org [6] Network Time Protocol, RFC-1305, http://www.eecis.udel.edu/~ntp/database[7] The Multi Router Traffic Grapher (MRTG) tool documentation LIENHYPERTEXTE "http://www.ee.ethz.ch/stats/mrtg/"http://www.ee.ethz.ch/stats/mrtg/ [8] EDISON documentation: http://cec.to.alespazio.it/EDISON[9] Spacecraft Operator Training Using Infrastructure Developed in Edison Project, P. Shlyaev, A. Vankov, D. Michel, D. Claude, F. Dubuc, L. Arguello  00 S-SIW-016 Orlando, March 2000. [10] JADS Joint Advanced Distributed Simulationshttp://www.jads.mil/Author BiographiesDANIEL MICHEL is a systems engineer at AEROSPATIALE-MATRA Lanceurs, France. He graduated both from Supélec (Paris), and from the Imperial College of Science (London). He was actively involved in distributed simulations during the 5 last years. FRANCOIS DUBUC is a the EDISON project manager within the Electrical Ground Systems Engineering Department of AEROSPATIALE-MATRA Lanceurs. He graduated both from ENSERG (Electronics) and ENSIMAG (Mathematics and Computer Science) in 1991. He has over 8 years experience in software engineering and international projects management, he  manages Distributed Simulation projects for 3 years.. DANIEL CLAUDE is the deputy manager of the Electrical Ground Systems Engineering Department of AEROSPATIALE-MATRA Lanceurs. AML is Prime Contractor for nuclear submarine strategic missile and Industrial Architect for the ARIANE launcher family. Daniel Claude graduated from Sup’Aero (1970) and INSEAD (1990), he is directly involved in distributed simulation activities for more than 5 years.PETER SHLYAEV is the technical manager at D3 Group GmbH.   He has over 6 years research experience in simulation, information technology and computer science. He participated in several large international projects in the area of distributed interactive simulation and operator training, where he was responsible for the development of some critical middleware components and participated in integration of training facilities. ALEXANDER VANKOV is the business development manager of D3 Group GmbH. Before joining D3 Group he worked at the Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center for over 18 years and was involved in all major Russian manned aerospace programs doing research activities in the areas of vehicle guidance and control systems, man-in-the-loop simulation, in-flight simulators, distributed simulation. 