Interim Report Out of the C4I Study GroupJoseph LaceteraMonmouth Science and Technology, Inc.PMB 180, 328 South Main StreetBel Air,  MD  21014 HYPERLINK mailto:lacetera@msti-b.com lacetera@msti-b.com(443) 253-9060Don TimianSterling Software, Inc.Applied Systems Division5205 Leesburg Pike, Suite 1200Falls Church, VA   22041-3800(703) 824-4020 HYPERLINK mailto:don.timian@falls-church.sterling.com don.timian@falls-church.sterling.comKeywords:Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I), High Level Architecture (HLA), Joint Technical Architecture (JTA), Modeling and Simulation (M&S), M&S-to-C4I Federation Object Models (FOMs), M&S-to-C4I Interoperability, M&S-to-C4I Technical Reference Model (TRM), Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) Implementation Study Group (SG), and SG-C4IABSTRACT:  Simulation interfaces to Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I) systems are essential to support Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA); the development of Doctrine, Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (DTTP); “Train as you fight;” Embedded Training (both individual and collective); Course of Action Development and Analysis, Mission Preview and Rehearsal; and Execution Monitoring.  Model and Simulation (M&S) systems have standardized on certain protocols and architectures for interoperability, such as the High Level Architecture (HLA).  Within the Department of Defense (DoD), the C4I community is also moving to standardize on the Joint Technical Architecture (JTA) and the Defense Information Infrastructure Common Operating Environment (DII COE).  These interoperability efforts, as well as efforts within the DoD and the international community to standardize message formats and develop common M&S and C4I data models may – if the appropriate standards are identified and developed – significantly enhance efforts to link M&S and C4I systems.In order to assess “where we are and where we need to go” the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) has commissioned a Study Group – C4I (SG-C4I) to:  1) provide background and current information on C4I and simulation interoperability efforts; 2) provide a standards based assessment of past and current interoperability efforts; and 3) make recommendations on how the SISO C4I Forum should proceed with standards development activities.  This paper is an interim report of the efforts of the SG-C4I and will describe the SG’s structure, goals, and delivery date for the final report, as well as a briefly describe the SG’s vision and a proposed M&S-to-C4I Technical Reference Model (TRM).  While the authors have collated submissions and edited this report, in truth it is the result of more than a dozen direct contributions in the form of draft sections and the indirect contributions of the more than one hundred subscribers to the SG-C4I reflector.1.	Introduction“The Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization is dedicated to the promotion of modeling and simulation interoperability and reuse for the benefit of diverse M&S communities, including developers, procurers, and users, world-wide” [15].  Through the Simulation Interoperability Workshops (SIW), SISO provides a forum for the interchange of new ideas and concepts across a broad M&S community and lays the groundwork for subsequent standards development.  As an intermediate step between the papers presented at the semi-annual workshops and actual standards development, SISO charters Study Groups (SGs)to  look at specific M&S issues that may ultimately bear on the development of standards.  A key issue for the Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I) community is the interoperability between live or real C4I  systems and simulations.  To address this issue, SISO has commissioned a SG for C4I-to-Simulation Interoperability (SG-C4I).  This paper is an interim report of the efforts of the SG-C4I and will describe the SG’s structure, goals, and delivery date for the final report, as well as a briefly describe the SG’s vision and a proposed M&S-to-C4I Technical Reference Model (TRM).2.	Background and IssuesMotivation for improving the interoperability between simulations and live C4I and Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) systems include:Simulation Based Acquisition (i.e., Requirements Development and Analysis, Testing, and Training)Development of Doctrine and Tactics Techniques, and Procedures (DTTP)Train as you fight;Embedded Training (both individual and collective)Course of Action Development and AnalysisMission Preview and Rehearsal; and Execution MonitoringThe Department of Defense (DoD) has undertaken efforts to link – via the High Level Architecture (HLA) – C4I systems to simulations.  For example, the Army has an ongoing project to draft a Capstone Requirements Document for a Simulation-to-C4I Interface (SIMCI) that will define the ”high level interface requirements for simulations (tactical, training, analytical, and testing) that will interact with C4I systems of the future” [11].However, while the M&S community is moving on a path towards standardizing interfaces on emerging HLA approaches, the DoD C4I community is moving to standardize on the Joint Technical Architecture (JTA) [8] and the Defense Information Infrastructure Common Operating Environment (DII COE) [3].  As noted in Flournoy [4], Hieb and Staver [6], and Ressler et al [13], over the last decade, uncoordinated standards for M&S-to-C4I interoperability have been and are currently being developed by both communities.  In addition, Flournoy [4] also discusses the implications of these efforts on M&S-to-C4I interoperability and states that standardization, occurring within both communities, raises hopes that the number of M&S-to-C4I interoperability needs can be reduced to a handful of connection solutions at the infrastructure level between the COE and HLA-compliant Run Time Infrastructures (RTI).3.	SG-C4I3.1	SG-C4I StructureThe chair of the C4I Study Group is Joe Lacetera and the vice-chair is Don Timian.  The study group has liaisons assigned from both the Conference Committee and the Standards Activity Committee and various interested forums.   C4I Study Group membership and participation is open to all who wish to contribute.  In addition, a SG reflector (SIW-SG-C4I; http://confs.itcenter.org/listprocedu/View All Mail.cfm? Reflector_ID=243&client=SISO) has been established to help foster dialog between SG members.  And, as with all SISO reflectors, all interested parties are both welcome to subscribe and encouraged to participate.3.2	SG-C4I GoalsThe basic goals of the SG-C4I are to:  1) assess and recommend approaches that will support an appropriate and necessary level of interoperability between C4I systems and HLA-based simulations and 2) deliver a report on the current “state of the art” of M&S-to-C4I interoperability.  Related considerations, which may also be addressed in the final report, include:Migration concepts for legacy systemsTechnical standards for migrationDevelopment of related Reference Federation Object Models (FOMs)Development of a C4ISR Conceptual Model of the Mission Space (CMMS)Relationships between the HLA and JTAInformation modeling concepts to support the Federation Development Process (FEDEP) for C4ISR federationsData standards which can link systems to simulations (e.g., the Command and Control to Simulation Interface Language (CCSIL))Transfer/authentication of data/metadataData coherence issuesEffects of the environment, including communications effects, on C4I systemsIn addition, a categorical bibliography and a partial M&S-to-C4I interoperability lexicon will be included in the report.3.3	SG-C4I Products The SG-C4I will produce a final report at the Fall 2000 SIW.  This report will include:Background and current information on C4I and Simulation interoperability efforts; A standards based assessment of past and current interoperability efforts; and Make recommendations on how the SISO C4I Forum should proceed with standards development activities.In general, the SG plans to make available, to SISO and other interested communities, intermediate products as soon as appropriate.  These products may be in the form of SIW papers or other materials or products – such as M&S-to-C4I FOMs – which will be posted on SG’s SISO web site.4.	VisionOur roadmap for improving the interoperability between simulations and live or real C4I systems is shown in Figure 1 [16] and SG’s vision of a interoperable  M&S-to-C4I  architecture is shown in Figure 2 [20].  In the near term, Figure 1 depicts the current state of the art between legacy with mostly custom “point-to-point” links that are often “black box” in nature.  Simulation control is basically one-way with the simulations initializing the real C4I system data bases.  In the mid term, we expect to see the HLA linking constructive and virtual simulations on the simulation side and, via common components found in C4I systems (e.g., the DII COE Common Message Processor), the HLA also allowing simulations and C4I systems to exchange both data and messages.  Simulation initialization will be two-way with real system databases providing information to the simulation side.  Ultimately, we expect to have full two-way via common databases, thus achieving a measure of seamless interoperability.  As one would expect, Figure 1 articulates a broad vision of where we want to go over time.  In it, the Far Term is not an end state, but “is where we could be in 2004 to 2007, if we [the M&S and C4I communities] articulate our [joint] requirements and develop coordinated architectures and standards” [7].  The figure is also not meant to imply that C4I systems have not been linked to with live components (i.e., tanks and infantry fighting vehicles), but that it is only in the far term that we expect “to see substantial progress in constructing common   interfaces to live equipment such as weapons platforms” [7].Finally, Figure 2 [20] depicts our vision of an interoperable M&S and C4I architecture where interoperability is based on a common conceptual reference model accommodating common mediation techniques and shared data and object models, all linked via a common information management process providing common solutions for the C4I and simulation community.5.	Toward a Technical Reference Model (TRM)Hieb and Staver [6] and Ressler [13] have discussed the information that an ideal interface must handle and the different types of information that need to be standardized.  They describe the bi-directional flow of data between a simulation and a C4I system where the function of the interface is to both control the information flow between the C4I system and the simulation and to align the information among the systems so that the it is received in either the simulation’s or the C4I system’s native format (See Figure 3).At both the SG’s August 1999 and January 2000 meetings, as well as the SG’s meeting at the Fall 1999 SIW, the TRM was discussed.  While it is too early to state what recommendations will in the final report, nonetheless – within the SG – there is almost a unanimous consensus that an updated version of M&S-to-C4I TRM will be included in the report.I6.	Summary and ConclusionsA key task for the M&S community is to link with live or real C4I systems.  Within the C4I community there is a similar pressing need to link C4I equipment with simulations.  And, as one would expect given the somewhat “stovepipe” nature of the two domains, up to this time C4I-to-simulation interoperability has been pursued separately by both the C4I and M&S communities.  However, recent work promises the cooperation of these communities in developing a unified approach to linking simulations and C4I systems.Figure 1 – The Road Ahead – articulates a strategy that the M&S and C4I communities must jointly execute in order to achieve near seamless M&S-to-C4I interoperability.  The primary task for the SISO SG-C4I is not to recommend to SISO potential standards, but to articulate what M&S-to-C4I interoperability is and to identify possible areas for joint investigation, by both the C4I and M&S communities, that may result in standards applicable to both domains.7.	References [1]	ATCCIS Working Paper 5-5 Draft 1.0:  ATCCIS Battlefield Generic Hub 3 Data Model Specification, ATCCIS Permanent Working Group, SHAPE, Belgien, 30. November 1996. [2]	Blalock, J. and Hieb, M.R.:  “Data Alignment between Army C4I Databases and Army Simulations,” Paper 99S-IW-034, 1999 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1999. [3]	Defense Information Infrastructure (DII COE) Architecture Oversight Charter, Office of the Defense Information Systems Agency, http://spider.osfl.disa.mil/dii/aog_ twg/aog/970122_charter.html, January, 1997. [4]	Flournoy, D.:  “Reconciling Emerging Infrastructure Standards to Promote C2-to-Simulation Interoperability,” Paper 98F-SIW-027, 1998 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1998.[5]	Hieb, M.R.; Cosby, M.; Griggs, L.; McKenzie, F.; Tiernan, T.; and Zeswitz, S.:  “MRCI:  Transcending Barriers between Live Systems and Simulations,” Paper 97S-SIW-197, 1997 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1997. [6]	Hieb, M.R. and  Staver, M.J.:  “The Army’s Approach to Modeling and Simulation Standards For C4I Interfaces,” Paper 98F-SIW-259, 1998 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1998. [7]	Hieb, M.:  private communication on the SG-C4I reflector, 3 February 2000. [8]	Joint Technical Architecture, Version 2.0, Defense Information System Agency, http://www-jta.itsi.disa.mil, 26 May 1998. [9]	Lightner, M.; Schandua, J.; Cutts, D.; and Zeswitz, S.:  “The High Level Architecture Command and Control Experiment – Lessons Learned in Designing an Extended Federation,” Paper 98S-SIW-93, 1998 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1998.[10]	Legaspi, A.:  SG-C4I Final Product Report, draft version 2000-0123, Section 5.2.[11]	Loental, D. and Leath, R.:  Simulation To C4I Interface (SIMCI) Capstone Requirements Document, (Draft), TRADOC Analysis Command, 25 February 1999.[12]	Proceedings of the NATO STUDIES, ANALYSIS AND SIMULATION PANEL (SAS), Symposium on Modelling and Analysis of Command and Control, Paris, France, January 1999.[13]	Ressler, R.; Hieb, M.R.; and Sudnikovich, W.:  “M&S/C4ISR Conceptual Reference Model,” Paper 99F-SIW-060, 1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1999.[14]	Roberts, J.:  SG-C4I Final Product Report, draft version 2000-0123, Section 5.1.[15]	SISO Vision,  HYPERLINK http://www.sisostds.org/doclib/doclib.cfm?SISO_FID_2383 http://www.sisostds.org/ doclib/doclib.cfm?SISO_FID_2383, May 5, 1999.[16]	Staver, M., et al: submission to SG-C4I.[17]	Sudnikovich, W.; Roberts, J.; and Lacetera, J.:  “Implementation of a Prototype C4I FOM,” Paper 99S-SIW-061, 1999 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1999.[18]	Thumin, K.; Clay, B.; Hieb, M.R.; and Cosby, M.:  “Modular Reconfigurable Message Translation:  Translation of Messages Between C4I Systems and Simulations,” Paper 97F-SIW-120, 1997 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1997.[19]	Timian, D.H., Hieb, M.R., Staver, M.J., and Glass, J.:  “Using Standard Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I)  Components to Interface to Simulations,” Paper 99S-SIW-035, 1999 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1999.[20]	Tolk, A.:  “Common Shared Data Environment for C4ISR and Simulation Systems,” Non-Paper Presentation, 1999 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1999.[21]	Tolk, A.:  submission to SG-C4I.Author BiographiesJOE LACETERA is a member of the SISO Conference Committee, is the C4ISR Track Manager and has been involved in distributed simulations since 1989. He has a B. S. in Mathematics and an M. A. in Physics from The Johns Hopkins University and worked 32 years for the U. S. Army, developing mathematics and physics models.  He worked six years for MITRE in support of distributed simulations including developing an HLA Communications Effects Federate and has been employed by Monmouth Science and Technology, Incorporated since 1998.DON TIMIAN is a System Analyst at Sterling Software.  Prior to joint Sterling Software, Mr. Timian served over 20 years in the United States Army.  While in the Army, he served as an Operations Research and Systems Analyst/Simulation Specialist in all three of the Army’s M&S domains; Analytical Concepts and Requirements (ACR), Research Development and Acquisition (RDA), and Training Exercises Military Operations (TEMO).  Just prior to retiring, Mr. Timian was assigned as Deputy, Policy and Technology Division, Army Model and Simulation Office where he helped to develop a pair of prototype interfaces to link M&S and C4I systems via common C4I components.  Mr. Timian’s has a Bachelor of Arts degree in Chemistry from the University of Arizona and a Master of Science degree in Operations Research from Kansas State University.