User-Oriented Systems Engineering for the Navy’s Battle Force Tactical Training (BFTT) Air Management Node (AMN)Craig A. PetersenDavid B. CavittBMH Associates, Inc.5425 Robin Hood Road, Suite 201Norfolk, Virginia 23513-2441. U.S.A.Kim MarshallDigital System Resources, Inc.2697 International PkwyParkway One, Suite 104Virginia Beach, VA  23452Keywords: BFTT, STOW, ATC / AIC TrainingABSTRACT: This paper presents a user-oriented view of the systems engineering process used to develop the U.S. Navy’s Battle Force Tactical Trainer (BFTT) Air Management Node (AMN), a component of the BFTT system used to provide proficiency training for Air Traffic Control (ATC) and Air Intercept Control (AIC). An iterative refinement of end-user training requirements successfully allowed the system to be engineered and developed in the presence of an unusually aggressive delivery schedule, driven by its installation on the U.S.S. Bon Homme Richard (LHD 6) preparing for her maiden cruise deployment. Existing capabilities and limitations of the BFTT system were used to help define some system requirements. However, given the robust STOW modeling and simulation technologies used in the AMN, existing user requirements for shipboard-based ATC/AIC training needed to be redefined and used as the principle factor driving system engineering, the objective being to provide a more realistic synthetic training environment and reduce operator workload as it relates to system configuration and control. This paper presents the AMN systems engineering process from a user-oriented viewpoint and discusses the impact of the AMN concept paper and a user-centric requirements analysis on system component design including the AMN Human Computer Interface (HCI), ATC and AIC modeling requirements, and AMN system control and configuration. The generation and significant use of Functional Description (FD) documents to support the Knowledge Acquisition (KA) process is discussed as well as the methodology for system implementation, testing, and shipboard system orientation and training for BFTT operators. Additionally, the paper outlines the operational and training capabilities of the BFTT AMN and reports on its initial demonstration during shipboard installation, enabling Fleet operators to conduct shipboard ATC and AIC training. This paper presents a useful case study for persons interested in user-oriented systems design and development and the use of formal documentation to drive systems engineering functions.IntroductionThe successful use of distributed simulation technologies by the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) has resulted in a set of evolving standards (DIS and HLA) used to support interoperability and reuse of software components in DoD Modeling and Simulation (M&S) environments. As a result, it is now easier to rapidly design and develop larger-scale, more realistic synthetic environments to augment military training, and support systems Test & Evaluation (T&E), analysis, and acquisition. The capabilities for rapid systems development and requirements for increasingly complex M&S systems frequently result in unreasonable software development schedules that necessitate the use of different techniques for developing system requirements, system engineering, and test and integration. For military training systems, end-user requirements are the most significant factor contributing to a usable system. Time constraints imposed by the schedule can pose problems for users trying to formulate and understand system requirements and specification. One solution to this problem is prototyping to allow users to iteratively experiment with a system to evolve requirements and discover requirements errors or omissions. This technique is especially well suited for development of human-computer interfaces (e.g., graphical user interfaces) where the run-time dynamics of the interfaces are difficult to capture in a specification. Modeling specifications don’t typically require a prototyping methodology, however, development of the specification is still dependent upon user-based requirements analysis to build a credible system.Figure 1 illustrates a software development methodology that incorporates a traditional waterfall process (with iteration) and also uses rapid prototyping to support requirements analysis and system specification. This process model is an extension to the model presented in [1] which provides detailed information on each process block (other than the prototyping) presented in the figure. The military domain requirements are used to define the real world objects and their doctrinal missions that must be represented in the simulation. User domain requirements specify how the simulation will be employed and can be useful for determining simulation fidelity. Simulation domain requirements can describe the functional and non-functional characteristics of the simulation (e.g., architecture, visualization capabilities, external system interfaces, etc.). Simulation domain requirements, object-level requirements, acceptability criteria developed during the KA/E phase of development, and outputs from the rapid prototyping are the basis for development of a system specification or high-level design.This paper presents a case study for the use of the process model presented in Figure 1. The development of the U.S. Navy’s Battle Force Tactical Training (BFTT) Air Management Node (AMN) consisted of extensive prototyping for Human-Computer Interface (HCI) development along with an iterative refinement of end-user training and modeling requirements. This methodology successfully allowed the system to be engineered and developed in the presence of an unusually aggressive delivery schedule, driven by its installation on the U.S.S. Bon Homme Richard (LHD 6) preparing for her maiden cruise deployment. The remainder of this paper discusses the AMN development life-cycle and expounds on the benefits of a user-oriented systems engineering process to build an effective M&S-based military training system.BFTT and the AMNThe U.S. Navy developed the BFTT system to provide shipboard training across the full spectrum of mission scenarios from unit level, small team training (Tier I), to theater level joint training exercises (Tier III). Peacetime constraints have limited the funds available for adequate mission training using live forces and to maintain an adequate level of military readiness, the DoD is exploring the increased use of simulation to support operational training. The principal technical objective of BFTT is to create a network of coordinated training using advanced distributed simulations to stimulate shipboard sensors. The BFTT system provides immediate feedback regarding trainee performance. The implementation of BFTT consists of a collection of hardware and software components used for training scenario generation, stimulation / simulation control, data collection, and performance monitoring. Shipboard and shore-based BFTT networks may be interconnected to provide a larger, WAN-based synthetic battlespace. An important BFTT training capability is Air Traffic Control (ATC). The original ATC capabilities in BFTT had limitations when used for proficiency training. Specifically, the number of simulated aircraft that can effectively stimulate the on-board radar systems for ATC is limited. In the average case, for every trainee, it requires one human trainer to control one computer-generated aircraft. The HCI used by the BFTT trainer to provide close-control of the simulated aircraft is generally considered restrictive, as is the existing simulation’s model fidelity (in the context of ATC training). To address these limitations, Naval Sea Systems Command’s (NAVSEA) Performance Monitoring, Training, and Assessment Program Office (PMS-430), initiated the BFTT Air Management Node (AMN) project.The AMN is designed as a training tool to help keep air controllers proficient with ATC terminology and control procedures. Principle goals in developing the AMN were to improve upon the ATC training capabilities of the BFTT Combat Simulation Test System (CSTS) including an improved HCI to reduce BFTT operator workload, and provide enhanced simulation and modeling capabilities (i.e., fidelity). An additional objective is to initiate a migration path for BFTT using the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office’s (DMSO) High Level Architecture (HLA). To achieve these goals, PMS-430 proposed the use of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Synthetic Theater of War, or STOW, technology. Various technical challenges existed regarding the integration of STOW technology with the BFTT system but doing so provided a more robust and realistic synthetic environment capable of supporting U.S. Navy training requirements [2].The UsersThe initial installation of the AMN was aboard LHD 6, a multi-purpose Amphibious Assault Ship of the Wasp Class. The AMN is required to support procedure and proficiency training for three separate groups of controllers aboard LHD 6: 1) Air Traffic Control (ATC) personnel, 2) Air Intercept Control (AIC) personnel, and 3) Tactical Air Control Squadron (TACRON) personnel.The AMN allows ATC personnel to maintain proficiency by practicing departure and recovery procedures used to launch, land, and control aircraft operating from a ship.  The AMN is able to reduce costs of team training during extended in-port periods by allowing personnel to conduct the same training onboard their own ship, on their own equipment, negating the requirement to travel to a training center.  Another significant benefit is that the AMN allows junior controllers to practice procedures without placing actual aircraft at risk.The AMN allows AIC personnel to maintain their proficiency by allowing them to perform basic intercept procedures using simulated aircraft.  Link-4A two-way communication messages are sent between the operator and the simulated aircraft to enhance training in Data Link Intercepts (DLI). TACRON personnel are able to develop and rehearse air control procedures they would create to support air control management during amphibious operations.AMN is scheduled for installation on other BFTT-equipped ships and is proposed for installation at several shore-based sites such as the Approach and Departure Control facilities at Naval Air Stations, and the Navy’s Air Traffic Control School in Pensacola, Florida.  Rapid Prototyping For HCI RequirementsThe AMN was initially conceived as an HCI improvement to the existing CSTS training program.  The CSTS system is currently installed on the LHD ship class and is a comprehensive training system.  The initial plan in 1997 was to replace CSTS with BFTT.  While BFTT had a more user-friendly Graphical User Interface (GUI) and was able to tie in multi-ship training scenarios, the CSTS system provided training capabilities that BFTT lacked (e.g. Link-11, Link-4, a more robust diagnostics and self testing for the multitude of radar stimulators, stimulation of the SPN-35 and SPN-43 radars, etc.). Thus, the original intent of reengineering ATC training capabilities was to incorporate the useful aspects of CSTS and use BFTT to improve upon existing limitations (e.g., the user interface).  Although some aspects of CSTS modeling were sufficient to meet training requirements, the interface was complex and only allowed control of one aircraft at a time by the trainee.  The existing interface was a dual touch screen (no mouse or keyboard control) with a series of colored buttons that indicated status.  The users had long suffered through attempts at training using this interface. Working with the ATC Amphibious community, a blackboard HCI was prototyped to suit the user and identify system requirements. The prototype was developed using a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet design that enabled the user to control multiple aircraft on multiple frequencies with a minimal amount of actions. There were several iterations of the user community evaluating/reviewing the HCI prototype.  During each review, extensive notes documenting the issues and suggestions were taken.  The users were given an opportunity to work with the HCI to determine what features were usable and what areas needed improvement.  This rapid prototype generation continued for approximately four months.  In July of 1998, the AMN prototype was taken to the ATC schoolhouse in Pensacola, Florida for evaluation during a training exercise.  Tests measured the number of aircraft that could be controlled by the trainer using the HCI and what features were lacking or required improvement.A Navy aircraft was utilized during HCI prototype evaluations.  The pilot of the aircraft was in verbal contact with the ATC personnel using the prototype to provide close-control of the aircraft.  The prototype did not directly provide feedback to the trainee that the requested action (pilot instruction) was recognized and performed. Additionally, the evaluation was complicated by the fact that the trainee did not know the actual position of the aircraft.  However, one significant result of the prototype evaluations was the trainee successfully controlled twenty aircraft on a single frequency, which far exceeded existing CSTS capabilities. Additional prototype evaluation feedback addressed the usability of the HCI.Guidelines were developed during the evaluation and design of the HCI to ensure a robust and usable graphical user interface.  These included:Popup menus with predefined values for 90% of the capabilitiesPopup menus were limited to one level of cascading menus to improve speed on selections.Allow for the operator to enter data from the keyboard if the popup menus are not desired.Tabbing to the next field to avoid the user having to move between the keyboard and mouse between entries.The removal of the requirement to hit the “ENTER” key for any entry on the AMN HCI.  This was a major complaint for the existing BFTT system.Flexibility when providing names for files, frequency data and call signs.The ability to save and recall data (frequency, maneuver and aircraft definitions) from a previous exercise.  The user is prompted to confirm the use of these files the next time the system is initialized but is not required to set up the data for each exercise.Automatic frequency switching for the headset and microphone based on the aircraft under control.  This “hands off” approach is significant when controlling two frequencies simultaneously.As the HCI design was progressively refined, the prototype implementation transitioned from an Excel spreadsheet to a Motif-based interface developed using a GUI generation tool and running on the target hardware platform for the AMN. The generation tool supported successive iterations of prototype evaluation and provided a mechanism to rapidly observe proposed changes to the interface. The Motif-based prototype ultimately provided many reusable software components used in the final HCI implementation. This component reuse is depicted as input to the system design process block shown in Figure 1. Figure 2 illustrates two of the primary operator display windows. The AMN Concept paper referenced in [3] provided preliminary discussion and screen shots of the HCI prototype and provided additional opportunity for  early feedback regarding the usability and functionality if the HCI.Knowledge Acquisition To Meet Modeling RequirementsFrom start to finish, the development of the AMN relied on input, analysis, and feedback from the military community of Navy air controllers.  The group of controllers had extensive and varied professional backgrounds including Amphibious Ship air traffic control, Carrier-based air traffic control, tactical air control, air intercept control, air traffic control equipment experts, as well as instructors and program managers from the ATC community.  As discussed, these personnel were invited to observe and comment on the initial AMN HCI design for aircraft control. Development of the HCI occurred simultaneously with development of the behaviors required for the aircraft simulation.  The Knowledge Acquisition (KA) process used to gather information used in the system specification is graphically depicted in Figure 3.Ideally, an agreed-upon list of requirements by the end user is the basis for the KA/E process and ensuing development life-cycle. It also acts as the standard that the final product is evaluated against.  Care needs to be taken in the development of the requirements analysis to ensure that an adequate cross-section of experts are solicited to guarantee all relevant aspects of the real-world process are addressed in the requirements.  Invariably, as was the case in AMN development, “mission creep” resulted in additional requirements after the fact. For AMN development, this mission creep resulted in an iterative refinement of the requirements, the system specification, and ultimately imposed an incremental delivery schedule based on a prioritized list of training objectives.Given an approved list of initial requirements, the Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) set about the task of gathering the data required to support ongoing development of the HCI and the aircraft behaviors.  This data was primarily obtained from technical manuals related to the ATC domain such as the Carrier Air Traffic Control Center (CATCC) Manual, LHD NATOPS Manual, and various aircraft flight manuals.  Information from the different publications was then collected and incorporated into a series of Functional Description (FD) documents whose purpose is to provide the amount of technical and tactical knowledge necessary to assist developers in designing, implementing, and testing the AMN system. The FDs can be thought of as Cliff Notes for Air Traffic Control. Instructors at the ATC School reviewed each FD for accuracy and completeness. This review process continued throughout the entire life of the AMN development process.The Functional Descriptions developed for AMN included discussions on Approach Procedures, Departure Procedures, Communications, and Tactical Air Navigation (TACAN) Operation.  The FDs also addressed the impact of weather, multi-aircraft formats, emergency procedures, Interrogation Friend or Foe (IFF) procedures, and standard operating procedures when operating from a ship. The FDs are referenced in [4] and Figure 4 provides an illustration of the FD documentation. As stated earlier, whenever possible the FDs were developed using data found in official publications. Each line item of data included the reference publication and page number to make it easier to verify that doctrinally approved data was being used.  If a procedure could not be traced to an official document, the next step was to contact a Navy air traffic controller (preferably an instructor from the ATC school) to get their professional opinion on a procedure.  That information was then noted as “Navy SME input” in the reference section.  As a last resort, civilian SMEs with domain expertise in ATC procedures (both controllers and aircrew) were solicited and their inputs were noted as “Civilian SME input.” With the FDs in hand, the software developers began designing the simulated aircraft behaviors. The FDs also provided guidance for making changes to the HCI design and implementation. Concurrent Systems Engineering and Testing The design and implementation of the AMN made extensive reuse of existing STOW M&S components so a large part of the M&S development focused on designing and implementing various interfaces to support the data flows required for the AMN. Other development tasks focused on integrating the HLA-based M&S federation with the BFTT system.  Detailed information on AMN integration tasks is presented in [2]. The important point is that once the system data flow was understood, it was possible to proceed with the design and implementation of the required interfaces independent of the on-going KA/E and modeling specification tasks, or the HCI prototyping. This resulted in three concurrent systems engineering (development) activities: 1) HCI prototyping and development, 2) aircraft model and behavior development, 3) and simulation and communications infrastructure development. Each activity proceeded independently with scheduled integration events to support the incremental delivery of the AMN system. Each delivery was associated with a software build having well-defined objectives regarding M&S capabilities, system reliability, and usability. The first build, installed on LHD 6 in September of 1999, consisted of a baseline software build that supported ATC training for standard departure and approach procedures.  The second phase added enhancements such as the ability to change destination sites, the ability to modify IFF while airborne, and the incorporation of additional maneuvers.  The third and final phase incorporates formation flying and the ability to join and detach aircraft while airborne.Unit, system, and integration tests were scheduled so as to provide continuous feedback from the user, test, and training communities. Early on, software developers began populating the AMN with aircraft behavior code. A logical approach was needed to test how valid and reliable the code was.  Prior to having the Navy observe and assess the AMN, civilian SMEs linked up with software developers to thoroughly test the system. Initial testing ensured that all aircraft behaved within expected operating parameters for the specific aircraft type.  The next series of tests focused on the ability to create, launch, and land the aircraft as scripted, with little or no operator interaction.  Subsequent to that, tests were performed to verify that aircraft could accept changes to assigned heading, airspeed, altitude, and/or mission while airborne.  Another set of tests was designed to see how many aircraft could be controlled from a theoretical as well as realistic approach.  The number of aircraft being flown was gradually increased until the system suffered crippling failures.  This became the theoretical limit of the system.  Prior to this point, it became obvious that one controller could only control a limited number of aircraft.  This became the realistic limit of the system, and this limit was predicated on the type of mission the aircraft were flying, as well as how much operator interaction was needed.  Throughout the process, attempts were made to extend both of these limits.  Finally, stress tests were conducted to identify software failures and to increase overall system reliability.  Shipboard Integration and TrainingNavy testers ultimately were responsible for ensuring that the AMN was reliable enough to interact with other shipboard systems.  This was determined initially through system testing conducted in a BFTT test lab on a test chassis similar to the shipboard configuration. Extensions to the system development schedule coupled with the LHD 6 deployment schedule meant the shipboard installation, testing, controller training, and maintenance training had to be conducted simultaneously during a one-week period.  Unfortunately, this was not an ideal arrangement as there were too many disparate evolutions occurring simultaneously. Ideally, initial training would be conducted in advance of system installation, and installation and testing would be conducted without any other distractions.  Once testing was accomplished, hands-on training could then take place. Despite the overlap in executing the shipboard integration activities, the AMN installation, test, and training went well. There were some difficulties in terms of system integration however, as the shipboard radars where not fully operational. Because of this, BFTT and the AMN were only able to stimulate a few of the radar systems. Regardless of this, the Navy’s response to the AMN specifically, was favorable.  Using the AMN, the Navy now has an air control training capability far greater than the older CSTS system and the AMN provides a greatly reduced operator workload relative to the increased M&S capabilities. The BFTT AMN has been designed to provide ATC and limited AIC training for CV and LHA/LHD ship types. Aircraft modeling includes all Navy and USMC FWA and RWA relevant to this training environment. Aircraft are capable of simulating controlled departures and approaches and provide in-flight behaviors that include auto-commencing approaches and all voice and standard reports. The AMN provides for speed / heading / altitude changes based on published approach procedures or as directed by Carrier Air Traffic Control Center (CATCC) or Amphibious Air Traffic Control Center (AATCC) controllers. It additionally provides for some emergency behavior training that includes failure to commence approach on time and/or out of position, inoperable IFF, divert, TACAN failure, and delta (change in approach commencement time). Additionally, the AMN supports Link-4A / AIC training by providing the ability to send and receive Link-4A messages via the AMN Server which establishes communications directly with the shipboard combat systems. The previously reference Functional Description (FD) documents provide a basis for the training capabilities provided in the AMN.Summary The AMN was an integral and successful part of the first shipboard installation of the upgraded BFTT system, due in large part to the inclusion of the end-user throughout the development process.  By utilizing the process model presented in this paper, the Navy was better able to identify early on, the desired goals of the system (Requirements Analysis), could ensure that the system behaviors were doctrinally correct (Functional Descriptions), and could verify and validate the final delivered product (Test and Evaluation). AcknowledgementsThis work was sponsored by the Naval Surface Warfare Center, Port Hueneme Division (NSWC-PHD) at Dam Neck, Virginia, under contract N633-94-97-D-2213. The authors would like to acknowledge the collaborative engineering and design contributions of NSWC-PHD, BMH Associates, Inc., Lockheed Martin, and Soar Technologies, Inc.ReferencesHarvey, E.P. 1998. Simulation System Verification and Validation: The Program Management Perspective. In Proc. 1998 Interservice / Industry Training, Simulation, and Education Conference. Cavitt, D.B., M.A. Gibson, B. Dobrydnev, D.S. Bryan, J.J. Berkeley. 1999. Integrating STOW and the Navy’s Battle Force Tactical Training (BFTT) system. In Proc. 1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop. 99S-SIW-191. Marshall, K. 1998. Battle Force Tactical Training (BFTT) Air Control Training Capability Concept Paper for the Integration of the Air Management Node Into BFTT. Draft v1.0, Nov. 1998 for Naval Surface Warfare Center-PHD, Dam Neck Detachment. Battle Force Tactical Training (BFTT) System, Air Management Node (AMN), Functional Description Documents for Approach, Departure, and Communications, Version 1.0, Prepared by BMH Associates, Inc. for Naval Sea Systems Command (NAVSEA) PMS-430, 13 Nov 1998.Authors’ BiographiesCraig A. Petersen is a BMH Senior Systems Engineer currently performing Knowledge Acquisition and Engineering (KA&E) in support of the Army's Aviation Combined Arms Tactical Trainer (AVCATT) project.  Prior to that Mr. Petersen was involved with KA&E for the Navy's Air Management Node (AMN) upgrade to the Battle Force Tactical Training (BFTT) system.  He is co-author of several papers presented at various modeling and simulation conferences. A former A-6 Intruder Bombardier-Navigator with over 15 years of experience in Naval Aviation, Strike Warfare, and Weaponeering, Mr. Petersen has served as a weapons and tactics instructor, simulator instructor, close air support coordinator, and forward air controller.  He is a Commander in the Naval Reserve.David B. Cavitt is a research engineer with BMH Associates, Inc., Norfolk, Virginia, and is a Ph.D. candidate at Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia. He received a BS degree in Computer Science at Old Dominion University. He has 12 years of experience in the use and development of simulations for military and engineering applications. His research interests include modeling and simulation, performance analysis, and distributed systems. Mr. Cavitt is a member of ACM and IEEE CS.Kim Marshall graduated from Old Dominion University in Norfolk, Virginia, with a Bachelor of Science Degree in Management Information Systems.  She was employed with Lockheed Martin Tactical Defense Systems from June 1982 until December 1999 and is currently employed as a Senior Software Engineer with Digital System Research (DSR) Inc. Her initial work included ACDS Block 0 Command and Control System with emphasis in the Display area.  This included requirements, design, code, test and integration at the Dam Neck training facility in Virginia Beach.  In August 1991, she transitioned to the Command Station project, which integrated COTS software and hardware working with Applied Physics Laboratory (APL) on the Display capability within the Common Display Kernel (CDK).  The display function was ported from Sun Solaris to HP-UX and is the base for the Battle Force Tactical Training (BFTT) system.  She worked as a senior software engineer on the BFTT system with work on Link-11, Link-4A, Navigation Simulation, Scenario Generation and Display.  Ms. Marshall coordinated the Lockheed Martin efforts for the successful BFTT participation in the Platform Proto-Federation experiment conducted by DMSO in 1995.  Most recently, she performed as the lead software engineer for Lockheed Martin on the development of the AMN requirements, software, test and installation within BFTT aboard the USS Bon Homme Richard (LHD6) in September of 1999.						Figure 3. – Knowledge Acquisition /Engineering Process EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 1. Modeling and Simulation Software Development ProcessFigure 2. – BFTT AMN Primary HCI GUI. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 4. – Functional Description Documentation EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8   EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  