Simulation Based Acquisition,The Way AheadEpifanio J. “Joe” AlbergoOUSD (AT&L) SA/ASM3020 DefensePentagon, Rm. 3E1044Washington, DC 20301-3020albergj@acq.osd.milDave ThomenScience Applications International Corporation1755 Jeff Davis Hwy, Suite 202Crystal Square 5Arlington, VA 22202thomend@mail.etas.comKEYWORDSSimulation Based Acquisition; SBA; SBA Concept; SBA Initiative; Collaborative Environments; Distributed Product Description; DPD; DoD/Industry Resource Repository; DIRR; Intelligent Synthesis Environment; ISEABSTRACT:  Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) is a joint Industry and Department of Defense initiative to define an acquisition process that employs a robust, collaborative use of simulation technology to integrate the acquisition process across acquisition phases and programs.  The intent of the initiative is to reduce the time, resources and risk associated with acquisition, enable the integrated product and process development (IPPD) and improve the quality of the fielded product. In August 1999, responsibility for the SBA Initiative was assigned to the Director, Systems Acquisition.  He, together with the Acquisition Council of the Executive Council for Modeling and Simulation, has identified specific goals to be accomplished in fiscal year 2000.  This paper presents not only a background of SBA, but also identifies the actions that have occurred since the Fall 1999 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, and provides an Office of the Secretary of Defense perspective on the details on the plan for implementing the SBA goals that have been established. The realization of SBA will require advances in M&S technologies and standards.  Steps to move forward in this direction are accelerating not only within DoD, but also across the government, industry and academia1.	IntroductionThere are several revolutions underway today within the Department of Defense (DoD).  The Revolution in Military Affairs challenges us to be prepared both to fighting differently and to engage in different kinds of conflicts than we have fought before.  Our focus has shifted to such things as information dominance, rapid force projection, and smart self-contained weapons.  As we modernize our armed forces, this revolution is defining what we must buy.  Likewise, the Revolution in Business Affairs directs that we place management emphasis on core competencies.  There is an emphasis to reduce overhead, leverage computer technology and ensure interoperability among systems.  This revolution is impacting how we buy.This paper is an introduction to an initiative that the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) has undertaken, called Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA). SBA is a strategy that employes a number of new technologies, including the robust use of simulation, to address what we buy and how we buy it.  All the military Services are responding to this initiative with actions of their own.  And this trend is not limited to DoD alone.  NASA has a similar initiative, as do other government agencies.  Similarly, Industry, in the commercial arena, has also made changes in its processes to incorporate SBA-like ideas.The SBA initiative is well underway, and will impact the way the Defense acquisition community, both government and industry, undertakes the acquisition process.  It will touch upon every aspect of Defense systems design, development, manufacturing, testing, fielding and sustainment.  It will impact systems from requirements to disposal.  This paper reviews the background of the initiative, recent actions that have been taken and future goals being pursued2.	Background2.1	SBA ConceptOver the past two years, a number of people both within DoD and industry have worked together to forge a new acquisition concept.  This concept, which has come to be called SBA, captures how DoD can exploit a number of new technologies to revolutionize the way it acquires and sustains defense systems.  In particular, some of the most promising technologies are those that will enable advanced modeling and simulation (M&S).  It is believed that these technological advances will usher in an era where the use of M&S tools in acquisition will become pervasive.  It is envisioned that much of acquisition will be done in the virtual environment.  This will permit, for example, the examination of many more alternatives during the acquisition process than has been the case traditionally.  As the design of the product is refined, so are the associated models and simulations.  The process will produce both the product and mature representations of the product.  These latter will support the sustainment, modifications and ultimately disposal of the product over its total life-cycle. It is becoming clear that models and simulations will become core resources for the future of acquisition within DoD.   In response to the changes in military affairs, we must replace existing equipment with systems having greater flexibility and complexity.  For all those involved in the acquisition of these new systems (whether determining the requirements or how the new weapons will contribute in a system of systems environment), the use of M&S early and throughout the acquisition process will become essential.  To fully implement the acquisition reforms, the members of the integrated product teams (IPTs) will need to communicate their ideas in a collaborative environment and share a common vision and understanding of the proposed system.  M&S will be the catalyst that will make that happen. [Ref. 1]2.2	The NeedTo understand the need for SBA, we must look at how we conduct acquisition today.  On an average, weapon systems take 8 to 10 years to design, and 15 to 20 years to field.  Only modest improvements in these times would be unacceptable.  Given the rate of change of technology, these systems, long in development, are out-of-date when they reach the field.  The current environment is characterized by the fact that the full potential of IPPD and the IPTs are not realized, solution decisions are made far too early, the majority of system costs are locked in by milestone II of a program’s life, and our operation and support costs consume too great a percentage of a system’s total ownership costs.  Similarly, M&S continues to be characterized by highly specialized, one-time use models with unique data requirements, and limited reusability.  The genesis of the SBA movement was at the grassroots level within government.  Faced with the task of acquiring increasingly complex systems, faster and with relatively fewer resources than in the past, individual acquisition programs have been forced to explore new ways to accomplish their mission.  The advances in computer, visualization and communication technologies, among others, have permitted these programs to use M&S to support the designing, building, testing and fielding of very sophisticated products.  The evidence from these experiences suggests that substantial economies can be realized if we can integrate the use of M&S across the various functional areas within a program, across the different phases of a program, and across programs themselves.  The SBA initiative encourages the individual efforts in order to advance the knowledge about the use of M&S in defense acquisition, and, from an enterprise perspective, to take those steps to expedite and facilitate the best practices.The Vice President has directed, as part of the National Performance Review goals, that cycle time for our new systems be cut by 25%.  Our DoD leadership has stretched this goal to make an even more aggressive target of 50%. The Defense Systems Affordability Council has recognized the potential that M&S brings to acquisition and has identified SBA to be one of the three top initiatives to help realize the stretch goal they have set before themselves.2.3	The VisionAt the DoD level, much of the initial work on the SBA Initiative was the results of the vision and efforts of the Acquisition Functional Area Council of the Executive Council for Modeling and Simulation (EXCIMS).  In December of 1997, the Council established the vision and goals for SBA (see Figure 1).Figure 12.4	Evidence for Confidence in SBAThe confidence the DoD leadership has placed in SBA is based on strong and compelling evidence found in recent acquisition programs.  In the Study on the Effectiveness of Modeling and Simulation in the Weapon System Acquisition Process, instances are cited that illustrate the potential benefits of SBA [Ref. 2].  Examples include how M&S tools have permitted the Navy to reduce the standard parts list from 95,000 for the Seawolf class submarine to about 16,000 for the NSSN.  The Army Tank and Automotive Research Development and Engineering Center was able to design a new, low silhouette tank prototype using 14 engineers for 16 months, whereas it previously took 55 engineers 36 months.  Using Computer Aided Design (CAD) models on the B-2 program permitted the Air Force to achieve first-time correct tube bending of expensive titanium electronic cable conduits.The evidence from programs such as these, combined with examples from industry (e.g., the automotive and aircraft manufacturers) and the research initiatives of DARPA and other agencies (e.g., Simulation Based Design) illustrates the potential contribution of a comprehensive, integrated simulation-based approach to defense acquisition.  SBA entails deliberate and coordinated use of M&S across the many acquisition domains, over all phases of a program’s life cycle.  It further promotes the reuse of M&S between programs.  Current acquisition programs are making revolutionary advances today using SBA concepts.  For example, the Navy’s DD-21 initial down-select will be based on the contractor proposed smart product models.  The program used a virtual concept model to experiment, with the user, the DD-21 operational capabilities well in advance of defining a system design.  Other government agencies are pursuing SBA-like concepts.  NASA, for example, has funded a program called Intelligent Synthesis Environment (ISE), which is very similar to SBA.3.	SBA InitiativeThe initiative associated with SBA attempts to identify and implement the actions required to bring about the new approach to systems acquisition, and doing so in the most efficient, expeditious and least disruptive way possible.  OSD is committed to making SBA a reality, and recognizes the need for change in the acquisition process if we are to modernize the force.  In 1998, a joint SBA task force made up of representatives from the Services and several DoD agencies was created to develop a conceptual Roadmap of what needed to be done to realize an SBA environment in defense acquisition.  It was recognized from the start that the acquisition community consists not only of the defense acquisition workforce, but also includes industry.  An SBA industry steering group worked with the Acquisition Functional Area Council to help identify the elements and principles associated with SBA and exemplified a tenet of SBA – a partnership between government and industry.  What follows are several of the observations that have emerged from the task forces’ work.3.1  Not just TechnologyAlthough it has been the advances in computer and other M&S enabling technologies in recent years that has made the concept of SBA feasible, it is not the remaining technological issues that offer us the biggest hurdles in the next few years.  Rather, it is the cultural and process changes that pose the greatest challenges to implementing SBA.  The demands on what we must buy together with the constraints on time and resources will necessitate changes in how we procure our future systems.  It may means changes in processes, policies and even organizational structures.  SBA will define new relationships between government and industry, between industries, and within government itself.3.2	Shared Use of Data, Tools and Techniques is EssentialSharing must occur between all participants of the process.  In many cases the most significant barriers are the legal, bureaucratic and social barriers that stand in the way.  This issue goes beyond proprietary data rights.  Although we have seen examples (e.g., a “model marketplace” established at Boeing’s Defense and Space Group) where they are making headway in this area, we may need changes to existing policy or the creation of new policy.  Other changes, however, are not precluded by policy, but simply need to be instituted to overcome existing cultural or process obstacles.3.3	Cultural ChangesCultural resistance to change is a significant barrier.  A recent industry survey on acquisition reform implementation revealed “cultural resistance”, for the most part ascribed to government, as being the most frequently cited barrier to acquisition reform implementation [Ref. 3].  The test community, for example, is currently undergoing a cultural shift with the evolution of the Simulation Test and Evaluation Process (STEP), a sub-process of SBA.  This new paradigm is a collaboration of simulation and test as part of an effective evaluation strategy.  The traditional “test-fix-test” approach becomes a “model-simulate-fix-test-iterate approach”.  As further evidence of the significance of overcoming existing cultural barriers, an American Defense Preparedness Association (ADPA) study in 1996 indicated that there are no technical showstoppers to implementing SBA, rather the primary issues associated with SBA were largely cultural [Ref. 4].3.4	IncentivesProgram Managers need incentives to change from the traditional approach of weapon system acquisition to a new approach that incorporates the tenets of SBA.  Given the extensive use of modeling and virtual prototyping early in the program, it is likely that future programs will experience even greater costs earlier in the acquisition process.  (The savings comes when total ownership costs are examined.)  The challenge is to identify the incentives needed to motivate the acquisition community to alter current acquisition processes and budgets, and to accelerate adoption of the SBA initiatives.3.5   Key Components of SBAThe joint SBA task force identified four key components to implementing SBA.  These are:collaborative environments (CEs)distributed product descriptions (DPDs)DoD/Industry resource repository (DIRR)data interchange formats (DIFs) The relationship between these elements is depicted in Figure 2. Figure 2These are enterprise level investments that have the potential of benefiting the many grassroot initiatives.  Under SBA, there will be a need to bring together the tools and technologies, people and processes into collaborative environments.  Whether these are created at the traditional product level, or are created to define and encompass different domains, they are formed to exploit the benefits to be gained through interoperability and reuse.  Within these collaborative environments the individual tool selection will focus on not only the specific attribute of the tool, but its ability to readily support the process through the exchange of information and through being of added value on multiple occasions. In essence, together these tools will become a system of models and simulations.  The DPD is “a distributed collection of product-centric information that is interconnected via web technology into what appears (to the user) to be a single, logically unified product representation.” [Ref. 5]  As a product is developed, the DPD associated with the product matures in parallel. The acquisition process, therefore, acquires both the product and the associated representations of the product at the same time. To facilitate the exchange and use of the information, DPDs, tools, models and simulations, by the collaborative environments, a DIRR will need to be established.  Leveraging the work already done in the Modeling and Simulation Resource Repository (MSRR), it is envisioned that the SBA DIRR will be a web-technology based distributed repository.Finally, the development of data interchange formats (DIFs) will be needed to permit the exchange of the DPDs and other SBA information between the CE participants and to permit the tools, models and simulations to be employed by authorized users.Figure 33.6   The ArchitectureTo construct a CE, establish a DIRR and institute DPDs and DIFs requires the establishment of a framework or architecture.  As envisioned in Figure 3, this entails thinking of it in three levels.  At the top is an Operational Architecture, defining such elements as the organizations, activities, and processes involved.  Next, is a System Architecture including platforms, components and data flow.  Finally, the standards, rules and conventions are defined in a Technical Architecture at the bottom.4. Current Focus4.1  Service and OSD EffortsIn the interim years, we have begun to see the Services take steps at their level to support the SBA Initiative.  Within the Army, there is the Simulation and Modeling, Analysis, Requirements and Training (SMART) Initiative.  The Air Force has established Collaborative Acquisition Simulation-based Environment (CASE) in support of SBA.  The Navy supported the pioneering work done by the Defense Advanced Research Project Agency (DARPA) in Simulation Based Design, and is requiring extensive use of M&S in their future ship programs.  The Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) has made an extensive effort to disseminate information about SBA to the testing and evaluation, system engineering, software engineering and program management communities.  In May 1999, as part of change 4 to DoD 5000.2R, the Department took an important step by designating the M&S Approach of an acquisition program an essential element of the Acquisition Strategy.  This means that the program manager, as he/she plans and budgets for how to acquire a defense system, must now include the M&S Approach to be used in those plans and budget.  These are all evidence of the recognized need for and belief in the importance of SBA.4.2  Acquisition CenteredSBA will exploit Advanced M&S and associated technologies, but it is not just about M&S.  Essentially, SBA is about acquisition.  As such, it is important that the Acquisition Community take the lead for the SBA Initiative to make this future acquisition environment a reality.  This past summer we saw the responsibility for SBA passed to the Director, Systems Acquisition. While the Acquisition Functional Area Council, which he now chairs, will continue to advise him on this and other acquisition M&S matters, he is responsible for all aspects of the DoD Acquisition process, including the SBA Initiative.4.3  Current ActionsRealization of SBA will not only entail an investment in the technologies that are needed for Advanced M&S, it will also require a number of cultural and process changes.  It will mean changes in the way the acquisition community is organized, in the processes it employs, in the skills and expertise required of its workforce, in the policies and guidelines that are used and in how resources are applied to the programmatic efforts.  Many of these issues can be explored through the use of business games.  The intent is to sponsor in the next few years a series of games to examine some of these process and organizational issues.  The transition to SBA will not occur overnight.  It will most likely occur in a series of stages over a number of years.  But to begin the implementation of the SBA initiative will require a transition body to map the path to be taken, and to coordinate the efforts of the number of agents involved in the Initiative.SBA potentially will affect every aspect of acquisition.  It entails institutionalizing a series of new relationships.  Primary among these is the establishment of a new relationship between government and industry.  To enable this will require the establishment of a mechanism whereby industry and government can identify the issues associated with an SBA environment, exchange ideas on how to address these issues, and support the research and development that will be needed to establish processes and standards where they are required.5.	GoalsThe near term goals for both DoD and industry are to address and resolve the following challenges.  Obtain Senior Leadership Commitment Although the Initiative to date has been a grassroots phenomena,  senior leadership in both DoD and industry is required to focus the effort, set the vector, and provide the venture capital needed if we are to realize this new environment sooner than the evolutionary timeline we are currently on.  Establish Dedicated Workforce to Develop the Way AheadThe change to the new acquisition environment will occur over time.  To architect the new approach to system acquisition, and map out the path to transition the Department will require a dedicated workforce. This transition office would catalog the issues, monitor the many individual initiatives, coordinate the investment of corporate funds into promising new areas, synthesize the lessons from the experiments, and facilitate the dissemination and exchange of ideas and information.  The transition office would perform the primary functions of a system program office, managing and orchestrating the many aspects of such a complex and far-reaching initiative.There are a number of other non-DoD initiatives in this area.  The British have undertaken several steps to define a new acquisition environment.  NASA has sponsored the National Research Council to conduct a two phased study on Advance Engineering Environments.  NASA has also sought funding in FY00 and over the next five years for their ISE Initiative.  The Department needs to leverage the work being done by others in this area, and should establish (e.g., through a transition office) Memorandums of Agreement (MOAs) and other relationships to promote the exchange of ideas and lessons.Establish a Government, Industry, and Academic Consortium A number of issues exist and will be uncovered in the coming years as we further explore the new approach to system acquisition.  To work in partnership with industry and academia on solving these questions and issues, we will need a forum where these fundamental issues can be identified, discussed and resolved.  In response to industry’s and academia’s lead in this area, the Department needs to be prepared to engage with industry and academia in the exploration of SBA related topics as they arise.  For example, Figure 4 represents a possible relational structure under SBA.  The consortium could provide the forum for determining the technical validity of such a structure.Figure 46.    Summary  The concept of SBA is alive and well.  To make SBA a reality, the leadership of the SBA Initiative must develop a strategic plan to guide, coordinate and, where appropriate, support the many effort now underway within DoD and industry.  They will need to leverage similar efforts being pursued by other government agencies, such as NASA’s Intelligent Synthesis Environment (ISE).  They will need to identify the resources that will be required to fund the research needed to validate the concepts and to flush them out into actual practice.We face several challenges this next year.  However, building upon the work that has been done to date, and capitalizing on the opportunities and initiatives of others,  will continue the momentum that one-day will transform the SBA concept into reality.7.	References[1]	Dr. Patricia Sanders, Simulation Based Acquisition, Program Manager, Vol. 26 No. 140 (pp. 72-76), September - October 1997[2]	DTSE&E study: “Study on the Effectiveness of Modeling and Simulation in the Weapon System Acquisition Process”, October 1996[3]	Coopers & Lybrand study “Acquisition Reform Implementation, An Industry Survey”, October 1997[4]	ADPA, “Study on the Application of Modeling and Simulation to the Acquisition of Major Weapons Systems”, September 1996 [5] Acquisition Council draft A Road Map for Simulation Based Acquisition, 4 December 1998.Author BiographiesJOE ALBERGO is a senior program analyst with the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Technology, Director of Systems Acquisition.  He is responsible for acquisition policy, specifically in the area of Simulation Based Acquisition as well as program analysis and oversight of a portfolio of major DoD space and missile systems.Mr. Albergo graduated with a bachelor's degree in Aerospace Engineering from the State University of New York at Buffalo.  He also received a Master of Public Administration Degree at the John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.DAVE THOMEN, a Senior Analyst with SAIC, provides technical support to USD (AT&L)/SA on M&S in Acquisition.  He holds a Master of Science degree in Operations Research from the Naval Postgraduate School.  He supported the development of the Simulation, Test and Evaluation Process (STEP) Guidelines and has participated on the Government Industry Team researching SBA. EMBED Word.Picture.8   EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  