The Role of Modeling and Simulation in Controlling Logistics SystemsCharles Sinex, PhDJohns Hopkins UniversityApplied Physics Laboratory11100 Johns Hopkins RoadLaurel, MD 20723-6099c.sinex@jhuapl.eduKeywords:Logistics, models, controlABSTRACT:  Military logistics systems are typically very large and dynamic systems that can have a wide variety of complex interactions.   Modeling and simulation tools have been widely used in the design of these systems, as well as to help validate logistics plans as they are developed.  However, modeling and simulation tools have not been generally used to help control the actual operation of such logistics systems, although considerable efforts are being devoted to developing sensor suites to monitor system performance and decision planning aids to support rapid re-planning.  This paper examines the military logistics system from the perspective of engineering control theory.  Control theory is a well-developed field that helps determine the best control methodologies, based on system characteristics, and estimate what performance levels should be achieved.  For systems with the characteristics of military logistics systems, model-predictive feed-forward controllers appear to be the best type and the same types of models that would be used to design and test logistics systems would be the types to be used in a model-predictive controller.  Complete control of the military logistics system would involve the use of a model-predictive controller linked with sensors to monitor system performance and the re-planning decision aids.   This paper discusses how such a model-predictive controller might be implemented and the potential gains it offers to logistics system performance.1. IntroductionThe introduction of the Joint Vision 2010 (JV2010) concept has placed increasing emphasis on rapid response of the military, with the goal of getting inside our adversaries decision cycle times [1].  At the same time, budgetary restrictions are forcing reductions in levels of force support.  For example, the focused logistics element of JV2010 envisions replacing the massive buildup of supplies overseas that we have used in the past with a system based on rapid delivery of required supplies from CONUS.  These trends place the requirement on many military systems, including weapon systems, sensor surveillance systems and logistics systems, to operate faster with a smaller margin for error.  This trend is illustrated in Figure 1, which shows the basic logistics pipeline extending from CONUS forward.  The locations and status of items in the logistics pipeline can be monitored by Total Asset Visibility systems, shown by the dashed lines going up to the SATCOM link and then down-linked to a Decision Support Center.  Deviations in the logistics delivery plan can be detected and a revised logistics plan developed and implemented to correct for these deviations, shown by the solid lines running from the Decision Support Center back to the logistics pipeline.  By their nature, military systems and operations are extremely complex.  They can have important non-linear interactions.  Because many military operations require the movement of large numbers of personnel and amounts of equipment, there is often a significant time lag between when orders are issued and when the system begins to respond.  Military campaigns often involve a number of missions, which are planned by separate commanders, but which require the support of the global transportation and communications infrastructure.  As a result, there can be strong interactions and conflicts between these separate plans during their execution.  Finally, the goal to operate inside our adversaries decision process cycle time places tight time constraints on plan execution.Although considerable planning is done in advance of military operations, as soon as operations commence, difficulties inevitably arise that require modifications to the original plans. Because of the complexity of the overall military system, these plan modifications can produce problems in other portions of the plan, requiring additional modifications.  For very complex systems with long lag times, the result can be a series of oscillations between being on schedule and off schedule.  These oscillations can also become unstable, growing increasing large to the point that the plan cannot be brought back on schedule within the time limits set by the military operation.  Such catastrophic failures can also develop very quickly with systems that are strongly non- linear, which is common for many of the complex military systems.Systems with these same characteristics are common in the engineering world, and there is a well-developed control theory for how to operate such systems and minimize oscillatory behavior and prevent catastrophic system failures.  The first basic premise of this paper is that these same control theories can provide insight into controlling these large military systems.  Moreover, for non-linear systems with large lag times, control theory suggests a particularly viable control technique is model predictive control (MPC), using a model of the process to predict its performance into the future.  The second basic premise of this paper is that modeling and simulation (M&S) tools for military activities are sufficiently advanced that they can be used to form such a MPC controller.2.  Military Decision ProcessFigure 2 shows a very simplified version of the military decision process.  There is some initial plan that will be implemented by the military system.  This paper concentrates on the plan for movement of personnel and equipment that is implemented by the logistics transportation system, but the same concepts apply to many other military problems as well.  As the plan is implemented, its execution can be monitored using sensors to detect deviations of the system output from the original plan, such as delays in equipment arrival time.  If these deviations are significant, military decision-makers then develop revisions to the plan to correct these deficiencies.Each of the basic components in Figure 2 can be thought of as having some characteristic time constant.  For the system itself, the basic time constant (p represents the time between when a modification is made to the plan and when the system is seen to respond to that modification.   For military systems that require transport of personnel and material, (p can be on the order of hours to days or longer.  A system can also have several different time scales; for example delivery by aircraft is typically much faster than delivery by land transportation.  For simplicity in this paper, we will restrict discussion to a single time scale.  The monitoring process also has some intrinsic time scale, (s, that represents the length of time before a plan deviation is detected and communicated to the decision makers.  This communication time is normally included in (s as well.  Usually this communication time is negligible; however, in cases where there is heavy message traffic and limited bandwidth, significant communications delays may occur for some messages. Finally the decision makers require some time for assessing the situation and developing plan modifications, shown as (c.The overall system has a representative time constant that is the sum of these three components, as shown by the timeline at the bottom of the figure:(total = (p   +  (s  +   (cIf a plan deviation is detected that requires corrective action, (total represents the time before the system begins to respond to the corrective action.  If the corrective action taken was not sufficient to solve the problem, then another plan modification is required and again a time (total is required to evaluate that modification.  One can see how the overall system can oscillate around the desired plan with a period (total.  Currently, the Joint Total Asset Visibility (JTAV) program is working to shorten the response time for detecting and reporting plan deviations, (s.  A key element in shortening (s is to be able to query units in the logistics pipeline in-transit rather than having to wait for their arrival at logistics nodes to determine their status.  Similarly there are a number of efforts underway to provide faster replanning tools to shorten the time, (c, required for the decision-makers to revise the plan.  The effects of these efforts can be seen in Figure 3.  The system response time is still the sum of the three time constants.  Once (s and (c become much smaller than (p, the system response becomes dominated by (p.  It can still take hours to days for a revised plan to develop sufficiently that new deviations can be detected, even though asset visibility allows the deviations to be reported quickly once they have occurred.  This simple example also suggests that increasing the speed of monitoring and decision making do not help much once these two times are both much shorter than the system response time, (p.2.1 Comparison to Closed Loop Control ModelsFigure 4 represents a simple closed loop control system and looks very similar to the military decision process model of Figures 2 and 3.  The boxes in Figure 4 are labeled with the normal terminology of control theory.  There is also one additional box labeled “Setpoint(s)” which represents the desired system output.  For example, for a temperature controller, the setpoint is simply the thermostat setting.  In very complex systems, there can be multiple setpoints, and these setpoints can vary as a function of time.  For military systems, the setpoints are generally determined from the plan and its schedule, as indicated by the dashed line in the figure.  The time constants use the same labels from Figures 2 and 3 and the same arguments about overall system response times also apply.There are a wide variety of controller designs, and the appropriate one strongly depends on the detailed system characteristics.  The important system characteristics for the military system include:System time constant (p:  For military systems, this time constant represents a time lag which can be fairly large compared to the time needed to detect deviations and make plan revisions.  Large time lags make system control more difficult.Variable system time constant (p:  If the time lag is both fairly large and varies with time, system control is more complicated.  For many military systems like the logistics transportation system, time lag will vary depending on how heavily the transportation system is loaded.Non-linear interactions:  For most military systems, there are strong non-linearities present.Setpoint characteristics:  Systems where there are multiple setpoints which can vary in time present control challenges.  Many military systems fall into this category.Multiple interactive control loops:  Systems where there are several different control loops for different portions of the system, and where these control loops interact with one another, can often produce non-linear and complex behavior.  Many military systems are very large and have multiple planners carrying out separate missions in different portions of the theater, placing them in this category.  In many cases, the interactions in the military system occur because all the participants are using the same global transportation and communications networks and assets.For systems with these characteristics, one of the better controllers is a model predictive controller (MPC), where a model of the process is used within the controller [2,3].  Depending on the exact characteristics of the system being controlled, the MPC can take a wide variety of forms.  However, these MPC configurations are designed to provide automatic control of a complex system.  Because military campaigns are highly unpredictable and involve many judgment factors, human control will always be an essential component.  Consequently the MPC configuration for the military system must incorporate the predictive model element with these human decision-makers.  The next section shows one possible configuration that provides this linkage.2.2  Model Predictive Control for Military SystemsFigure 5 shows how a predictive model might be incorporated into the military control process.  A predictive model of the military system is added into the control loop.  Since even very complex models can run quickly on today’s computers, the time constant for running such predictive models is considered very short, indicated by ( ( 0.  The decision-makers and the predictive system model together constitute the controller, as indicated by the grayed section.  The measurements from the sensors and the setpoints from the plan are fed to both the decision-makers and the predictive model.  The decision-makers develop a plan revision and test it using the predictive model for its feasibility.  This test-evaluate process continues until the decision-makers have an acceptable plan revision, which is passed to the real system for implementation.Since the predictive model runs fairly quickly, the time constant for developing a modified plan that has a high chance for success is controlled by the decision makers time constant, (c, rather than the military system time constant, (p.  With modern planning tools and decision aids, (c can be quite short.  Effectively the predictive model is used to eliminate sub-optimal plan modifications rather than letting the military system itself determine the sub-optimal plan modifications on its much longer time scale, (p.This predictive model concept also works in the multiple interactive control loop case where there are multiple military decision makers planning different missions.  The predictive system model would be a theater-wide model fed by all the data and all the plans.  Any plan modifications that cause disruptions in other plans would be quickly identified in the predictive model runs, again on the short model execution time scales.  Plan revisions that produce problems elsewhere in the theater would be eliminated at the outset.2.3  Applications to Logistics PlanningAn example of how this concept might work can be given for the military logistics system.  Military logistics, especially for JV2010, will flow personnel, equipment and supplies forward from CONUS to the theater for delivery to the warfighters.  This system has all of the complicating characteristics discussed earlier:Long system lag times:  The logistics system typically has a range of response or lag times depending on the transportation assets and the distance to be covered.  For example, delivery by aircraft from CONUS to a theater might take as little as a day while surface ship transport can take a few weeks.  Transport forward in the theater by truck might take several days. Variable Lag Times: In addition to long lag times, logistics systems exhibit variability in the lag times.  In simple cases, inclement weather can cause slower transport speeds, resulting in longer times before plan deviations become apparent.  To a degree, in-transit visibility with tracking the real-time location of the transportation vehicles can help reduce this variability.  However, non-linearities in the system can be a significant source of lag time variability.  In a very simple example, two different shipments coming from different locations can arrive at the same transportation node transfer point simultaneously.  If the shipments together exceed the node throughput, significant delays can suddenly result, even though both plans were right on target up to the moment of arrival.Non-linearity:  Logistics systems can vary between linear and nonlinear states.  For very lightly loaded systems where only a small fraction of the transportation capacity is used and material throughputs at transfer nodes (e.g. ports) are a small faction of the capacity, the logistics system is basically linear. If you double the inputs, the outputs should basically double.  As the system becomes more and more loaded, backups begin to occur and non-linearities appear. For large logistics systems, some portions of the system may be operating in the linear regime while other portions can be in the non-linear regime.Time-varying setpoints: The setpoints for military logistics are not single-valued, fixed functions, but vary throughout the campaign.  If the logistics system is driven by the Time-Phased Force Deployment Data (TPFDD), the appropriate setpoint is a function that follows all the units and supplies in the TPFDD in terms of whether those units and supplies arrive at their destination(s) on time. Multiple Control Loops:  Because of the DoD logistics system is extremely large and diverse and must simultaneously support many different military activities, there are typically many different groups  of logisticians responsible for different sets of supplies.  However, they are all trying to use the same transportation infrastructure.  This situation basically produces a system with multiple control loops.  Unless there is some feedback between these different control loops, such systems can become unstable. To a degree, this can be viewed as the source of the problem in the previous example, where two separately planned shipments arrived at a transfer node at the same time and exceeded its transfer capacity. Expressed another way, these instabilities are the result of planning locally, but executing globally.  The interactions between the different plans must be considered.Currently, there are a number of efforts in the services and in DARPA on developing asset visibility and decision planning aids for logisticians.  As these tools become fully operational, there will be significant reductions in the sensing and decision making times, (s and (c, down to the order of perhaps an hour or so.  The earlier discussion on control theory then predicts the logistics system will run as an oscillatory system with a period comparable to the logistics system rate, (p.  The logistics system will also continue to carry some risk of developing catastrophic instabilities, where the system evolves in such a way that there is insufficient time left to bring it back to the original plan schedule.However, there are a number of logistics transportation models currently in use in the logistics community that have sufficient accuracy and sufficiently rapid computer execution times that they could be used to add a model predictive control element to the system.  The Enhanced Logistics Intra-Theater Support Tool (ELIST) developed and used by the Military Transportation Management Command—Transportation Engineering Agency (MTMC-TEA) is an example of such a model.  These logistics models could then be combined with the asset visibility tools and the decision aids currently being developed to form a predictive model control system as shown in Figure 5.   Such a model predictive control tool would also provide the additional capabilities of allowing the decision-makers to ask “what if” questions and test a variety of logistics plans using the predictive models to evaluate their feasibility.3.  Summary	 This paper has looked at the role of modeling and simulation from the perspective of control theory for controlling large, complex systems such as the military logistics system.  Major points in the paper include:  Military systems represent large, complex, interactive systems that can be difficult to control.  At the same time, new warfighting concepts such as JV2010 and reductions in military size require that these systems be controlled even more accurately in the future.Control theory is a well-developed field that offers considerable guidance on how to control  large, complex systems like the military logistics system, how to design such control systems, and what levels of performance to expect.The use of predictive model controllers are particularly appropriate for military systems, and modeling and simulation tools have advanced to the point where it is feasible to build and use such model predictive controllers.A predictive model controller would also make it extremely easy to explore a wide variety of “what if” questions.  Such questions might be comparison of plan alternatives or assessing impact of events such as major weather disruptions or enemy attacks on the logistics system.Finally this predictive model control approach to military systems is extensible to more complex situations.  An example has been given in this paper for control of the logistics system.  One could apply the same control theory principles to the warfighting process as well.  In this case, the system would include both logistics and warfighting elements and decision makers, and the predictive models would be coupled logistics and warfighting models. ReferencesJoint Chiefs of Staff: Joint Vision  2010, July 1996F.G. Shinskey: Feedback Control for the Process Industries, Mc-Graw-Hill, Inc. 1994Gustaf Olsson and Gianguido Piani: Computer Systems for Automation and Control, Prentice Hall 1992Author BiographiesCharles Sinex holds a Ph.D. in Nuclear Physics from Rice University.  He is currently a Program Manager with the Joint Warfare Analysis Department at the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, Md.  Dr. Sinex is a member of the American Geophysical Union and the SISO Logistics working group. EMBED MS_ClipArt_Gallery   EMBED MS_ClipArt_Gallery  FactoryAirfieldIn-transitDistributionUserSATCOMDistributionLogistics PipelineDecision SupportCenterPlan StatusPlan RevisionsAirfieldFigure 1: Logistics Pipeline-- Materiel and Information FlowMilitary System ((P)DecisionMakers ((c)PlanOutputsMeasurementsPlanRevisionsSensors ((s)(s(c(PTime Line:PlandeviationoccursSensorsreportdeviationDecisionMakersrevise planDeviations fromrevised planappear0Figure 2:  Basic Military Decision ProcessMilitary System ((P)DecisionMakers ((c)PlanOutputsMeasurementsPlanRevisionsSensors ((s)(s(c(PTime Line:PlandeviationoccursSensorsreportdeviationDecisionMakersrevise planDeviations fromrevised planappear0JTAVFastRe-planning toolsFigure 3: Achieving Faster Response TimesSystem ((P)Controller ((c)InputsOutputsMeasurementsCorrectionSignalsSensors ((s )Setpoint(s)Figure 4:  Closed Loop ControlMilitarySystem((P)DecisionMakers ((c)InputsOutputsMeasurementsSensors((s )Setpoint(s)PredictiveSystemModel ((()FinalPlanRevisionFigure 5:  Model Predictive Control for Military Systems-- one configuration