The National Counterdrug Center - Leveraging Military Simulation Technology for Law Enforcement Agency Interoperability TrainingKevin MullallyAndy CoxMotorola ADSS12424 Research ParkwaySuite 390Orlando, FL 32826Kevin.Mullally@motorola.com, Andy.Cox@motorola.comABSTRACT: The United States Government’s ability to implement effective anti-drug efforts is limited by a lack of operational coordination among law enforcement agencies, the unavailability of reliable, adequate, and timely information to plan interdiction operations, and an unawareness by planners and operators of lessons learned from past counter-narcotics efforts. [GAO 1998]  To address this problem, the National Counterdrug Center (NCC) was established to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) involved in drug interdiction.  The NCC applies distributed and virtual simulation technologies to enable realistic exercises for joint operations of drug interdiction forces. Military simulation technology and applications were leveraged to develop the NCC Simulation System.  Using MS Windows based workstations over a Wide Area Network (WAN), the system models civilian and law enforcement vehicles and aircraft over urban and rural areas, utilizing visual surveillance equipment, radio communications and sensor devices.  Rapid scenario development and implementation is enabled using Scenario Development tools and a database-driven system initialization capability.  An Exercise Console provides insight into the health and activity of each player in an exercise and provides alerts when performance thresholds have been exceeded. This paper describes technical accomplishments in the development of the NCC Simulation System.  LEA training requirements are discussed and approaches to Scenario Development and Exercise Management are presented.The NCC ProgramThe National Counterdrug Center (NCC) is a Center of Excellence for interagency drug interdiction.  The NCC infuses law enforcement communities with the knowledge, skills and abilities to operate in a joint, interactive, coordinated and integrated manner at all levels and serves as a source of best practices and lessons learned.  The initial operating capability of the NCC, called Module 1, involves a wide range of Law Enforcement Agencies (LEA) in the US Southwest Border area, including:U.S. Customs ServiceU.S. Border PatrolArizona Department of Public Safety (ADPS)Cochise County Sheriff's Office (CCSO)Southwest Border Alliance Group (BAG)City of Douglas, Arizona Police DepartmentUnder the direction of the Department of Energy (DOE), the NCC program consists of multiple sites, each site comprising a classroom environment with computer workstations, communications devices, and graphics displays connected by a local network.  Sites are connected via a Wide Area Network (WAN) into a distributed system for the conduct of simulation exercises.  The initial operating capability consists of three geographically distributed sites. NCC Main Facility, Richland, Washington - The NCC Main location provides program direction and coordination, scenario development, system user training, exercise management and control, and threat/red team exercise participation.  It is the main archive of simulation data, scenario libraries, lessons learned, and after action review materials.	Southwest Border Regional Facility, Cochise County, Arizona - The NCC Southwest Border Regional Facility participates in counterdrug exercises with the NCC Main Facility via a high bandwidth network connection as shown in Figure 1.Development Facility, Motorola ADSS Office, Orlando, Florida - The Development Facility is the location for NCC systems and software engineering.  The Development Facility connects to the NCC Main facility via a high bandwidth network connection.Figure 1 – Southwest Border Regional Facility LayoutThe NCC Simulation SystemThe NCC Simulation System is comprised of a network of Windows NT™ workstations.  A Computer Generated Forces (CGF) Workstation is used to drive NCC Workstations over a distributed network.  Commercial-Off-The-Shelf (COTS) software products developed for use in military simulation were leveraged to develop the system.CGF WorkstationThe CGF Workstation uses the Scenario Toolkit and Generation Environment (STAGE™) application from eNGENUITY Technologies to provide vehicle representations and behaviors.NCC WorkstationsCommon applications used on the NCC workstations include the 2D Display, 3D Display and Radio interfaces.  Workstation functionality is built upon the ModIOS™ Tool Suite from Motorola, Inc.2D DisplayThe 2D Display interface is implemented using the ModIOS™ Exercise Controller application and is the primary situational awareness interface for the system.  Users can quickly identify their location and orientate themselves in the environment.  The Vehicle Controller tool is used in conjunction with the 2D Display to drive or fly an entity by selecting waypoints and adjusting velocity.  A filter is applied to only display entities within a selected range from the user’s entity.3D DisplayThe 3D Display interface is implemented using the ModIOS™ 3D Stealth Viewer.  It complements the 2D Display interface, providing the user with a 3D virtual representation of the drug trafficking area.  The 3D Display is primarily used as an out-the-window view.  However, additional capabilities can be simulated by setting the 3D Display to night vision or infrared view through a scope or binocular representation.RadioRadio communications are simulated using a Radio Graphical User Interface (GUI) as a front end to the ModIOS™ Voice Communicator tool, along with a headset and handheld microphone.  The Radio GUI was developed using DiSTI’s GLStudio™ and can represent a range of radios typically used by law enforcement, including the MCS2000 mobile radio, HT1000 handheld radio and the Wulfsberg airborne radio.  The Radio GUI can also be used to represent cellular phones.After Action Reviewer The ModIOS™ After Action Reviewer is used to record and playback NCC Exercise simulation data. The After Action Reviewer allows Plug-In Events (PIEs) to be programmed that monitor and highlight events of interest to the training audience.  Several PIEs were developed for the NCC Simulation System, including a Radio Communication PIE that identified the length of each transmission and could be filtered to display transmissions from each agent or each agency as a whole.TrainingFigure 2 – NCC Training AudienceSimilar to military joint interoperability training, the NCC focuses on identifying issues involved in performing multi-agency drug interdiction operations.  Training topics include Operational Planning, Agency Policies, Resource Allocation and Communications.  Operational Plans are developed with an emphasis on interoperability.  Each agency works within a unique set of policies, which need to be considered during the planning and execution of an operation.  For example, the US Border Patrol maintains a policy restricting pursuit over 55 mph.  During an exercise, the entity’s speed is observed on the Exercise Console.  Each agency also brings a variety of resources to an operation, such as the US Customs Blackhawk helicopter or the US Border Patrol surveillance cameras.  The NCC stimulates awareness of the availability of various agency resources and provides a mechanism to train in their employment. Communication is a critical element in any operation.  Each agency uses different radio equipment with different channel/frequency assignments and utilizes unique expressions (10 codes) to convey data.  NCC training stresses the importance of establishing and maintaining effective inter-agency communication.Drug traffickers present an ever-changing threat and law enforcement capabilities and resources are constantly revised.  NCC provides a forum to increase awareness of current capabilities, tactics and lessons learned.  Seasoned law enforcement officers armed with modern simulation technology create a framework to instill LEAs with up to date knowledge and experience in combating drug traffic.AudienceThe training audience for NCC is at the first line supervisor level.  These are the primary decision-makers for drug interdiction operations whose responsibilities include operational planning, inter-agency coordination and resource allocation.  Figure 2 shows the target audience for LEAs in Southwest Arizona.ScenariosTraining with the NCC Simulation System begins with identifying a drug trafficking scenario.  Scenarios are usually based on drug trafficking history and provide focus for the training to be executed.  Subjects for NCC Scenarios include activities such as border crossings and airdrops.  Scenarios are pre-determined and are a reusable asset in the NCC training process.  The Scenario Developer tool, used in conjunction with ModIOS™ Exercise Controller and STAGE™, allows a user to plot routes and assign behaviors to entities which are saved in a STAGE™ scenario file.  The scenario file will be updated and played back during an NCC Exercise.ExercisesNCC Exercises are built upon the drug trafficking scenarios.  A multi-agency drug interdiction team is provided intelligence about the scenario and develops an Operational Plan.  The STAGE™ scenario file is then updated with elements of the Operational Plan.  Starting positions for the drug trafficking team and the drug interdiction team are plotted.  Resources specified in the Operational Plan, such as vehicles, aircraft, surveillance equipment and sensors are allocated to entity models.  Members of the drug trafficking team and the drug interdiction team are immersed in the exercise via NCC Workstations and fight the drug battle by manipulating their CGF entity models in a virtual simulation environment.Distributed After Action ReviewThe NCC Simulation System supports the conduct of a distributed After Action Review.  Simulation data recorded during the exercise is played back from a ModIOS™ After Action Reviewer tool at the NCC Main Facility.  A 2D Display and 3D Display at the NCC Regional Facility are tethered to the After Action Reviewer at the NCC Main Facility.  When an event is selected in the After Action Reviewer on one side of the network, the view in the 2D Display and 3D Display are automatically centered around the event on the other side of the network.  In a likewise manner, radio traffic is played back through the ModIOS™ Voice Communicator.  Elements of interest in an NCC After Action Review include the Operational Plan, team coordination, radio communications, detection of drug traffickers and pursuit activities.Training AgendaThe current NCC training course takes place over two days.  Law enforcement officers are given a short course on interoperability, discussing methodologies and lessons learned.  They are then trained on the use of the NCC Simulation System and subjected to a number of NCC Exercises using various drug trafficking scenarios.Exercise ManagementGiven the time constraints and the geographical separation involved in NCC training, robust Exercise Management is key to success.  The NCC Simulation System is designed to provide turnkey operation where NCC Exercises can be developed and executed efficiently and effectively.Exercise DatabaseThe NCC Exercise Database stores scenario and exercise data.  Initialization data is captured and used to automate the startup of an NCC Exercise.  Elements of the exercise, such as network parameters and simulation characteristics including Exercise ID, Time of Day and Weather conditions, are used to establish the exercise environment.  For each participant in an NCC Exercise, a profile is compiled in the database, which defines the initialization data for their NCC Workstation.  The profile identifies which CGF entity (car, aircraft or person) is associated with the participant and which applications (Radios, 2D Display or 3D Display) the participant will be provided.Figure 3 – NCC Exercise ConsoleNCC LaunchpadFor each exercise, NCC Workstations need to be configured based on the exercise setup and the participant’s profile information.  Initially, this entailed a labor intensive and error prone process of manually updating numerous parameters in configuration files and changing command line options in shortcut files.  The NCC Launchpad was developed to provide an automated capability for configuring and starting up NCC Workstations.  When a participant logs into the workstation, the Launchpad queries the Exercise Database for exercise initialization data and the participant’s profile information.  The Launchpad then updates configuration files, connects the workstation to the simulation network and starts the selected applications as specified.Exercise ConsoleThe Exercise Console is a Graphical User Interface (GUI) used to monitor the health and status of the NCC Exercise.  Exercise parameters and status such as Weather, Time of Day and Network Utilization are displayed.  A participant list is presented along with their associated workstation status and entity information.  When performance parameters are exceeded, such as CPU Usage over 75% or Vehicle Velocity over 55mph, they are highlighted in red as shown in Figure 3.Time of Day and Weather ConditionsTime of Day is simulated in an NCC Exercise using an application to periodically update Time of Day data over the simulation network.  The 3D Display receives the data and adjusts its light levels appropriately.  Daytime and nighttime conditions are represented.  During nighttime, streetlights and vehicle lights are illuminated and moonlight levels can be adjusted.  During the transitional periods at dawn and dusk, light levels are gradually adjusted.  Weather conditions are also simulated by updating weather state data over the simulation network.  The 3D Display receives the data and applies visual weather effects representing sunny, rainy, cloudy or foggy conditions.Site CoordinationMicrosoft NetMeeting™ is used to coordinate training events over the Wide Area Network (WAN).  Audio and video teleconferencing are utilized as well as program sharing, whiteboard and chat windows.  These applications are particularly useful during the execution of an NCC Exercise and the conduct of a Distributed After Action Review.Technical AccomplishmentsUser AdaptabilitySimulation has been a part of military training for decades and the military has an integral understanding of how to define and implement simulation training.  As new users of simulation technology, law enforcement has little knowledge of simulation training capabilities and its application.  Given a lack of simulation know-how, NCC participants require an accommodating, user-friendly environment.  The NCC Simulation System is designed to allow users to quickly adapt to the simulation interfaces.  Currently, the NCC training course allows two hours of hands on training with the NCC Simulation System.  Law enforcement officers are adept in learning the system and after a practice dry run, are able to move readily into a training exercise.Platform Models and EnumerationsPlatforms of interest to law enforcement are different than the military platforms typically used in simulation.  Police cars, civilian vehicles and aircraft, horses, and cows are some of the unique platforms used in the NCC Simulation System.  Considerable work was performed to develop enumerated values (enumerations), 2D Display icons and 3D Display visual models for these new platforms.  3D Visual models were developed using Multigen Creator™.Terrain RepresentationFidelity requirements for terrain representation are different for a civilian or law enforcement simulation.  Military simulation users typically orientate themselves in the simulation environment by using map coordinates, while civilian or law enforcement users typically use landmarks and road signs.  The landscape for military training is usually centered around a training range, in the middle of a military base, with few roads or buildings.  Law enforcement training is usually centered around civilian populations, in cities and rural areas, with a high degree of road infrastructure and a large number of buildings.  Considerable work was performed to model roads, buildings, signs and landmarks in the NCC Simulation System.  Terrain databases were developed using Multigen Creator™.  Road names were also embedded in the 2D Display.CGF BehaviorsNew behaviors were needed to meet drug interdiction training requirements for the NCC Simulation System.Road Following – a behavior to maintain a vehicle’s position on the right side of a road.  This also requires the ability to turn tight corners in the middle of city traffic without veering off the road.  The approach used in the NCC Simulation System was to use waypoints to identify the road placement.  This was sufficient for keeping vehicles generally on the road.  However, vehicle dynamics of the CGF model created problems when rounding corners and trying to keep to the right side of the road.  These issues are currently being investigated.Evasion – a semi-automated method for modeling drug traffickers evasion of law enforcement.  This behavior is currently being researched.Civilian Traffic – a semi-automated method for modeling civilian vehicles driving around in the training area.  This behavior also requires the vehicle to observe road signs.  Route assignments using waypoints are currently used to meet this requirement.Traffic Stops – a model employing lights and sirens as an indication that a law enforcement officer is initiating a traffic stop.  This behavior is implemented in the NCC Simulation System by selecting the vehicle in the 2D Display and applying the siren effect, which illuminates the siren lights on the 3D Display vehicle model.Vehicle Spikes – a model for the tire deflation equipment used by law enforcement to disable a suspect vehicle.  The vehicle spikes are modeled as a platform in the NCC Simulation System.  After colliding with the vehicle spikes, a vehicle will come to a stop.Sensors - a model for the magnetic, seismic, acoustic and infrared sensors used by law enforcement to detect drug trafficker’s movement.  Sensors are modeled as platforms in the NCC Simulation System.  When another platform passes within the detection radius of a sensor, event data is sent over the network.  The Sensor Base Station and Portable Sensor Display applications receive the event data and appropriately display the detection.SummaryDevelopment of the NCC Simulation System was challenging and rewarding.  Military simulation technology was successfully leveraged to create a multi-agency interoperability trainer for law enforcement.  Many opportunities exist for synergy between military and law enforcement simulation training.Current StatusThe NCC Simulation System is currently fielded at the main facility in Richland, Washington and at the Southwest Border Regional Facility in Sierra Vista, Arizona, where NCC training courses are conducted twice monthly.  Feedback from officers completing the NCC training course has been positive, citing that the experience has increased their awareness and improved their knowledge of multi-agency operations.  The Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST) organization is an accreditation authority for law enforcement training and has recently awarded the NCC program with 16 hours of accredited training in state of Arizona.Future PlansThe NCC program is evaluating additional fielding sites where regional training facilities can be established in the following areas:Northwest US-Canada BorderPacific Coast – Seattle AreaPacific Coast – San Diego AreaExpanded Southwest US-Mexico BorderSouth FloridaImprovements to the NCC Simulation System are being developed and other applications of simulation technology developed under NCC, such as Emergency Management and Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) training, are being investigated.  For more information on the NCC program, please refer to the homepage at  HYPERLINK http://www.ncc-simex.gov http://www.ncc-simex.gov. References“Drug Control: Observations on U.S. Counternarcotics Activities” GAO/T-NSIAD-98-249, September 16, 1998.“NCC After Action Review Software User Manual”, 68:P57634J Rev. A, Motorola, Inc., March 30, 2001.“NCC Computer Generated Forces Software User Manual”, 68:P57631J, Rev. A, Motorola, Inc., March 30, 2001.“NCC Communications Software User Manual”, 68:P57633J, Rev. A, Motorola, Inc. 3/30/2001“NCC Exercise Management Software User Manual”, 68:P57630J, Rev. A, Motorola, Inc., March 30, 2001.“NCC Intelligence, Surveillance, Reconnaissance, Software User Manual”, 68:P57632J, Rev. A, Motorola, Inc., March 30, 2001.National Counterdrug Center Homepage,  HYPERLINK "http://www.ncc-simex.gov" http://www.ncc-simex.govTrademarksModIOS is a registered trademark of Motorola, Inc.STAGE is a trademark of eNGENUITY Technologies.GLStudio is a trademark of DiSTI.Creator is a trademark of MultiGen-Paradigm, Inc.Windows NT is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation.Author BiographiesKevin Mullally is a Software Engineer for Motorola Advanced Distributed Simulation Systems (ADSS) and has been involved in the simulation industry for over 7 years. Mr. Mullally holds a BS degree in Electrical Engineering from the University of Central Florida and formerly chaired the SISO-SIW Testing Forum.Andy Cox is the Motorola Project Manager for the National Counterdrug Center.  He is a graduate of the University of Central Florida with BS and MS degrees in Computer Science.  His research interests are in distributed simulation and network communications. 