Data Modeling Implications for a Data Driven Environmental Software Sub-systemClark D. StevensU.S. Army Simulation, Training and Instrumentation Command, STRICOM12350 Research ParkwayOrlando, FL 32826-3273(407)-384-3673 HYPERLINK mailto:eroot@ideorlando.org stevensd@stricom.army.milDale D. Miller, Steve PragerLockheed Martin Information Systems Advanced Simulation Center3605 132nd Ave. SE, Suite 400Bellevue, WA 98006(425) 746-6800 HYPERLINK mailto:eroot@ideorlando.org ddmiller@lads.is.lmco.com ,  HYPERLINK mailto:eroot@ideorlando.org sprager@lads.is.lmco.comCharles Campbell, Jon Watkins, Eric Root, James OnealScience Applications International Corporation (SAIC)12479 Research Parkway, Suite 600Orlando, Florida 32826321-235-7969 HYPERLINK mailto:eroot@ideorlando.org charles.e.campbell@saic.com  HYPERLINK mailto:eroot@ideorlando.org jon.e.watkins@saic.com  HYPERLINK mailto:eroot@ideorlando.org eroot@ideorlando.org  HYPERLINK mailto:james.oneal@lmco.com james.oneal@lmco.com Keywords:  Data Model, Data Driven, EnvironmentABSTRACT: In 1998-99, the Warfighter Simulation (WARSIM) program developed the Terrain Common Data Model (TCDM). This TCDM is being extended by the OneSAF Objective System (OOS) to provide a family of Environmental Data Models (EDM) describing the terrain, ocean, atmosphere and space for OneSAF, WARSIM, JSIMS and Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT). The Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) and Army Modeling and Simulation Office (AMSO) have co-funded extensions to provide a Common Data Modeling Framework (CDMF) supporting development and automated comparisons of EDM’s for Modeling and Simulation (M&S), C4I and other external systems.As OOS is developed over the next 3-5 years, the WARSIM environmental subsystem will be enhanced to meet the full range of environmental representation requirements for OneSAF, WARSIM, JSIMS and CCTT through a single software baseline.  This implementation will be facilitated by the extended EDM providing direct control of data driven software.  The data model and software will cover the full range of features and effects to be modeled at multiple resolutions for all these systems. This paper will describe the technical approach and challenges for extension of the EDM and the implications for data-driven software and for commonality and interoperability. The role of the enhanced EDM in the environmental software process will be defined to include: The SEDRIS Environmental Data Coding Standard (EDCS) and its direct relationship to the runtime software and the database generation system.The management of data in the Environmental Database Generation System by the EDM FSA and the auxiliary databases developed to provide mapping rules for translating data from various vector source products into EDM format and for applying default values and deconfliction rules in a data-driven infrastructure.The SEDRIS Transmittal Content Requirement Specification (TCRS) and its importance in controlling and supporting data interchange.The use of the EDM to generate configuration files and the use of these products to control the runtime database compilers and environmental runtime services.IntroductionIn the current Warfighter Simulation 2000 (WARSIM) environmental representation process, the Terrain Common Data Model (TCDM) provides direct control of data driven software.  The OneSAF Environmental Data Model (EDM) is under development to extend the WARSIM/JSIMS TCDM and to describe the full range of features and effects to be modeled by the OneSAF Objective System (OOS), WARSIM, the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) and Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT).  As OOS is developed over the next 3-5 years, the WARSIM environmental subsystem will be enhanced to provide a single software baseline meeting a broad range of requirements for OneSAF, WARSIM, JSIMS and CCTT.  This implementation will be facilitated by the extended EDM providing direct control of data driven software. The data model and software will cover the full range of features and effects to be modeled at multiple resolutions for all these systems.  The common software component approach is supported by a multi-resolution Application Programmer’s Interface (API) designed to meet the full range of requirements for the participating programs. This paper will describe the technical approach and challenges for extension of the EDM and the implications for data-driven software.  Figure 1 illustrates the data flows in the WARSIM environmental representation process. The major data control points represented by dashed lines are the major focus of this paper and these and are described in greater detail:Section 5 describes the SEDRIS Environmental Data Coding Standard (EDCS) and its direct relationship to the runtime software and the database generation system through the Feature Set Analysis (FSA).Section 6 describes the control of data in the Environmental Database Generation (EDGe) System by the EDM format.  This section describes the auxiliary databases developed to provide mapping rules for translating data from various vector source products into EDM format and for applying default values and deconfliction rules in a data-driven infrastructure.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1: OneSAF/WARSIM Environmental Representation Process with Data Flows and Control PointsSection 7 describes the SEDRIS Transmittal Content Requirement Specification (TCRS) and its importance in controlling and supporting data interchange in the SEDRIS Transmittal.Section 8 describes the use of the EDM to generate runtime software and database configuration files and the use of these products to control the runtime software.Reference  REF _Ref518284496 \r  \* MERGEFORMAT [1] defines what the EDM is and reference  REF _Ref503187212 \r  \* MERGEFORMAT [2] describes the development of the EDM.  The purpose of this document is to describe how it is used to improve the software development process.BackgroundIn 1998-99, the WARSIM Program developed the TCDM to describe all of the required environmental data elements and their attributes. The core of the TCDM is the Feature Set Analysis (FSA) describing all features with their spatial representation, attributes, default values, functional uses, and the requirement source. Other major elements of the TCDM relate the FSA to potential data sources (lineage), the range of allowable values for attributes, and rules for mapping data from various sources into TCDM format (mapping rules).  The purposes of the TCDM include:Serves as a Front End Analysis (FEA) for the WARSIM/JSIMS environmental representation and defines the relevant effects the environment should cause in the simulation’s cognitive behavior models.   Identifies all features and attributes that the simulation must represent so that all views of the environment within the simulation are consistent.   Since all features and their effects are described completely and unambiguously, this approach provides the configuration data to drive runtime services and behavior models without embedding this data into the source code. The data model serves as a mechanism to support interoperation with other systems with a similarly defined data model at the environmental subsystem level.The STRICOM Synthetic Environment Technology Management Division (SETMD) initiated an effort to extend the TCDM to “reverse engineer” the environmental representations of the Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT) and OneSAF Testbed Baseline (OTB) systems and this work is being completed by the OneSAF program.  DMSO and AMSO have agreed to co-fund completion of the Common Data Modeling Framework (CDMF) supporting development of EDM’s for other Army system requirements. This framework will support mechanisms for evaluating and/or establishing “interoperability profiles” between simulations and with other systems.  DMSO is funding development of EDM’s for selected C4I systems in cooperation with the Topographic Engineering Center (TEC).The OOS environmental subsystem is being developed over the next 3-5 years to meet a broad range of requirements at various resolutions.  The existing WARSIM/JSIMS low to medium resolution Synthetic Natural Environment (SNE) is being extended to meet OneSAF high-resolution requirements. WARSIM/JSIMS post-IOC requirements will also be satisfied through backward compatibility.  The range of resolutions the software will support includes:   JSIMS low resolution 1:1,000,000 scaleWARSIM medium resolution 1:250,000 scaleOTB High Resolution 1:50,000 scaleCCTT very high resolution 1:12,500 scale3-D structures with full interior representation for selected features, including buildings, sewers, ventilation shafts, etc.This common software baseline will be facilitated through the extended EDM that provides explicit data definition at each of these resolutions.  Advantages of Data Driven SoftwareInstead of “hard-coding” features, attributes and associations into the runtime software, the EDM will be utilized in the OneSAF software development process to provide configuration files to drive the software.  This permits software complexity to be reduced since programmers can code in terms of generic classes specified by the data configuration files for each application. For example, while the vegetation class will always affect the intervisibility algorithm, the WARSIM EDM will define a forest area feature with generic attributes for tree type, spacing, etc., while the CCTT and OneSAF EDM’s will provide specific tree instances.  This permits various users and applications to use the same intervisibility algorithm automatically configured to support that program’s particular representation of the vegetation class as defined by its version of the EDM.  This “data-driven” approach has numerous additional advantages:Database configuration will always be consistent with the supporting documentation, since the configuration is derived directly from the self-documenting EDM, i.e., whenever the EDM is modified, the configuration files are regenerated to ensure future that future databases are consistent with the documentation. This is in direct contrast to ”hard-coded” parametric software where documentation must be manually modified to keep pace with software changes, and the two are rarely in agreement.Since the EDM configuration directly controls data-driven software for both the database generation system and runtime compilers, the delivered databases are guaranteed to be consistent with the runtime compilers and software, again, unlikely with traditional “hard-coded” software.The EDM serves as an overarching requirement specification for data providers, database developers, software developers and system users.  The EDM define the features, attributes and relationships with their required effects much more completely and unambiguously than is possible with textual software requirements.  Software maintenance can be managed much more efficiently with fewer bugs due to reduced code complexity.The EDM serves inherently as an ideal mechanism for systems interoperability as defined by the C3ISR Working Groups Levels of Information Systems Interoperability (LISI), providing a path for enhanced interoperability through shared data and/or common views of data.  REF _Ref518284592 \r \h [3] Common Data Modeling FrameworkAcross the breadth of M&S systems, environmental data requirements can vary dramatically. Lacking a systematic way to compare requirements between different applications can lead to limited interoperability. When defining a data model for natural environments developers seek to simultaneously address the needs of M&S interoperability, specific program requirements, Subject Matter Expert (SME) input, and simulation system behavior requirements, all with respect to available source data. These are lofty but attainable goals and the approach has been proven through the TCDM development.The CDMF extends program specific data modeling to address the needs of multiple programs, i.e., the “system of systems” problem. Given a set of specific framework directives, a program’s data model can be captured in the CDMF and compared with other environmental data models and available source data. The CDMF provides mechanisms by which data models may be reviewed, evaluated, enhanced and validated.The foundation of the CDMF is a relational database, currently a Microsoft (MS) Access® 97 database with associated macros, queries, reports and associated software and documentation. For an environmental data model to be captured and analyzed in the CDMF, it must minimally (1) identify the supported features and their geometric representation (e.g., point, line, area), and (2) identify the supported feature attribute combinations.Features are identified by a combination of Feature Classification Code and Feature Type (referred to as a Feature Identification (Id)).  Attributes are identified by an associated Feature Id and Attribute Code. To add a data model to the CDMF, at least the three basic tables described in Figure 2 are required. They must exist in a standalone database whose tables can be linked into the CDMF database.TableDescriptionContent DescriptionProvides the lineage of the data model, data model history and version information.Feature UsageLists the features comprising the data modelAttribute UsageLists the attributes employed by the data model identifying those provided via source data attributes and those that are derived.Figure 2 CDMF Mandatory ElementsData Model AnalysisSource data analysis within the CDMF requires identification, description and comparison of available source data products. This information is currently housed in a separate (from the data models) MS Access® 97 database and accessed through table links. Source data product types currently supported are: VMAP Level 0, VMAP Level 1, Foundation Feature Data (FFD), DTOP Levels 1 – 5, Digital Nautical Chart (DNC), Littoral Warfare Data (LWD), Tactical Ocean Data (TOD) and Urban Vector Map (UVMAP).  The feature and attribute content of the cartographic products Topographic Line Map 1:50,000 (TLM) and Operational Navigation Chart (ONC) are also supported.  CDMF analysis provides identification of specific features and/or attributes, and the source data products from which they may be obtained, e.g., Figure 3 shows which cartographic data products support the Disposal Site / Waste Pile feature and its attributes. It was generated by a CDMF report.Program specific environmental data models can be compared in a similar manner. To date, the CDMF has been used to analyze several terrain data models including the pair of Marine Corps Urban Warrior data models, the TCDM and a Ft. Knox/MOUT DTOP data model. Figure 3 illustrates an excerpt from an automatically generated report comparing the data model features and attributes expected to be required for the OneSAF Objective System with the content provided by ONC and TLM.Figure 3: Excerpt from CDMF report comparing content of draft OOS EDM with contents of ONC and TLMSEDRIS in Data Driven SoftwareA data model requires both semantics and syntax. The phenomena/features and attributes of the physical environment need unambiguous and agreed-upon meanings as well as a coding schema to support machine parsing. The Digital Geographic Information Exchange Standard (DIGEST) Feature and Attribute Coding Catalog (FACC)  REF _Ref518291134 \r [4], a NATO standardization agreement (STANAG 7074), was initially used as the language for the JSIMS TCDM. However, FACC does not fully cover the spectrum of environmental data now required in M&S applications. The Environmental Data Coding Specification  REF _Ref503203095 \r [5],  REF _Ref503203109 \r [6] (EDCS) was initiated as a part of the DMSO-sponsored SEDRIS project and will eventually provide a code for each object and attribute likely to be included in any simulation database describing the physical environment. The EDCS is becoming an international standard under processes established by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC).The EDCS provides the data dictionary for the TCDM and other EDMs.  This approach provides a path for consistency between WARSIM databases generated in earlier versions of the EDCS as the data dictionary evolves.  The features and attributes in an EDM are statically “bound” to the EDCS via mappings, providing the opportunity to maintain consistency between the EDM and the EDCS as both evolve over time.The SEDRIS program has provided a rich suite of tools and utilities facilitating development of the WARSIM SNE, and, in the future, the OneSAF SNE.  The SEDRIS Spatial Reference Model (SRM) provides the core of the WARSIM Encapsulated Coordinate System (ECS). The Synthetic Exercise Environment Inspection Tool (SEE-IT) is used to validate the content and consistency of the STF in the WARSIM process. Enhancements to the usage of SEE-IT in OneSAF are planned to facilitate implementation of the environmental database repository.WARSIM Terrain Data Fusion System (TDFS)The TDFS is a Visual Basic application layer written to take advantage of the functionality provided by the Arc/Info Geographic Information System (GIS).  The TDFS implementation of Arc/Info GIS data processing is achieved by leveraging an extensively modified and improved version of the Arc/Info Open Development Environment (ODE) API. As such, the TDFS provides a highly automated, repeatable process aimed at facilitating a series of complex data preparation procedures for users with technical expertise in domains other than GIS.TCDM and the TDFS As the TCDM provides for complete and unambiguous definition of all terrain features, there exists the opportunity to describe certain characteristics regarding the relationships between individual features.  For example, users may designate that wherever a road crosses a river, there should always be a bridge present.  The explicit definition of such relationships facilitates a means by which dissimilar data can be composed in a manner wherein certain critical features (e.g., tactically significant bridges) can be produced in a consistent manner regardless of the content of the initial source data.In that the TCDM is source data independent, multiple sources can be supported directly via the implementation of mapping rules that enable the conversion of features from one data model schema to another.  Any attributes not provided by the source data are in turn populated with default or derived values based on the schema and specified contents of the destination data model.  These relationships, mapping rules and default attribution values are soft-coded in MS Access® 97 format and implemented at TDFS runtime.  The resulting system is such that once a set of rules are established, the product of the TDFS execution is consistent across the input databases.  Finally, in the event that the input data are inconsistent with the mapping rules or the existing data model, the set of rules can be readily changed in a just-in-time manner so as to properly handle any set of nonconforming features that become evident during the course of data processing.Mapping RulesIn the development of most existing simulation database production systems, data sources are selected on a per database case and in most instances, source data availability is the major driver for data content.  Typically, ad hoc processes are developed for mapping source data into the simulation’s data model leading to inconsistent content and increasing complications with respect to interoperability between simulation systems.WARSIM developed the TCDM prior to selection of any particular source data.  Initially, support for a broad range of source data products was planned but due to fiscal considerations, a reduction in capability was required.  In that the TDFS is data driven, however, the reductions in the capability of the TCDM do not affect the TDFS, and the TDFS data processing capability remains largely independent of specific source datasets. In the current TDFS/TCDM implementation, formal mapping rules are provided for VMAP Level 1 (and for a small subset of VMAP0).  These rules are implemented in conjunction with the TCDM in MS Access® format and are directly accessed by the TDFS at runtime.  Changes in source data or an associated EDM are easily accommodated by changes to mapping rules in the database.  Unlike previous ad hoc and hard-coded solutions, the software itself need not be modified.With an appropriate EDM and associated mapping rules, the existing TDFS will directly support Feature Foundation Data (FFD) when available as well as lower levels of Mission Specific Data Sets (MSDS).  Higher resolution MSDS will, however, require infrastructure enhancements to accommodate the increased feature density.Deconfliction. A core set of TDFS functionality is its automated data deconfliction capability.  A set of “generic” deconfliction methods have been developed that address various data integrity and conflict scenarios:Linear ContinuitySnap Points to LinesIntersect Lines in AreasConnect Lines to AreasIntersect Points in AreasAlign Lines to LinesIntersect Lines and LinesIntersect Points and LinesEach of the above methods may be applied singly or in conjunction with any number of the other methods.  Similarly, each method is applicable to multiple features in any given data model.The sheer volume of possible deconflict operations dictates the need for some mechanism by which to parameterize deconfliction for each dataset in a replicable and consistent manner.  To this end, series of deconflict “rules” were developed that explicitly define what operations (and in what order) are applied to each set of feature classes.  An auxiliary table stores various tolerances for each deconflict operation type.Collectively, the deconflict rules stored in a MS Access® data base are accessed via a “rules engine” designed and developed specifically to automate deconfliction operations.  Again, the flexibility of the data-driven approach is clearly evident, and cases wherein different geographies or feature density require tailored deconfliction can easily be accommodated.  Transmittal Content Requirement SpecificationCurrently, WARSIM produces SEDRIS Transmittal Format (STF) via the WARSIM “STF Creator”.  The content is defined by the TCDM, but the structure is essentially undocumented.  Furthermore, texture and model libraries are mapped into the WARSIM STF as a post-process to produce the OpenFlight database rendered in the WARSIM Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) visual database.  During WARSIM development, several situations were encountered where a document describing the SEDRIS data structures used by WARSIM could have facilitated data exchange.  For example, WARSIM used SEDRIS to facilitate direct reuse of low-resolution data sets from the DMSO sponsored Terrain Scenario Generation and Archiving (TSGA) project in providing a broad geographic coverage area for JSIMS. A very loose agreement was formed between DMSO and WARSIM to facilitate this exchange.  The fundamental elements of the agreement included:The TSGA databases must be delivered in STF.The databases must be provided in a geodetic spatial reference frame.The data content must be TCDM compliant.While this agreement has been executed successfully, absence of a clearly defined specification for the STF remains a hindrance to database reuse.  The Combined Arms Tactical Trainer (CATT) family of programs and the United Kingdom CATT (UKCATT) program have jointly developed a Transmittal Content Requirement Specification (TCRS) providing a clear definition of the representation and attribution required in order to generate their systems’ non-visual (e.g. CGF) databases.  The TCRS is expressed in compliance with the SEDRIS EDCS, thereby providing a common language between producer and consumer.  Because the SEDRIS Data Reference Model (DRM) is implemented as a software API, use of SEDRIS terminology for requirements provides a clear link to implementation.  Thus, database producers may use the TCRS to understand what content they must export to allow fully functional CATT databases, while consumers may use the TCRS as a guide for the kind of data CCTT and UKCATT transmittals must contain.  The CCTT/UKCATT TCRS has facilitated use of one set of database compilers to generate derived databases from two different producers.  The CCTT environmental representation and specifically the relationships between the high-resolution visual database and the correlated Computer Generated Force (CGF) databases have made this a particularly daunting task. [7]OneSAF will utilize the CATT TCRS as a guideline for development of the initial OneSAF TCRS.    The first step in this process will be documenting the existing WARSIM STF content to form the OneSAF TCRS.  The existing STF implementation must then be extended to include the additional OOS higher resolution EDM content and visual texture and models must be integrated into the STF.  This extended representation must then be documented to form the baseline OneSAF TCRS.To maximize the value of the TCRS in OneSAF, several additional issues must be addressed.  An apparent limitation in the CCTT TCRS is its current textual format (Microsoft Word).  In this format, the “requirements” of the TCRS are subject to human interpretation, complicating implementation and testing.  To support a data-driven implementation, there is a need for machine readable TCRS.  Furthermore, the authors of the CATT TCRS recognize that their work, as it stands now, is incomplete.  Several auxiliary documents still undeveloped are cited, principally a Transmittal Extraction Capabilities (TEC). The TEC specifies how data is extracted from the SEDRIS transmittal as well as “value adding” that occurs for missing/incomplete attribution in the database compilers during the extraction process.  REF _Ref518451034 \r \h [8]   A key design decision to support OneSAF environment’s data-driven approach will be to implement the TCRS in a machine-readable format similar to the EDM to provide direct control of STF production and extraction processes.  This will ensure consistency between documentation and software and will improve “testability”.  OneSAF is currently working with the developers of the CATT TCRS to address these issues.Runtime SystemCompiler Configuration FilesThe WARSIM runtime compilers are controlled by configuration files derived directly from the TCDM ensuring that the compiler software is always consistent with the current version of the TCDM.  The configuration files are automatically generated by a series of PERL scripts that traverse the MS Access® format TCDM. Since the configuration files are derived directly from the system’s EDM, database content can be tailored for each system according to its particular EDM.The Feature Data File (.fdf) holds the enumeration of all possible features. The .fdf format includes the name, SCC, geometry description and lookup priority.  The Attribute Data File (.adf) contains attribute information (where appropriate) including the name, data type, default value, and range (min/max) values. The format includes the SEDRIS Attribute Code (SAC) name, SAC data type, unit of measure and description.  The Feature/Attribute Association (.faa) file identifies the attributes associated with each feature identifying the number of bytes required to hold the data.  The .faa filesets the configuration of features for the terrain compiler, run-time software, and Plan View Display (PVD). The Feature Usage List (.ful) indicates the functions affected by each feature.  Examples include line of sight and route planning.  The .ful enumeration values are used to construct a usage mask for each feature to facilitate efficient feature access and retrieval.  For example, assume bits 0 and 1 of the usage mask represent line of sight and route planning respectively.  A forest may have both bits set (affects both LOS and routing), a lake may only have bit 1 set (affects only routing), an anti-tank ditch may have only bit 0 set (affects only line of sight), and a road may have neither bit set.  The Feature and Attribute Representation Mapping (FARM) is a two dimensional array, using the feature enumeration as rows and the attribute enumeration as columns as illustrated by Figure 5. The FARM table is built from the .fdf, .adf, .faa and .ful configuration files to map the data in the feature body to the associated attributes for efficient access.  The array holds the byte offset into the data field for each attribute of each feature.  The first row of the array is reserved to hold the number of bytes required for the attribute data type.  The first column of the array is reserved to hold the usage mask for the feature. Features are accessed using the Feature Pointer Array.  This approach permits the runtime software to efficiently retrieve only the features and attribute affecting that particular method. [9]FeatureUsageHeightVegetationBrush_DensityBottom_Material…Byte size12111Trees01010110023-1Cropland0101000002-1-1…Figure 5: Feature and Attribute Representation Mapping (FARM) TableFuture WorkDMSO has developed EDM’s for the Atmosphere, Ocean and Space (AOS) for JWARS, JSIMS and the DMSO Enviroment Federation components in a program called the Oceanographic and Atmospheric Representation Data Model (OARDM).  OneSAF is developing an EDM for AOS for the OOS EDM.  As a part of the OneSAF environment enhancements, the existing WARSIM AOS runtime infrastructure will be reengineered to integrate the DMSO Ocean, Atmosphere, and Space Environmental Server (OASES). OneSAF is coordinating with the OASES developers to integrate these AOS EDM’s to provide a similar data-driven approach for representing the OneSAF AOS. SummaryThe combined OneSAF, WARSIM, JSIMS and CCTT environment requirements cover a broad range of resolutions for data content and simulation effects demanding a flexible and extensible implementation such as is supported by the WARSIM data-driven approach. The EDM will define the data content and effects on simulation in a format that supports direct or near direct control of the environmental software subsystem processes and products.  The EDM will also support associations of environmental objects at multiple resolutions to support systems interoperability between these and other M&S systems and with external systems with similarly defined data models.  The data model data-driven approach provides a growth path for the life of the WARSIM/OneSAF environmental representation via extensions to the data model.  The approach reduces the number of changes to the source code and helps ensure consistency through self-documentation thereby helping to reduce life cycle cost.  ReferencesBirkel, P. A., “The Terrain Common Data Model (TCDM)-- A Joint Effort of JSIMS, STOW, and JWARS” Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation, 8TH-CGF-004, May 1999. D. Miller et al., “Environmental Data Modelingfor Simulation System Requirements Specification”, I/ITSEC 2000, paper no. MS-038, November, 2000. Stevens, Clark D., Toward a Common Synthetic Natural Environment, Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation and Education Conference (I/ITSEC), MS-041, December 1999.http://www.digest.org/.R. Richbourg et al., “Standardizing the codification of environmental objects: the Environmental Data Coding Specification”, Proc. Simulation Interoperability Workshop, paper 00F-SIW-071, September 2000.ISO/IEC WD18023 Environmental Data Coding Specification (EDCS), see also HYPERLINK "http://www.sedris.org/wg8home/index.htm"http://www.sedris.org/wg8home/index.htm.Stevens, et al, “Common Environmental Representation for Virtual and Constructive Simulations” 01S-SIW-134, Spring 2000, Simulations Interoperability Workshop. CATT Correlated Database Transmittal Content Requirement Specification (TCRS), SAIC Corp., 27 April 2001.Campbell, Craft, “Advances in Synthetic Natural Environment Representations”, Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation, 8TH-CGF-071, May 1999.Author BiographiesClark D. (Dan) Stevens, LCDR USN, RET, is a former Naval Aviator and Aeronautical Engineering Duty Officer with over ten years experience as an ASW Mission Commander flying the S-3 Viking.  He is a graduate of the Naval Postgraduate School (M.S. Computer Science, 1993), the Naval War College (1988) and the Advanced Program Management Course (2000). He served as the STRICOM SNE Team Leader for development of WARSIM/JSIMS SNE from June 1996 to April 2000 and has served as the OneSAF Environment Lead since then. DR. DALE D. MILLER is the manager of Advanced Technology Development for the Advanced Simulation Center group of Lockheed Martin Information Systems. He led the projects Dynamic Terrain and Objects in a Virtual World and the Terrain Database Generation & Technology for Synthetic Environments both sponsored by DARPA and USATEC. He was also the technical leader for the terrain database and terrain data fusion development for the WARSIM Program. Currently he leads the STRICOM Common SNE and DMSO Dynamic Terrain in the Environment Federation projects. Dr. Miller received his Ph.D. in Mathematics from the University of Washington in 1976. Since then he has contributed to the areas of DIS and its successor, HLA, data models for terrain representations, real-time computer graphics, computer image generator design, adaptive filtering, image processing, feature extraction, machine vision, and optical character recognition.Steven Prager is a GIS Software Engineer at Lockheed Martin Information Systems Advanced Simulation Center and has been a key developer of the WARSIM Terrain Data Fusion System, the DTIS, and the CDMF.  He is currently preparing to defend his doctoral dissertation at Simon Fraser University.  His Ph.D. dissertation, “Geographic Perspectives on the Sustainability of Nations” combines innovative numerical methods with traditional econometric modeling in an effort to better understand the interrelationship between economic and environmental systems.  He received his M.A. in geography from the University of North Carolina at Charlotte in 1995, where he specialized in spatial modeling and environmental planning.Charles E. (Chuck) Campbell is a senior software engineer with SAIC working on the OneSAF ERC project and SAIC’s Research Project Team.  His WARSIM responsibilities included design and development of Synthetic Natural Environment representations and services.  Mr. Campbell holds a Masters of Science in Computer Science from the University of Central Florida and a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science from Indiana University.  His interests include simulation, software engineering, computational geometry, and computer graphics.Jon Watkins is a senior software engineer with SAIC.  He has contributed to a variety of simulation systems over the last ten years, and is presently working on OneSAF ERC and CCTT/UKCATT database development.  Mr. Watkins received his Bachelor of Science in Computer Engineering from the University of Central Florida.Eric Root is a senior software engineer with SAIC working as the technical lead for the SNE component of the WARSIM program. His responsibilities include oversight of the design and development of SNE representations and services.  Mr. Root holds a Masters of Science in Computer Science from the University of Central Florida and a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science from Missouri Western State College.  His interests include simulation, software engineering and basketball.James (J.R.) O’Neal is a senior software engineer with SAIC.  He received his B.S. in Computer Science from the University of Central Florida in 1997.  He is currently the Technical Lead for WARSIM/JSIMS Synthetic Natural Environment.  J.R. enjoys hunting, fishing and basketball.PAGE \# "'Page: '#''"  Do you really want “Operational”?  The acronym is OTB, not OOTB.PAGE \# "'Page: '#''"  Dan.  I’ve used auto numbering for the references.  Then when you want to refer to a reference, instead of hard coding the reference, use the Insert / Cross-Reference command.