Modeling and Simulation Capability Maturity Model ExplorationFrank RicheySr. Software EngineerIIT Research Institute1701 N. Beauregard StreetAlexandria, VA 22311 703-575-3296  HYPERLINK mailto:frichey@iitri.org frichey@iitri.orgAbstract: There are no industry benchmarks for assessing the credentials, capabilities or organizational maturity of a company that provides model and simulation (M&S) products and services. If such a criterion were in place, a unit evaluating organizations to fulfill an RFP would be more confident in their decision, using a level of certification for the capability of the providers. An accomplished provider who is very mature would like to distinguish itself among its competitors.Our hypothesis is that M&S is a unique discipline, separate but not independent of specific software and engineering principles and practices. Selecting an M&S provider based on software skills alone can be a big mistake while selecting one that doesn't have the right M&S skills could prove just as disastrous. We believe that at the present time, SEI CMM’s product development practices and common management practices is the best available vehicle to provide the most efficient and cost effective means to identify companies who successfully deliver M&S products better, faster, and cheaper than the competition. In addition, SEI’s common management practices can provide the guidance to properly manage the acquisition process from low to high maturity level organizations. Having such a mechanism would allow a unit to identify contractors who can provide M&S intensive systems that are maintained with predictability and improved cost, schedule, and quality. There aren’t any official acknowledgements or certifications that distinguishes Modeling and Simulation (M&S) organizations as mature, capable, reputable or accomplished. How can an acquirer ensure its probabilities for success in identifying the appropriate contractors who provide M&S intensive systems that are maintained with predictable and improved cost, schedule, and quality? We’re aware that M&S is designed and developed with the use of software and system engineering principles and practices. However, can acquisition professionals be assured that any accomplished software development organization is capable of providing a quality M&S product within the projected cost and schedule? If not, then perhaps some consideration should be given to ways in which an M&S development organization can be recognized for its M&S capability. Also, it would be helpful to be able to recognize, among the high maturity level software development organizations, which ones are proficient as M&S developers and in which area of M&S their expertise resides. The Software Engineering Institute’s (SEI) Capability Maturity Model (CMM®) IntegrationSM (CMMI) can serve as a means for identifying a company’s process maturity level in Software (SW), Systems Engineering (SE) and soon to include Acquisition (A). It could be of greater use to the members of the DoD Modeling and Simulation community and for the Modeling and Simulation community at large if M&S were included. What makes Modeling and Simulation development requirements different from most common or typical software development projects? Our attempt in this paper is to describe some of the unique characteristics of M&S that distinguishes it as a discipline of its’ own.From a technical standpoint, the following definition is most appropriate for our use of simulation, because it incorporates the concept of modeling and simulation as indivisible. Simulation is “the process of designing a computerized model of a system (or process) and conducting experiments with this model for the purpose either of understanding the behavior of the system or of evaluating various strategies for the operation of this system.” Simply put, a simulation allows you to develop a logical abstraction (an object), and then examine how an object behaves under differing stimulus. Simulations are widely used throughout the technical community. Applied to many critical areas, it is often used to uncover and explore issues, so that they can be addressed before becoming problems. Simulation, is a technical discipline that forces one to think in global terms about system behavior as well as systems being Figure 12more than the sum of their components. It can provide insight into the design of processes, architectures, or product lines before significant time and cost have been invested and can be of great benefit in support of training. In particular, military training where servicemen and women, both individually and in teams or units operate and maintain virtual systems before they are built. Simulation is being increasingly emphasized in the Department of Defense (DoD) community, where there is documented evidence that its impact on cost, quality, and schedule is nontrivial. Modeling and Simulation is a software-based discipline involving networks, data, human interface, hardware interface and physics. It is a replica of an actual system comprised of engineering principles from both software and systems engineering technologies. However, Modeling and Simulation is different than software technology in the respect that a skilled software developer wouldn’t necessarily be proficient at Modeling and Simulation development. Therefore, selecting an M&S provider based on software skills alone can be a big mistake while selecting one that doesn't have the right M&S skills could prove just as problematic. The bottom line is: while no selection process is perfect, if you have some confidence that the group you’re about to hire has a sound understanding of good M&S development practices and has staff members recognized in that field, you will more than likely have a good foundation. But as of now, there is no organizational capability identification for the M&S discipline.The Army is embarking on an ambitious program to integrate SMART (Simulation and Training for Acquisition, Requirements, and Training) into their acquisition business processes. SMART will closely integrate the efforts of the requirements, acquisition, and training communities through the use of M&S. The ultimate goal is to provide systems with greater utility, lower cost, and fewer burdens on the Army’s budget.As the Army matures the SMART process, it requires a mechanism with which to identify those innovative companies who successfully deliver products better, faster, and cheaper than the competition.  Because IT and M&S are critical enablers to delivering products better, faster, and cheaper, this device must enable the M&S community to identify and distinguish between those companies who are applying M&S and IT in consistently mature and innovative ways to deliver products to the end-user. The challenge is to develop an instrument for evaluating contractors, that does not duplicate tools or methods already available, and that makes efficient use of effective processes already developed or knowledge already available. The Capability Maturity Model (CMMs) developed by the Software Engineering Institute (SEI) is perhaps the best example of an analogous mechanism already in place. The latest generation CMM product is the Capability Maturity Model (CMM®) IntegrationSM (CMMI). The CMMI project integrates SW-CMM® Version 2C, [1] EIA/IS-731 Systems Engineering Capability Model Version 1.0 [2], and the IPPD-CMM Version 0.98a [3] into a single framework that can be used by organizations for process improvement and for applying multi disciplines in building products or large interrelated systems. In developing the CMMI, authors are constrained by size and complexity considerations relative to the activities/practices that can be included from source models. Figure 23CMMI sponsors agree that CMM integration would enable the software and systems engineering communities to capitalize on the similarities of their approaches to product engineering process improvement. It also would eliminate some of the differences between the models that had increased the effort and expense required to pursue improvement with stovepipe models. It seems logical that M&S as a discipline should be integrated into this model since it incorporates the use of software and systems engineering practices. SW and SE models include many key Acquisition process areas such as risk management, requirements management, planning, subcontractor management, monitor and control, and configuration management. As a guide to better enable program teams in meeting user needs — including certification of the systems for operational safety, suitability, and effectiveness — a complete CMMI needs to include other disciplines such as, acquisition, IPPD and maybe M&S to provide the remaining relevant functions that are vital to delivering capabilities. To improve the efficiency of model use and increase the return on investment, the CMMI project was created to provide a single integrated set of models. Because all disciplines are not employed by every organization, the project provides CMMI models for individual disciplines and discipline combinations. Since not all processes apply equally to all organizations, the CMMI models can be tailored to an organization's mission and business objectives. Tailoring is the selective use of the content of the products generated by the CMMI framework. Selective tailoring is done by the organization applying the CMMI products. Tailoring may be performed several ways and for a variety of reasons. It may be done by restricting the application of a CMMI model to specified process areas. This may be fitting if certain process areas are not appropriate to the organization's role or business approach. For example, if an organization integrates subcontractor labor into its own processes and has no actual suppliers, then the Supplier Agreement Management process area would not be essential to the organization's practice and could be tailored out. Similarly, some practices within a process area might not be relevant to a particular system engineering role and could, therefore, be excluded. Finally, the recommended process improvement order for implementing practices may be altered to better meet business objectives.  Figure 34However, CMMI models are only abstractions of reality. Models must be chosen and tailored according to organizational need, aligned with organizational goals and objectives, and used with judgement.Currently new information has been added to clarify tailoring as an activity at the project level, working with the organizational standard processes. Historically, the challenge has been seen as organizations wrestle with the applicability of various process areas as they seek to demonstrate a maturity level. The CMMI model is in excellent condition for its intended role as a tool to stimulate enterprise-wide process improvement. Nevertheless, we recognize that there remains a need to use such process tools to benchmark organizational capability or maturity. We expect that refinements from actual use will need to be made to the model, just as refinements were made to the Software CMM when it was introduced. Thus, a refinement plan after the initial release of the CMMI could be to incorporate M&S amplifications to practices in a plan towards continuous improvement. It may be feasible to combine CMMI with M&S amplifications and possible processes in a new release, CMMI v1.1 or v2.0 in approximately a year.In summary, we believe that at the present time, SEI CMM’s product development practices and common management practices is the best available vehicle to provide the most efficient and cost effective means to identify companies who successfully deliver M&S products better, faster, and cheaper than the competition. In addition, SEI’s common management practices can provide the guidance to properly manage the acquisition process from low to high maturity level organizations. Having such a mechanism would allow a unit to identify contractors who can provide M&S intensive systems that are maintained with predictability and improved cost, schedule, and quality. An industry standard for the design and development of Modeling and Simulation products and services would be advantageous for members of the M&S community. The M&S community that we’re referring to includes both government (DoD and non-DoD) and the commercial industry. M&S integrated into the CMMI would provide guidance for an organization to improve its ability to manage the development, acquisition, and maintenance of M&S products and services. It would also provide proven practices placed into a structure that would help organizations assess its organizational maturity and process area capability, while also establishing priorities for improvement and guiding the implementation of those improvements. Some of the benefits expected with the ability to tailor a CMMI model for an organization with the mission and business objectives for M&S products and services are:Ability to identify a simulation company’s strengths and weaknesses and assesses riskAn institutionalize, organize collection of best practices Significant return on investment in productivity and qualityEliminate inconsistencies and reduce duplications Competency Assessment of contractors who develop M&S productsProfessional certification requirementsRisk ManagementIdentify training requirements for M&S qualifications or functional competencies  Improve clarity and understanding by:Common terminologyConsistent styleUniform construction rulesCommon componentFrank Richey is a Senior Software Engineer for IITRI, AB Tech Group in Alexandria, Virginia. Frank has over twenty years of progressive technical experience, specifically in planning, documenting, reviewing and assessing the development of large-scale systems. He is currently exploring the feasibility of adding model and simulation, as an additional discipline to the Capability Maturity Model (CMM®) IntegrationSM (CMMI). Frank has thirteen years of continuous experience in the DoD arena specifically with NIMA while with GE and TASC. Frank has also been involved with the IRS’ modernization program at the FFRDC, ISC and TIPPS level. For the IRS Modernization he has performed IT strategic planning for Architecture, developed a SE-CMM Level II implementation plan, designed Modernization transition planning and project managed the building of a Requirements Management Infrastructure. He has a bachelor’s degree in Computer and Information Science from Temple University.  Shannon, R., "Simulation: A Survey with Research Suggestions." AIIE Transactions. 7(1975): 289-301.2 Richey, F., “XMSO M&S Steering Group Kick-Off Meeting”, IITRI AB Tech Group Brief, 28 February 2001IPPD - Integrated Product and Process Development3 Scott, J., “Information Brief: Adding M&S to the CMMI”, IITRI AB Tech Group brief to the XMSO, 13 April 2001.4 Scott, J., “Addressing the Needs of the Modeling and Simulation Community in the Capability Maturity Model Integration”, IITRI AB Tech Group brief to AMSO, 5 January 2001HLA – High Level Architecture, DII COE - Defense Information Infrastructure Common Operating Environment, SEDRIS - Synthetic Environment Data Representation and Interchange Specification, JTA - Joint Technical ArchitectureModeling and Simulation Capability Maturity Model Exploration