Standardized Distributed Weapons Simulation and Avoiding “Red Herrings”Michael R. OakesBMH Associates, Inc.(757) 857-5670, ext 249 HYPERLINK "mailto:moakes@bmh.com" moakes@bmh.com Keywords:HLA, Distributed Mission Training, DIS, Modeling and Simulation, DMT, JSAF, Ordnance Servers, BDA, Command and Control, C2, Battle Damage AssessmentABSTRACT:	The key to any successful program starts with a series of investigations filled with assumptions and conclusions.  In the weapons acquisition world, various analyses occur from initial concept and design to operational deployment.  The accuracy depends heavily upon whether the logic involved was correct and whether the weapon was placed in its intended design environment.  Certainly, fiscal constraints drive development paths and are a great determinant whether a weapon fulfills users’ requirements.  In order to best satisfy warfighter needs, simulation based acquisition (SBA) uses modeling and simulation (M&S) to provide much of the needed analytical work.  The focus is to measure performance tradeoffs for cost (i.e., cost as an independent variable).  In fact, large reductions in unit price are possible by trading other than "key performance" requirements.  But it is not just SBA that requires robust M&S; it is also needed in concept, doctrine, and tactics development.  So, can SBA or Test and Evaluation (T&E) simulation be used for Operational Training?  The red herring occurs when attempting to answer this very question.  Many times, the M&S community views T&E simulations as a completely different system from operational training based on fidelity requirements.  In reality, today’s precision weapons require the same fidelity for both T&E and training.  It is exactly these cases where the M&S community must see through the irrelevancy of separate models and adjust how these are applied to each particular environment.  Certainly, standardized weapons models developed for both areas can be achieved.  This approach allows for data sharing and enhancement by operators and developers to increase operational proficiency as well as provide a robust test-bed to include high-end force-on-force evaluations.  There are many approaches being taken to provide simulation in force-on-force exercises and the Joint and Service communities are busy with experimentation and evaluating one hypothesis or another.  This paper describes the various efforts expanding JSAF capabilities in both the T&E and training communities with various weapons platforms and the critical problems associated with distributed simulation integration and man in-the-loop facilities.  The paper will also discuss the various development efforts to standardize the models and interfaces to achieve these goals.1.	IntroductionIn the 1800s the lore of the “red herring” began when wily British fugitives discovered that rubbing a herring across their trail would divert the bloodhounds hot in their pursuit.  In the 1920s, equally clever American investment bankers began calling preliminary prospectuses "red herrings" as a warning to investors that the documents were not complete or final.  Today, red herring (also known as the fallacy of diversion or irrelevance) is used in a more colloquial term when someone introduces irrelevant material into an argument and your argument goes off in the wrong direction (see smoke screen or wild goose chase).  Certainly trying to trip my young daughter up while learning state capitals, I asked; “Is the capital of Kentucky pronounced ‘Lewis-ville’ or ‘Louey-ville’?”  She promptly and emphatically responded, “It’s pronounced Frankfort!”  To be so confident at age 10 is truly a treasure, but it’s also a better indication of knowing the facts and applying them.  The Modeling and Simulation (M&S) community should be so lucky.  As the community competes for funding and searches for the perfect system to meet organizational or service requirements, are we all overlooking some basic concepts and facts?  Are standards limited in scope in search of the one-size fits all or do they allow opportunities to integrate, reuse software, models or simulation?  Can these models and simulation be used across disciplines?  Domains?  Services?  Are we leveraging individual M&S capabilities across the field?  Maybe reinventing the wheel every once in awhile is a good thing (ask some of the tire companies), but when is it short sighted?  Logic is the science of reasoning, proof, thinking, or inference [Concise QED].  Logic allows us to analyze a piece of reasoning and determine whether it is correct or not (valid or invalid).  Logic should take us down the right path, but it still is determined by careful analysis of individual user requirements.It would take volumes to present the various facets of M&S and the standards applications.  This paper is limited to discussing how part of the Test and Evaluation (T&E) community at Eglin AFB, FL is using simulation and networking ordnance servers in order to enhance acquisition strategies and in turn make the M&S weapons models more robust for the operational training community.  It is an attempt to explain how standards may be levied in order to provide interoperability among various users with the same weapons models.2.	Background.  While there are numerous systems, models and simulations in the T&E world, this paper briefly covers a few and their applications to the on-going OS work at Eglin AFB, FL.  The areas to investigate are the PRIMES Lab simulations and capabilities, Joint Interim Mission Model (JIMM), and Joint Modeling and Simulation System (JMASS).  Once those facts are known, then a quick overview of existing operational training simulations completes the background information in order to focus on the collaboration among the operational and T&E communities at PRIMES.2.1 	PRIMES Capabilities and T&E Simulation(s).  The Preflight Integration of Munitions and Electronic Systems (PRIMES) test facility at Eglin AFB, FL is composed of four major test areas, including an anechoic chamber, several test laboratories, and the EMI test facility to provide a multi-level integration test capability for fighter-sized aircraft and their associated weapons and electronics systems.  The PRIMES Test Facility performs installed systems testing of air-to-air and air-to-surface munitions and electronics systems on full-scale aircraft and land vehicles.  The tests include system level integration performance, weapon system effectiveness via the Guided Weapons Evaluation Facility (GWEF) / PRIMES Link, and electromagnetic compatibility and vulnerability measurements.  PRIMES testing assures that the entire aircraft or system has been tested as an integrated platform before starting the more expensive flight-test program. Through simulation and modeling, vast amounts of performance data can be obtained at a fraction of the time and cost of conventional flight test programs alone.  PRIMES provides the following major test areas: RF Anechoic Chamber:  100 dB RF-isolated anechoic chamber with a hoist lift capacity of 40 tons and capable of testing all current USAF and USN fighter aircraft and helicopters. Hangar Floor: a sheltered, non-anechoic testing environment with access to all facility simulation and instrumentation capabilities. Outdoor Ramp: open-air flightline area for testing of large aircraft, with access to all facility simulation and instrumentation. Test Stations: shielded laboratories for subsystem level testing of fighter and bomber electronics and weapon systems. EMI/EMC Chamber:  semi-anechoic shielded enclosure for testing of MIL-STD 461/462 and many other EMI/EMC commercial specifications. The PRIMES test facility can provide a variety of tests on full-sized aircraft, electronics pods, electronics pallets, missile seekers, and portable, self-contained electronics systems.  Its anechoic chamber is capable of testing all current USAF and USN/USMC fighter aircraft.  The PRIMES RF environment generators are currently capable of supporting one-on-one or many-on-many threat scenarios.  Each scenario can be a static or dynamic flight simulation that can test the integrated platform in a realistic airborne situation.  The dynamic scenarios currently use National Imagery Mapping Agency (NIMA) databases to create geographically specific threat environments.  The major PRIMES modeling and simulation systems include: a real-time six degree of freedom flight motion simulator for shooter and target motion dynamicsa four target, closed loop radar target simulator with dynamic radar cross section, jet engine modulation, electronic counter measures, and clutter signatures6174 open loop, multiplexed threat radar emittersMIL-STD 1760 weapons and aircraft simulatortwo 10-channel differential GPS constellation and GPS jammers. Test instrumentation systems include MIL-STD 1760, MIL-STD 1553, H009, AIM-7 / AIM-9 / AIM-120 umbilical, and telemetry analysis.  The GWEF-PRIMES datalink transfers information transmitted between the munitions (in the GWEF) and the aircraft (in the PRIMES).  This datalink allows simulation of aircraft–munitions interoperability and evaluation of message formats.  This capability is unmatched by any other facility of this kind. ( HYPERLINK "http://www.eglin.af.mil/46tw/TS/facils/primes/primes.htm" www.eglin.af.mil/46tw/TS/facils/primes/primes.htm)2.2	JIMM.  The Joint Integrated Mission Model (JIMM) is a Distributive Interactive Simulation (DIS) capable, event-stepped, object-oriented, general-purpose conflict simulation. JIMM can participate in a network with other simulations, simulators, hardware, and man-in-the-loop systems, or run in a stand-alone constructive manner. Multiple-sided conflicts involving air, ground, naval, and space forces may be simulated. JIMM represents the mental aspects of organizational structures, responsibilities, tactics, contingency plans, attitudes, perceptions, memory, and motivations. It also represents the physical aspects of the environment, communications, information gathering and exchanging, physical influence, disruption, and movement. Players consist of platforms, elements, systems, and expendables that can move, shoot, talk, sense, disrupt, and think.  While JIMM provides many useful capabilities it lacks the credibility and fidelity necessary for operational tests.  Through various funding means, the Operational Testing Agencies will improve JIMM's Command and Control architecture, earth representation, blue system modeling and other model capabilities to the level necessary for dedicated operational testing.  (Grelk)  JIMM is currently being used in the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) operational testing assessing how the combination of signature, maneuverability, countermeasures, and situational awareness impact survivability and lethality. 2.3	JMASS.  First of all, it’s important to note that the Joint Modeling and Simulation System (JMASS) in not a simulation but an architecture and associated tool set, which supports the building of models, the combination of models into a simulation, the execution of simulations, and the post-processing (i.e., examination) of the results (i.e., output data) of executions of simulations.  No models or simulations, other than very simple tutorial examples, are delivered on the distribution CD, i.e., you cannot usefully “run” anything on the CD.  No analysis of any sort is possible using just the JMASS software as it comes on the delivery CD.  The JMASS models have established standards but even compliance is not a guarantee it will network with other systems.  A model which is found to be JMASS-compliant (e.g., passes compliance testing) is not guaranteed to be (meaningfully) interoperable with other compliant models when combined in a JMASS simulation.  While true that compliance more or less guarantees executability (i.e., a simulation made up of JMASS-compliant models will run, or execute), interpretation of model-to-model interfaces is outside the purview of JMASS compliance and must be consistent among models in a simulation for them to be considered “interoperable.”  (Meyer)2.4	Operational Training Simulations 2.4.1	The “legacy herring” argument also exists to exclude new High Level Architecture (HLA) exist for the sake of legacy model use and the comfort in using old architectures.  The advent of each new technological advance development in weapons takes a long time to overcome the inertia set up in the masses with habit patterns and methodologies of “old” systems.  Where this fact is true in new sensors, weapons and weapons platforms, it is also true in the M&S community.  This inertia must be overcome before new tactics and methods are embraced and employed.  Many times legacy models fail to meet user requirements but due to the fast pace of T&E and operational training may lead organizations to keep up with the pace using legacy systems instead of the newer simulation that does meet their evolving requirements.  Unfortunately familiarity breeds complacency with legacy systems to the detriment of advanced M&S systems.  The propensity to maintain systems beyond their life cycle certainly is a service decision, but to do so in order to preserve those legacy simulations and ignoring newer, more efficient and more capable M&S systems that provide outstanding enhancements for both T&E as well as training seems irresponsible.  In this vain, the PRIMES lab began investigating methods to integrate JSAF into the lab and evaluations for ordnance fly out and effects in a battlespace.  2.4.2	Joint Semi-Automated Forces (JSAF).  JSAF is an entity-level warfare simulation.  It includes hundreds of Service-created models of air, land, and sea forces of various nations and alliances.  Entities can be created at the individual or aggregate level and placed in a simulated battlespace.  Objects can be created and commanded autonomously, or as part of a larger group (squadron, company, brigade, etc.).  These entities replicate the outward behavior of their component vehicle and weapon systems to a level of realism sufficient for testing and combat development.  When an object is created, it is given extensive capabilities: avoid obstacles, shoot gun and launch missiles, and be tasked to execute a mission.  Units can take advantage of situational awareness and opportunities for cover and concealment when they perform tactical movement and combat.  The user can interact with the simulation to create, load, and run scenarios to simulate a battlespace situation. JSAF can participate on a network with other constructive and virtual simulations and live hardware systems.  3.	Standardized Weapons Model DevelopmentDuring discussions on unification of the three services Dwight Eisenhower said, “It is far more important to be able to hit the target than it is to haggle over who makes a weapon or who pulls the trigger.”  DoD and the Services are engaged in numerous efforts to construct a single joint simulation, but many times they cannot agree on architecture or model development.  In many cases, the services are proceeding with their own visions and development.  The good news is new simulation development follows HLA standards and though it’s not all plug-n-play, it is a common reference for integration purposes.  Other service efforts attempt to continue legacy model maintenance and transition to HLA but miss the boat somewhat since their ability to model at the entity level is not available; hence the ability to be used in a SBA or T&E environment is limited.  Weapons fidelity and scoring must be an accepted form in order to have credibility.  It cannot depend on varying models being introduced from different sites or sources.  Air Combat Maneuvering Instrumentation (ACMI) fly out models are accepted in the training arena and are used in previous JSAF OS applications.  The PRIMES OS effort uses the ACMI fly out models for air-to-air, air-to-ground, and surface-to-air weapons for both Blue Air and Opposing Forces (OPFOR) as a basis for integration.  In this application, whenever a synthetic agent shoots a weapon, the OS creates the weapon fly out and displays/scores it for engagement resolution.  The weapons fly outs still require user requirements above the "accepted" parameters used over time but verified and validated to ensure it meets the user's expectations in the training environment.   A careful consideration regarding fly out integration must be examined to avoid any processing slow-downs or lock-ups using the fly out for all ordnance whether single or multiple interactions.  If SBA in a T&E environment is desired, then the ability for the OS applications to scale up from a single event to multiple events within a theatre operation must be available to evaluate how a weapon or platform will function in its intended environment.  The use of Modeling & Simulation continues to proliferate into virtually every realm of the Acquisition, Test and Evaluation (T&E), and training processes. Even the intelligence community faces a unique challenge in providing credible threat representations at appropriately varying levels of fidelity to a myriad of customers, especially in weapons simulation.  The challenge to the acquisition and intelligence communities is to provide well-defined models with the flexibility to address changes in intelligence assessments as systems move through the various stages of conception, development, production, and proliferation. The recent trend in military sales across international borders, as well as a preponderance to mix-and-match equipment from a variety of producers compound the difficulty in creating statically defined threat representations, since avionics and weapon "fit lists" have become very dynamic. Thus, the need to produce models which are fully instantiated, dynamic in configuration, interoperable, and reusable.  4.	Battlespace Interactions and BDA Implications One of the primary reasons JSAF was chosen for the PRIMES OS effort was the synthetic environment, its entity level resolution, scalability and of course ability to interface with C4ISR assets.  Primarily, this paper discusses the PRIMES OS development efforts and effects based operations (EBO) during weapons fly out evaluations.  4.1.  BDA Probe.  The JSAF Bomb Damage Assessment (BDA) Probe uses detonation, fire and entity-state information plus dynamic terrain data collected from the HLA environment.  This data is processed to compute a variety of BDA parameters on target vehicles, munitions, multi-state objects (MSO), and the ‘firing’ vehicle.  These parameters are stored in two files: one read into a text editor and the other read into a spreadsheet.  During processing, DIS PDUs (packets for HLA) are also created.  For each detonated munition, an entity-state PDU is created for the munition, launch vehicle/platform, vehicle targets, and “probe” so their position and orientation can be displayed.  The BDA Probe is placed on a target of interest such as a SAM site or airfield and describes detonations within a prescribed distance from the object.  Once the detonation occurs, then a mission report can be sent identifying "seen' detonation and damage to the MSOs.  Further efforts to use the BDA Probe and apply to the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) models for an engineering level damage analysis are being evaluated.  4.2	Effects Based Operations and Synthetic Representations.  The ability to analyze the battlespace and go to the critical points and get the effects needed through kinetic destruction, disruption, deception, information operations defines effects based operations (EBO).   What is most important for more interactions between the T&E and Operations communities is transferring the weapons information and how it will apply to EBO evolution.  As the PRIMES effort continues, it will be necessary to eventually include in the evaluations and experiments that directly link to operations to evaluate EBO and whether the ability to quickly change advanced weapons targeting data while the JSAF artificial intelligent aircraft on on their way to the target.  This particular capability has matured since Operation DESERT STORM and continues to evolve.  New generation precision weapons provide a greater accuracy but also require more up to date information to achieve their design goals.  As PRIMES evaluates and refines the weapons fly outs, this information can be used to improve weapons simulation for a more robust EBO evaluation in the synthetic battlespace.  Future warfare requires engaged forces to stay inside of the threat decision cycle for friendly force unpredictability and enhancing survivability.  The operational use of intelligence information and precision weapon effectiveness are key to EBO realization.  The PRIMES JSAF integration with an enhanced OS must carefully document its validation process as part the anticipated success between the T&E models and operational evaluations.4.3	The V&V HerringThe PRIMES OS development uses JSAF entities and interactions within the battlespace to evaluate weapons effects.  The enhanced OS for PRIMES is using models previously validated within the operational community and adapting software development to provide the capability to change parameters for T&E evaluations.  This method requires a careful validation of the software to verify and validate the fly outs.  Sometimes, programs become stifled with the validation process and suffer from "validation avoidance." The root of the problem is that validation is not always understood to be a process, rather than an absolute end in itself.  The question: "Is your model validated?" leads inevitably either to never-ending validation, since there is no definition of what's good enough correlation with test data to decide you can quit doing it, or it ends with the user deciding that validation is too hard (or too expensive) so he avoids it altogether.  Validation really only has meaning in the context of an application: the user wants to know if the model is demonstrated to be good enough for his purpose.  This means that the user has to analyze his application, determine what "good enough" means for him, and only do enough validation to determine if the model meets his needs. In other words, the user must search for "analytical significance" in validation results.  (Hall)For the T&E environment, validation has specific results.  Can the simulation represent empirical weapons fly out accurately and efficiently?  Can these models now be applied to operations to enhance training?  The answers should be an emphatic YES!  First decide what are the operational user's "critical issues and requirements, then apply the data from the T&E evaluations to enhance the models affecting training (i.e. threat and friendly weapons fly out and munition effectiveness).  From the answers to those questions, particularly the latter, come M&S acceptance criteria for the particular application.Once those criteria are established, they are compared with the model's capabilities to determine its suitability for the application at hand. The results of these comparisons are threefold:(a) Data To Support M&S Accreditation and is there correlation to empirical “real world data? (how the model fared compared to the acceptance criteria); (b) A Risk Assessment (what areas of the model pose risks to the study questions?); and (c) Requirements for Model Enhancements (what areas of the model should be "fixed" because of their high risk to the program?).  These are the results of comparing the model with test data for "analytical significance": it ties the entire process to the real requirements for the model, in the context of an actual application.  Tests of statistical significance are really suited more to an assessment of the behavior of the test data, rather than their significance to the problem.  We can use statistical techniques to evaluate the suitability of the data for use in comparison with model predictions, but statistics themselves will never answer questions about whether the model is suitable for a particular application. (Hall)5.	Current and Future Distributed Ordnance Server(s) Applications“The fight you train for may never happen.  It’s the ones you can’t train for that kills you.”  The entire premise behind the PRIMES OS work migrating for operational training is stated above.  As pilots and crews train for war, they must face an accurately represented threat and have their weapons modeled correctly in order to hone their skills.  Certainly, the Occam's Razor approach to analysis to peel away the layers until we find the simplest solution or outcome and discover what it tells us about an event is appropriate for continued OS development.  In fact, that development is beginning to look at each weapon during its fly out and consider the environmental effects of the battlespace for the seeker, guidance and control, fuze, warhead and collision, and finally the synthetic terrain inter-visibility/representation.  A typical approach will involve decomposing a model into functional elements.  This allows for identification of "testable" elements of the code, and examination of how each of those elements contributes to the overall credibility of the model for "end-to-end" model comparison with test data. If we compare the model's final output parameters with test data, and the results do not correlate well, we must have functional level results to sort out which part of the model is causing the problem (assuming that the problem is not in the test data). And, if the results correlate well, we want to be sure that it is not due to a cancellation of compensating errors within the model.  Parameterizing the PRIMES’ OS to date has provided JSAF models for the HARM, JDAM, AIM-9M, Hellfire, and GBU-10 for evaluation.  These models provide a good cross-section of capabilities against fixed and mobile targets in addition to different guidance and control methods in order to evaluate how they interact with the synthetic environment and terrain.  These weapons also allow an early evaluation of the OS potential to scale uop to a theater level battlespace for weapons for manned and unmanned platforms such as the Unmanned Combat Air Vehicle (UCAV), the Arsenal ship and even consideration for military applications of a Space Maneuvering Vehicle (SMV).  The UCAV will work cooperatively with manned systems and exploit the emerging command, control, communications, computer, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (C4ISR) architecture to enable successful achievement of campaign and mission level objectives. Intelligence preparation of the battlefield will provide an initial mission/threat database for mission controllers.   The UCAV will penetrate enemy IADs and external systems such as the Miniature Air Launched Decoy (MALD) will stimulate potential targets.  Sensor cueing and off-board targeting can be provided by national systems or airborne assets in real time and/or UCAVs may be part of multi-ship Time Difference of Arrival (TDOA) targeting architectures.  The system will create superior situation awareness by leveraging the many sources of information available at both the tactical and theater levels.  Such a UCAV weapon system has the potential to fully exploit the emerging information revolution and provide advanced airpower with increased tactical deterrence at a fraction of the total life cycle costs of current manned systems. The government envisions a UCAV with unit cost less then one-third of the Joint Strike Fighter, and reduction in total life cycle of 50-80% compared to a current tactical aircraft squadron.  A variety of cost and weight penalties are associated with the presence of a human pilot, including constrained fore-bodies, large canopies, displays and environmental control systems.  The aircraft's maneuver capabilities are limited by the pilots’ physiological limits such as G tolerance.  Removing the pilot from the vehicle eliminates man-rating requirements, pilot systems, and interfaces.  The UCAV offers new design freedoms that can be exploited to produce a smaller, simpler aircraft, about half the size of a conventional fighter aircraft.  Weighing about one-third to one-fourth of a manned aircraft, at 10,000 pounds they would weigh two to three times more than a Tomahawk missile.  Typically 80 percent of the useful life of today's combat aircraft is devoted to pilot training and proficiency flying, requiring longer design lives than would be needed to meet combat requirements. Without the requirement to fly sorties to retain pilot proficiency, UCAVs will fly infrequently.  A reduced maintenance design with condition based maintenance, minimized on-board sensors, reduced fluid systems, maintainable signature, and a modular avionics architecture will reduce touch labor in the fashion of commercial aircraft.  No matter what is accomplished in UCAV development and deployment, it will still require intense operator training and how the PRIMES T&E models translate to the operations.  While the PRIMES Lab is not expected to oversee Arsenal Ship concept development, it may be important to consider the weapons associated with its proposed doctrine and be included in some future EBO evaluations (operationally or T&E).  The Arsenal Ship could ensure the continued exploitation of freedom of the seas by the deterrence and power projection role it is envisioned to have. This role could be accomplished by respecting the sovereignty of partners due to the range and maneuverability of the Arsenal Ship. This exploitation could allow minimizing the use of early land-based units that have recently lost access to a number of overseas staging facilities through base closures. Secondly, massive firepower is intended to punish the enemy from the initial stages of combat operations. According to the recent OPNAV brief "Arsenal Ship...21st Century Battleship," the intent is to have 1,000 VLS cells available in less than a week. This capability is intended to enhance the credibility of those forces that are forward deployed. Next, the Arsenal Ship could free up early airlift tasked with transporting munitions into the theater. This capability will potentially make airlift available to provide support across a much larger spectrum. Finally, it will increase the time tactical air components have for preparations of traditional roles such as combat air support, combat air patrol, and strategic strike.  The Arsenal Ship has been conceived and espoused as a fully integrated joint platform.  First, it is intended to have strategic mobility and protection capabilities with the ability to operate in forward positions.  With fewer personnel on board and the protective umbrella of the Aegis system, the Arsenal Ship should be able to remain forward deployed for extended periods of time. Therefore, it should be able to provide continuous force presence and a forward magazine capacity.  Second, the Arsenal Ship is intended to have an excellent strike capability.  With the massive volume of weapons an Arsenal Ship is anticipated to have, the Navy proposes the Arsenal Ship will be able to provide sustained and coordinated long-range strikes.  The third capability intended to support joint warfighting is direct support to the land campaign. The Arsenal Ship is perceived to have the flexibility of positioning in such a manner as to effectively interdict advancing armor and to deliver battlefield operational fires in support of U.S. ground forces in the region.  A fourth joint capability would seem to be that of contributing to air superiority and countering Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD). This is envisioned through the combination of theater air defense and theater ballistic missile defense weapons planned for the Arsenal Ship.  Having a permanent availability of these weapons coupled with the remote magazine concept would considerably enhance air superiority and efforts to counter WMD.  The Air Force has long had the ability to extend its range of strike though the use of intercontinental bombers and intercontinental ballistic missiles and these options have arguably been favorable to carrier-based aircraft due to a reduced risk of collateral damage.  Technology advances added PGMs to the equation for bombers and ships.  Cruise missiles, such as the TLAM, have gained utility as a primary means of conducting strikes.  The combination of extended range and precision guidance system enhances the chances of commanders reducing the risk to their platforms and personnel.  This is accomplished by launching weapons from far greater distances than was possible in previous eras in a variety of platforms.  PGMs provide theater platforms with an immediate response capability due to their increased delivery speeds over more conventional weapons.  The advanced weapons in the PRIMES OS will have valid fly outs for careful T&E evaluations and experiments while still providing accurate models for operational use with JSAF or other DIS/HLA simulations able to tap into the PRIMES work.  6.	Conclusions“ ...the more you sweat in peace the less you bleed in war”  Hyman G. Rickover 1983Ideas versus Implementation (the classic .ppt engineering solution versus practical and operational experience/use) may lead decision makers hesitate and forego use of more robust models than current legacy models betting on the promise of .ppt technology.  Certainly, it’s been said that the only thing harder than getting a new idea into the military is to get the old one out.  The work for the PRIMES OS and JSAF integration provides a very robust low-cost simulation system and presents innovative ways, consistent with the RMA, of dealing with the future.  This PRIMES effort includes a review of its anticipated effectiveness in carrying out military missions, discussions regarding command and control issues, and its potential for joint interoperability.  The degree of success depends upon the logic and analysis used since SBA is used to highlight design trade-offs with operational requirements, it must be done correctly.  Not all models or simulations are extensible.  For example, JMASS is NOT “plug and play” though its architecture can be used for model development.  JIMM is currently DIS only and is used in T&E though there are plans at  PRIMES to consider networking with JIMM and evaluate the interactions for use.  The trades associated with each system, weapon, and platform need to be made with the full involvement and encouragement of the operational user who ultimately makes the trade decisions and of course “lives” with the weapon.  JSAF also provides PRIMES simulation Lab the ability to network and connect to live, virtual, and constructive C2ISR systems.  The opportunity to train integrated C2ISR teams in the "real world" continues to diminish.  Large realistic training exercises historically require unit deployment to training sites that increase the fiscal and operational burden on both personnel systems and units.  Over the last decade, fiscal constraints eroded infrastructures required to produce effective training sorties even as environmental pressures diminish training spaces for weapons systems that require ever-increasing volumes of land and air.  Preventing potential foes from collecting distinct and identifying characteristics of emerging technologies became a more onerous task.  The value of the advanced JSAF OS for PRIMES and the operational community is the extensibility to entity-level simulation scaled to theater operations.  While U.S. leadership and warfighting teams rely increasingly on tighter linkages and shorter decision cycles between sensors, decision-makers and shooters, sensors, like space assets or JSTARS, and shooters, such as F-16s, F-18s, F-15Es or Patriot, coalesce with the aerospace operations center (AOC) in order to ensure quicker completion of kill-chain tasks, namely to find, fix, track, target, engage, and assess (F2T2EA).  These are the tasks that must be performed to kill high-threat, mobile targets on the battlefield.  There is a definite synergy to “train like you will fight” and it is an integral part of the equation for continued military success.  As the PRIMES OS and simulation efforts unfold, data will be available for use in the USAF Distributive Mission Training (DMT).  Equipped with the OS V&V, the PRIMES T&E work can migrate to applications in the joint synthetic battlespace and immerse the user into that synthetic environment and provide real-time feedback on a system’s expected performance.  The quality of training and feedback from pilots/crews who have been using DMT unit mission training centers has been very positive.  Their feedback will not only increase the training community’s ability to work in a restricted environment, but also expand the acquisition community’s ability to build or modify systems to satisfy the warfighters’ needs and expectations.  Eventually, DMT will also include command and control (C2) and provide a synthetic environment for training warfighters from the operational to the tactical level.  Because of its synthetic nature, DMT-C2 can address and resolve the C2 training difficulties of the past. It can easily integrate a variety of offensive and defensive weapons systems simulators, and does so for a fraction of the cost of employing real weapons systems. The simulations and events can be effectively segregated to shield and protect emerging technologies, while immersing them in robust status quo architectures. Because synthetic events can be repeated, shortening decision cycles and integrating new weapons systems is more easily accomplished.  Gathering participants can be as simple as a TDY to a common event, or as effortless as having at-home devices and operators participate via distributed means and the training can be accomplished at the unit, team, and/or inter-team levels including detailed EBO evaluations.  Under the training rubric of DMT, the Air Force’s can provide highly realistic training from the operational to the tactical level, and it is poised to launch ever-increasingly complex training scenarios and opportunities as well as the testing and experimentation environments.  PRIMES is leading a great effort to further enhance JSAF simulation and be more capable of executing highly realistic mission rehearsal events in support of real-world contingencies.  Lessons learned previously in the shared synthetic battlespace, such as the ability to rapidly form and solidify contingency teams, will remain a training cornerstone stimulated by T&E  for the flexible operational applications of weapons and weapon systems.  These new solutions are poised to present incredible SBA opportunities in weapons evaluations and applied to training, mission rehearsal synthetic events.  These concepts, and their evolved applications, are only as constrained by limits to imagination.  In past OS discussions, “Fair Fight” was a critical issue for training to ensure model and simulation standardization.   The real “Fair Fight” issue maybe that we don’t want to be fair, we want to win!  By using T&E simulations to enhance operational training for friendly and threat weapons, PRIMES is leading the field proving advanced capabilities and avoiding red herrings.  7.	ReferencesGuckenberger, Dr. Dutch and Michael R. Oakes, Modeling and Simulation Adaptive Ordnance Server Innovations For Critical What If Applications, EC-027, I/ITSEC 2001.Grelk, Capt Brian J and Stuart Matthews, Ensuring Credible Mission-Level Modeling and Simualtion for the Joint Strike Fighter’s Operational Test and Evaluation.  AFOTEC.Hall, David H., Statistical Vs Analytical Significance:  How Much V&V Is Enough? McKenzie, Major Kenneth F., Jr., An Ecstasy of Fumbling: Doctrine and Innovation, Joint Force Quarterly, Winter 1995-96.Meyer, Robert J., Joint Modeling and Simulation System (JMASS):  What it does… and What it doesn’t!Oakes, Michael R. (1998), Augmenting Air and Space Dominance: The Future of Combat Training.8.	Author’s BiographyMICHAEL OAKES is a senior systems engineer with BMH Associates, Inc.  He holds a B.S. in Aeronautical Engineering, M.S. in Aeronautical Sciences, and an M.A. in National Security and Strategic Studies.  He was responsible for the evolution, bed-down, and deployment of high priority classified special access required programs.  He is a retired USAF fighter pilot with over 20 years of experience in the Pacific, European, and Southwest Asia theaters of operations and is a USAF F-15 Fighter Weapons School Graduate.  Mr. Oakes was the WISSARD Lab Test Director for the STOW-97 ACTD.  He maintains domain expertise as a commercial airline pilot and continues to provide modeling and military domain expertise for Air Synthetic Force development used in JSAF technologies. 