Training for Deep OperationsJohn BearfootMichael F NivenQinetiQDERAFort HalsteadSevenoaksKent TN14 7BPUnited Kingdom+44-1959-514906, +44-1959-516214 HYPERLINK "mailto:jebearfoot@QinetiQ.com" jebearfoot@QinetiQ.comjebearfoot@dera.gov.uk,  HYPERLINK "mailto:mniven@QinetiQ.com" mniven@QinetiQ.commniven@dera.gov.ukKeywords:Deep Operations, Training Doctrine, Training Systems, TES, CATT, HFT, FCASTABSTRACT: This paper addresses the characteristics required in future simulation-based training systems to support training in Deep Operations. It is in response to the recognition presents the results of a study on behalf of the British that  Army into the training requirements for Deep Operations. Given the anticipated nature of future operations, the Deep Operations component isare likely to become increasingly significant in future military operations. Unfortunately, high level (two-star and above) collective training has traditionally been weak in this area, whereas effective training for Deep Operations is seen as becoming increasingly crucial to operational success. Thise paperIt considers the characteristics of Deep Operations that impact most significantly on training, identifies the primary training audience and and considers the combat functions and capabilities that training for Deep Operations encompasses. It considers the training requirement and uses this as a basis for the identification of characteristics required of simulation systems to support  training for Deep Operations. considers how technology, and specifically the use of simulation, can be used to provide the training required. The conclusion is drawn that that current training capabilities do not adequately prepare forces for Deep Operations. However, it is also concluded thatfFuture simulation can technology will be able to provide much of the training required and thatusing a combination of live, virtual and constructive simulations. It recommends that procurements of future training systems and simulation upgrades should focus more strongly on remedying this shortfall. is required to meet the training need.on meeting the requirements of Deep Operations.1.	IntroductionThe British Army Future Army Training Concept [1] has identified Deep Operations as an area of training importance.   As a result, UK HQ Land commissioned a study to consider the training required for Deep Operations.  The aim of the study was to establish the gap in training capability, for Deep Operations based on an analysis of the training requirement and current training capabilities.  From thisese a number of training options were developed to provide some guidance as to how future training could be conducted. Whilst the study was carried out  from a land forces perspective, the intrinsically Joint nature of Ddeep Ooperations was recognised at an early stage. To provide boundaries for the study, the work has beenwas based on the land force chain of command, but recognising that the land formation commander could be the land component commander within a Joint task force.The study provides the basis for this paper, which has been developed to consider the wider questions of the characteristics required within training systems to support training for Deep Operations.The study itself went into the whole nature of Deep Operations in considerable detail, but this paper concentrates on the training analysis undertaken, on the identification of the training gap and on  possible solutions. The paper is primarily aimed at the user community, although the study itself did address some of the technical problems identified. Prior to the study, and to capture the imagination of potential stakeholders, a brief demonstration was held given at the ‘Artillery 2000’ exhibition, held at the UK Royal School of Artillery Larkhill. This demonstration, run in conjunction with Alenia Marconi, showed how simulation techniques could be used to support training for Deep Operations as this already been identified as a prime training medium to supporta primary means of improving operational effectiveness for Deep Operations.and draws lessons from these as to the characteristics required in both current and future training systems to support Deep Operations.Whilst the study was carried out for the British Army, it is considered that the findings have wider applicability and relevance to other nations.2.	AimThe aim of this paper is to describe the characteristics required within training and simulation systems to support training for Deep Operations.3.	2.	Deep Operations32.1	Introduction2.1.1	This section introduces the concept and nature of Deep Operations as a basis for considering training requirements in the next section. In the post cold war era Deep Operations are becoming increasingly important and can be defined as:	Deep Operations expand the battlespace in time and space, making it difficult for the enemy to concentrate combat power without loss, and thus diminish the coherence and tempo of his actions.. .[21].2.1.2  	To place this in context, it is envisaged that a cCorps level Deep Operation could be launched to a depth of more than 400kms (250 miles) with a commensurate increase in the reach required by Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance (ISTAR) systems to provide intelligence and targeting information.32.2	Scope and RrelationshipsDeep Ooperations do not exist in isolation but exist within a framework of operations that comprises of ‘deep’, ‘close’ and ‘rear’ operations. Primarily these terms relate to each other by function and secondly by geography and time. As a result, “these operations must be considered together and conducted as an entity at the operational and tactical levels; this requires continuous and careful synchronisation and, where necessary, integration between levels of command”.32.these operations must be considered together and the interactions between them need to be fully represented.Deep Operations are seen as becoming the primary focus for cCorps level operations and, increasingly, are becoming of major importance at the dDivisional level.32.3	Joint IssuesThis paper addresses Deep Operations from the perspective of the Land ComponentLand Component Command (LCC), but recognises that successful Deep Operations cannot be prosecuted successfully from within a single environment. By their very nature, Deep Operations are Jjoint and require the use of assets from all the Component Commands within a Joint Force. In the context of this paper, it is assumed that Deep Operations are being prosecuted by the Land Component Command (LCC) as the ‘supported’ component. However, much that this paper discusses could equally apply if command rested with another component commander or was retained by the Joint Task Force Commander.32.4	Doctrine. In prosecuting Deep Operations, the British Army applies the principles of Manoeuvre Warfare, which is aimed at shattering the enemy’s overall cohesion and will to fight.  It seeks to target the enemy’s centre of gravity by finding, fixing and striking the enemy. To achieve this in depth,  the Army will use the doctrinal concept of Land Manoeuvre within a Jjoint context. Land Manoeuvre is defined as:	The conduct of Land Component Operations within the Manoeuvrist Approach. It is achieved through a blend of the Find, Ground Manoeuvre, Air Manoeuvre and Firepower capabilities, synchronised by effective Command to achieve success within the Joint Operation’1.Land Manoeuvre seeks to integrate Land and Joint assets seamlessly to achieve the desired effect.  This requires a capability to plan, co-ordinate and synchronise all the activities needed to prosecute Deep Operations within the fix, find and strike continuum, both across components and within a multi-national force, with an emphasis on Battlespace management and timely effects. The complexity of this is illustrated below: EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 1: The Battlespace Environment2Training for Deep Operations 2.5	Implications of Deep Operations for TrainingFrom a consideration of the nature of Deep Operations a number of key implications for training become apparent. These are:The greatly increased dimensions of the Battlespace  to be represented within the training environment;A need to represent the broad range and special nature of the assets used in Deep Operations. Within the domain of the training audience (e.g. the LCC), the assets themselves will need to be realistically modelled. However,  for assets from other components, especially ISTAR, it may be sufficient to represent only their control and outputs;Realistic representation of the command and control environment, including the links between components and the JFHQ;The need to facilitate the representation of individual high value assets within the training environment;The need to represent the ‘soft’ effects of Information Operations in order to ensure that these have a realistic impact upon training outcome.4.2	General PrinciplesThe principles of training stillBest practise in training should apply and to Deep Operations training, will need towhich should follow the Systems Approach to Training (SAT).Training for Deep Operations  Training will need should toIt must be progressive, building on training at the systems level prior to integration into a specific Deep Operations scenario. Explain a little more.It is envisaged that the component parts of a Deep Operation will have their own dedicated training support e.g. full mission simulators for the AH64 Attack Helicopter. These could then be integrated into an overall Deep Operations scenario as required and/or provide outputs into other training systems. Collective training requirements need to be drawn defined at a relatively high level and developed from the NATO Mission Essential Task Lists (METLs) and the Joint Exercise Training Scenarios developed by Commander Joint Force Readiness and Training at the UK Permanent Joint HQ (PJHQ). alliance and national Mission Essential Task Lists (METLs). From these high level requirements, specific exercise training objectives can be developed specific exercise training objectives.Training Objectives (TOs)  need to be developed at either cCorps or dDivisional level to provide a realistic representation of the complex interactions required at both the component and Jjoint level to prosecute Deep Operations. Training objectives need toshould concentrate on the planning, co-ordination and synchronisation of a Deep Operation rather than onwith the detailed execution of the operation at unit/brigade level, which should bebeing left to the close combat training of the brigade under the responsibility of the brigade commander.3.2	Current Ttraining Status3.2.1	ResponsibilitiesThe UK Future Army Training Concept paper states that:“Responsibility for the direction, conduct, assessment and resourcing of training for Deep Operations should ideally lie with the superior headquarters most likely to assume command on operations. The study found that  Currently the responsibilities within the UK are unclear.of LAND (DCinC), PJHQ (CJFORT) and ARRC (COS ARRC) are unclear.”It is important that best practice should be applied to collective training at the level of two-, three-, and four-star commanders and staff.  This means that an operational superior headquarters, with the support of professional military trainers, should train JFHQ, JTFCs and Divisions for Deep Operations, in conjunction with HQ ARRC. and US corps HQs.; that tThe superior commander should set the training objectives and; that his staff should provide the HICON.; and that tThe commander should be engaged in the process of assessment and evaluation. However, the current responsibilities of HQ, as they pertain to Deep Operations training (and indeed to all collective training at 2* level and above) are unclear.  There is no clear single HQ responsible for training for Deep Operations (i.e. producing training directives and objectives and assessing standards reached. There is, however, increasing clarity in the responsibility for, and co-ordination of, exercises between the Component Commands and at the Joint level.3.2.2	Training PrioritiesTraining priorities are now set out in the Future Army Training Concept paper. However, this does not lay down priorities for training for Deep Operations, or for high level collective training as such. High level collective training is expensive of resources, requires large staffs to facilitate and requires tomust train and exercise all elements within the overall framework of operations. Within these constraints, it is essential that training for Deep Operations is accorded a high priority.43.3.3	Collective 	Collective Ttraining OopportunitiesThere are few opportunities to exercise the full spectrum of Deep Operations, because of the often limited availability of assets, mainly as a result of operational deployments, the relatively small size of the training estate .and limitations in the training systems currently in service. Most exercises involve, at most, a divisional HQ, which usually has to write and control the exercise as well. These need to be complemented by higher level Deep Operations exercises providing a realistic representation of the Jjoint environment.To provide a rRealistic environment to training for Deep Operations in all its aspects requires a combination of live, virtual and constructive training, as only by using all possible training environments can the full spectrum of Deep Operations tasks and objectives be trained. In particular live training is required to:Achieve operational and logistic ground truth, including time and space;Stress the command and control systems;Achieve the realistic friction of war in a complex environment as a background to managing the battlespace;Realistically test aspects of the sensor/decider/ shooter links.4.4	Training Ffacilities.Currently, training facilities available to the UKmost nations do not support the full breadth of Deep Operations training needs. Using the UK as an example, the following points illustrate current capability and enhancements required to support training for Deep Operations:Some live training can be carried out in Canada at the British Army Training Unit Suffield (BATUS).  However, realism is constrained by the physical size of the training area and, by the fact that the  Tactical Engagement Simulation (TES) systems employed have not been developed to support the needs of training for Deep Operations - which would require interfaces with air, aviation and Air Defence assets;.There are no existing UK virtual training facilities that can support Deep Operations training. The UK Combined Arms Tactical Trainer (CATT) comes into service shortly to train All Arms Battle Groups, but how CATT could contribute to training for the Deep Battle has yet to be fully addressed;Constructive simulation is provided within the UK’s Higher Formation Trainer (HFT), which is based on the Raytheon Advanced Battlefield Computer Simulation, ABACUS. HFT was conceived in 1987 and entered service in 1995 as an interim system, with the intention that the user experience gained would enable a definitive requirement to be developed. To represent Deep Operations in  collective training requires:It does not represent all aspects of Mmanoeuvre Wwarfare;A representation of Mmanoeuvre Wwarfare;It does notr represent all aspects of the Jjoint environment. The Air model  and some aspects of ISTAR representation are a particular weakness;A representation of the relevant components of the Jjoint environment. Comprehensive representation of the air environment and of ISTAR assets are of particular importance;It was not designed to be easily integrateIntegration d with operational CIS (C4I);Appropriate feedback through After Action Review (AAR) fascilitiesfacilities.It has a limited After Action Review (AAR) facility.At the Jjoint level, no dedicated UK CAST training facilities exist, although the Joint Theater Level Simulation (JTLS) is currently in use to support Joint training. This provides a good representation for the JFHQ, but does not have the fidelity to realistically represent all the assets required at the LC level.3.2.4	Training ExpertiseFinally, there is no central single centre of expertise responsible for training for Deep Operations and for developing ‘Lessons Learnt’ from exercises and disseminating bsestbest practice. As a result, lessons are lost and best practice is not disseminated efficiently. Given the Jjoint nature of Deep Operations and the need for command, control and coordinationco-ordination, both within and across components, it is likely that such a cCentre would be Joint.4.	The Collective Ttraining Ggap4.1	General4.1.1	Deep Operations cannot be divorced from Close and Rear Operations within the  operational framework and must not be separated in training.  Nevertheless, it must be given its due weight as it is the greater challenge to collective staff processes, co-ordination, synchronisation and decision-making.  4.2	The Ttraining PproblemFromn the consideration of current training, it is possible to identify the key areas that make up the training gap. In essence these are:Responsibilities: Clear responsibilities for high level (two-star and above) collective training, including that for Deep Operations and for Joint and multi-national operations, must need to be established..  The national responsibility should rest with CJO, acting closely with COMARRC, but it must not be a responsibility for a top stratum only: it must include all key elements that require training in Deep Operations.Training Objectives and Directives: High level collective training directives, including those for Deep Operations training directives, need to be set by CJOproduced for all three Services, and issued as detailed directives to all 2-, 3- and 4-star commanders.Time: Training for Deep Operations is complex and involves multiple levels in the chain of command and a large number of diverse assets, many of which are outside the LC. To represent all these aspects to the training audience currently requires a great deal of time and effort to both set up and run the training event.;Opportunity: The availability of the training audience is constrained by needs of operational commitments. As a result, opportunities to exercise all elements within the Deep Operations cycle are limited.;Real Estate: The availability of training land to provide the space required to exercise in a live environment is limited to or non-existantexistent, especially within Europe.;Training systems: The training systems currently in service have significant shortcomings in their representation of Deep Operations.It is significant that live training figures as a key requirement, as many of the functions that require to be trained lend themselves to the use of simulation. However, some live training, using TES equipment as needed, is required to:ATo achieve operational and logistic ground truth, including time and space;STo stress the command and control systems;ATo achieve the realistic friction of war in a complex environment as a background to managing the battlespace;RTo realistically test aspects of the sensor/ decider/shooter links.To close the training gap, changes to training responsibilities and processes will be required, but training systems and simulation have a key role if the challenge of providing effective training for Ddeep Ooperations is to be met.5.	Meeting the Ttraining Nneed Introduction: To meet the training need, improvements are required in both training organisation and processes, and in training systems. Changes to the development, responsibilities and processes involved will be necessary to set the conditions within which realistic training can be delivered. The delivery of effective training for Deep Operations will depend upon development of new training systems and improvements to existing ones to provide the functionality, fidelity and interfaces required to allow for an adequate representation of the full Battlespace. In particular, training systems need to provide a more realistic representation of the human dimension; so crucial in the portrayal of the characteristics and impact of manoeuvre warfare. They must also support interoperability with other, often dissimilar, simulations and with operational C4I systemsTraining PprocessesAs has already been indicated, successful Deep Operations training requires changes in the training process as much as improvements in training technology.  This involves:Responsibilityies: A clear lead is now being taken by the Commander Joint Force Readiness and Training (CJFORT) to ensure direction of Deep operations training within Jointr exercises and coordinationco-ordination of training within and between components.Direction: Training directives and objectives need to be developed to meet the emerging operational doctrine on Deep Operations. Much of this training will be outside the overall umbrella of Joint training.Direction:  Training directives and objectives need to be developed to meet the emerging operational doctrine on Deep Operations. These need to flow down from the UKs PJHQ and be incorporated in the UKs LC METLs as they are developed. In view of the expected coalition nature of future conflict it is important to ensure that these correlate with the NARO METLs used by the ACE Rapid Reaction Corps (ARRC) for which UK is the framework nation, , and with US Joint and LC METLsTraining expertise: A centre of excellence should be established to provide a focus for Deep operations concepts, doctrine and training. This centre should could be part of either an existing or planned Centre such as the proposed Joint Training for Operations Centre, or as part of the new National Defence Academy - recommended in the UK MoD Defence Training Review [4]Introduction: Training systems currently in service need to be developed and the requirements for future training systems should incorporate the requirements for Deep Operations. All three simulated training environments – live, virtual and constructive - have a role to play and will, in some cases, need to be integrated together to provide a seamless complete training environment.5.12	Live Training Systems: Whilst live training will often be conducted at too low a level to fully represent a deep battle, there can be benefit in playing some elements of a Deep Operation live. Examples would be the direct fire engagements of attack helicopters at depth, or the live representation of some ISTAR feeds into HQs. To ensure that this can be done realistically, it will be essential that all elements of the force are equipped with the relevant weapon effect simulators (WES).  Real eEstate constraints will also need to be overcome by the innovative linking of training areas to provide secure operational bases for mounting a Deep Operation, forward operating bases and so on. This will provide real-world air traffic etc. problems, but these could be overcome with careful planning?????As an example, here could be usingconsider the use of two separate training areas in the UK, such as Salisbury Plain and Sennybridge , which are just over 100 miles apart. One would provide the secure operational base whilst the latter would provide the area over which the Deep Operation is actually fought. Constraints such as real-world air traffic control over the transit routes would have to be accepted, but this would provide just another element of the friction always created by events. Other nations, with fewer geographical constraints, may be able to undertake their training within one training area.Live training could also be used to populate a virtual model of an ISTAR asset, such as a UAV, as long as some form of Position Locating and Reporting  System (PLRS) is in use by those engaged in live training. . This could then provide a realistic representation of the UAV sensor products within the simulation.5.2	Virtual Training SystemsA virtual environment, provided byembodied in a system such as : CATT, could be used to provide a more detailed representation of some elements required to prosecute the deep battle. In particular, CATT could be used to represent the close battle element of an Air ManouevreManoeuvre force engaged in Deep Operations. It could also be used to provide detailed sensor representations of (examples??)UAVs, Airborne Stand -Off Radar’s, and manned reconnaissance. However, in order to achieve this, CATT would need to be provided with:A much larger visual terrain data base, or a means of correlating two separate data bases within the same exercise, separated by up to 500kms;Realistic attack helicopter simulators, or the ability to link with the Apache AH 64 full mission simulators in service with the British and other aArmyies’s;Realistic target arrays, in depth, to allow stimulation of the operational level ISTAR assets that will be deployed to provide the information required by the commander;.Simulators or workstations to act as the control stations for the ISTAR assets.5.3	Constructive Training SystemsConstructive simulations are likely to remain the main medium through which training for Deep Operations will be conducted;. Eeither by themselves, or in conjunction with other training systems.Current UK Higher Formation Trainer (HFT)CAST systems provides a limited basis upon which to build- in the specific needs of training for Deep Operations. However, it is unlikely that improvements in all the areas identified can be incorporated within HFT current systems – these will have to wait on for the the successor system capability under the Future Command and Staff Training (CAST) programme, with a planned IOC of 2006-2008.introduction of replacement CAST systems, such as the UK’s Future Command and Staff Training (FCAST) pProgramme and the US WARSIM development.The key improvements planned for HFTneeded withforin current CAST systems is to  is to enable full interoperation with Operational C4I. This one single improvement will provide greatly enhanced training. Joint CAST is a developing area within the UKmost nations and it is essential that any LC constructive training system can link with the Joint CAST system. One option is for HFT/FCASTthe Army CAST to provide the land component of any Joint CAST. However, it is essential that the needs of Deep Operations training areare also fully reflected within the requirements for Joint CAST.For CAST systems to meet the need for the LC to train within a Joint environment, it is essential that a CAST Statement of User Need (SUN) fully reflects the requirements of Deep Operations. Many of these requirements would also support both close and rear operations and thereby help enhance training effectiveness in other areas. In particular, there is an overall need to provide a better representation of human behaviour to support Manoeuvrist Doctrine and to provide better tools to manage exercises and provide timely and realistic After Action Reviews (AARs). Particular areas of importance to Deep Operations are:A better representation of the Jjoint environment in all its facets. This will meanimplies a better representation of the overall Battlespace, especially the air and space environment,. Iintegration with operational C4I, both within the LC and within the Joint force, and a realistic, depiction of both LC and Joint ISTAR assets;. The provision of realistic ISTAR feeds, especially feeds from strategic and operational level systems. Underlying complexity will be compounded by the problem that these could be provided on a multi-national basis with national intelligence cells deployed to protect the interests of individual nations. It will be necessary to develop systems that can take aggregate level information from a CAST system, transform thatit into the picture that an ISTAR system (such as a UAV) would provide, and then use thatis as the basis for the mission report that is submitted into the G2 iIntelligence system;The representation of human behaviour. Deep Operations are designed to surprise, dismay and disrupt an enemy by attacking in areas where he feels secure and with a tempo and ferocity that will constitute both a physical and psychological attack. The effects of this attack must be represented to ensure that morale, tempo, decision making abilities and overall fighting power are degraded in a realistic manner. This will be even more important to support Information Operations by providing a realistic representation of the effects expected from, say, a Psyops campaign linked to a physical attack;The need to provide the Opposing Force (OPFOR) with similar capabilities to ensure that a force under training can not only undertake Deep Operations, but must also react to and defeat such operations directed against them.5.4   	LinkagesIn considering the three separate environments above, it is possible that enhanced training benefit could be gained by linking a combination of live, virtual and constructive simulations in such a way as to provide a more detailed training environment. In considering the three separate environments above it became evident that enhanced training benefit could be gained by linking the simulations  in some way to provide a more detailed training environment. In such a scenario, the overall fFramework of an Ooperations could be represented within CAST, the detailed sensor representations could be provided through a virtual environment such as CATT and elements of the Deep Operation, such as Deep Attack using Attack Helicopters, could be played either within CATTa virtual environment or live. In general terms, three major constraints need to be addressed to achieve this and work is currently underway within the UK to address these issues:Synchronisation of time management;Consistency of terrain;Consistency in interactions with operational C4I.More practical training issues also need to be addressed to ensure that Training Objectives within the different training environments are compatible and that a consistency of training benefit can be achieved. Linking simulations to live exercises provides the greatest technical challenge and should only be undertaken if the training advantage gained is significant. The Training exercises must ensure that live elements have no direct line of sight interactions with assets simulated elsewhere, although it might be possible through the use of Area Weapon Effects Simulation systems to allow indirect fire interactions initiated within CAST or CATT to be represented within the live environment. Finally, since the live domain is clearly restricted to real time operation, any exercise involving live assets would be constrained to run in real time. From the representation of ISTAR assets will come the realistic development of the intelligence picture. However, especially in a multi-national environment, there will be security and technical problems in providing realistic intelligence feeds. These can be overcome by providing stimulation from sources representing the high value assets through development of research tools such as the Joint Intelligence Virtual Environment (JIVE) which allows aggregate units to be decomposed into entities to stimulate ISTAR assets modelled within a Battlespace Sensor Simulation (BSS)  which then outputs reralistic ISTAR reports to the training audience.The FCAST SUN is currently being written and much of the work that led to both the Deep Operations Training Report and this paper are being incorporated as Requirements.5.2.4	Developmental work: It is also expected that training systems, especially simulations, will have a greater role to play in support of UK Battlelabs. In the UK it is proposed to use simulations to support the work of our Whilst not driving the FCAST requirements, the needs of the UK Joint Effects Battlelab need to be taken into account..6.	ConclusionsDeep Operations are becoming increasingly important which, consequently, has a significant impact on the nature of training, particularly at corps and divisional levels within the LCC. However, Deep Operations represent a Joint activity requiring synchronisation and co-ordination both within and between components.The depth and breadth of Deep Operations (out to more than 400 kms) makes them one of the most complex operations of war, requiring well trained HQs and units to ensure that the tempo of operations is maintained within a well controlled battlespace.The developing doctrine for Deep Operations has not been matched with commensurate developments in training systems, many of which were designed to address the needs of the cold war and have difficulty in representing all elements involved in Deep Operations.To meet the challenge of providing realistic training for Deep Operations, this paper has identified that:Training systems in the live, virtual and constructive domains need to be improved to fully represent Deep Operations. Some of the ways that live and virtual worlds could be used have been considered here, but further study is required to justify the investment needed to overcome the technical challenges involved in Live/Virtual/Constructive linkage;It is anticipated that the primary training capability will be provided through current and future CAST systems.  To support training for Deep Operations, improvements are required to current trainers and it is essential that the need to support Deep Operations training is reflected in future training system procurement specifications;The major improvement required in CAST is integration with Army operational C4I. CAST systems will also need:Improved representation of the Joint environment, especially with regard to Air, Air Defence, Space and ISTAR;Improved representation of human behaviour to support the doctrine of Manoeuvre Warfare;An ability to interoperate with Joint and coalition operational  C4I systemsMany of these improvements to training systems are being incorporated into current and future CAST, but maximum operational effectiveness will depend upon the correct balance between the training process and the training systems required to support it. References[1]	UK MoD Joint Warfare Publication 0-01.1, United Kingdom Glossary of Joint and Multinational terms and definitions.AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to acknowledge the large contribution to the Deep Operations Requirements Study by Brig (Retd) JWM Kincaid CBE, Thesaurus Ltd, and the feedback and support provided by the customer - UK MoD HQ Land.The authors would like to acknowledge the contribution  of Bill Kincaid for all his reqts capture work.  Customer for the work.UK MoD HQ Land and Brig (Retd) JWM Kincaid CBE Thesaurus Ltd  and the feedback and support provide by  UK MoD HQ LandAuthor BiographiesJohn Bearfoot is a training consultant working with QinetiQ DERA at Fort Halstead, UK on training and simulation issues as part of the Ministry of Defence’s Applied Research Programme. He was one of the authors of the Deep Operations Training Report prepared for the British Army.Michael Niven is a Senior Project Manager with QinetiQ DERA at Fort Halstead, UK. He has over 20 years experience in military systems design for the Army, Navy, and Air Force. He began working on modellingmodelling and simulation for Army training some 6 years ago, and is currently Project Manager for the UK Ministry of Defence’s Applied Research Programme into Army collective training.© British Crown copyright 2001. Add Crown Copyright   ?????????????? Allied Command Europe Rapid Reaction Corps RRF(L) Operations Final Draft 18 December 2000. 1 Working definition from UK Director General of Doctrine & Development May 012    Courtesy of the Royal School of Artillery Development May 20 01. UK Ministry Defence Report: Modernizing Defence Training – Report of the Defence Training Review  27 March 2001