RESIDENT G2HLA Distributed Interactive Simulations Framework for Forces ReadinessLionel KhimecheDélégation Générale pour l’Armement (DGA)SPOTI18, rue du Docteur ZamenhofFort d’Issy les Moulineaux92231 Issy les Moulineaux cedex, FranceTel : +33 (0)141463631, Fax : +33 (0)141463314lionel.khimeche@dga.defense.gouv.frKey Words :HLA, Java, C4I, gateway, Training, AAR, JANUSABSTRACT : One of the French Army Authorities main requirements is the training of Command Posts in their actual operational environment, especially at regimental level. To analyze this requirement, the RESIDENT multi-year Research Program has been launched in 1997 by the French Ministry of Defense. RESIDENT (French acronym for Distributed Interactive Simulations Framework for Forces Readiness) is based on a configurable technical architecture allowing federation of distributed heterogeneous simulations (Live, Virtual and Constructive) and C4I systems. RESIDENT provides necessary communication, coordination and management services to achieve preparation, execution and analysis of training exercises distributed over two sites.RESIDENT program is divided into three versions over a four year period. The first two versions were prototypes based on DIS. They were designed to prove feasibility of such a system with focus on technical basic functions for first version and on operational areas (Control and After Action Review) for second version. Based on lessons learned of previous versions in technical and operational areas, the third and last version RESIDENT G2 has been fielded in the second quarter of 2001. Except the objectives and functions which remain the same, everything has changed : the architecture is HLA compliant, applications are coded in Java, the After Action review is fully new, controllers see the perceived situation of their units through the use of Observation Reports from French version of JANUS, and this situation is introduced into the “SIR” C4I Trainee’s real world via the C4I-Simulation Gateway. This paper introduces RESIDENT G2 inside the context of RESIDENT program, with insight given into new technical characteristics and capabilities, with a special focus to the SIR-Simulation gateway. Lessons learned based over a Training exercise with French Army Engineering School are also presented..Introduction – BackgroundWithin a SPOTI (Information Telecommunication and Observation Programs Service) “Research Study Program” (PEA in French) logic, RESIDENT aims at building skills in the distributed simulation area applied to forces readiness. This is the domain of use of the French Regimental Information System (SIR), with close relationships with army application schools which are responsible for education and training of SIR fitted units.RESIDENT G2 is the last of a family of three demonstrators. The first version, developed in 98-99, aimed at dealing with the technical issues related to interconnection of simulations on two sites. The second version, developed in 99-00, addressed the operational aspects linked to distributed training. The original objectives of the third version was to deploy an operational demonstrator based on the lessons learned from previous versions.However, results from those previous versions, and adoption of HLA standard (IEEE 1516) by the international community led the French Army to reconsider the priorities in the distributed simulation for training domain before completion of RESIDENT. Hence, the new PEA ESTHER was launched during end 2000. This program aims at setting up by 2004 the necessary conditions for training a battalion command post in the fields with their SIR, the synthetic environment being provided by the Army Application Schools JANUS Centers over a total of 8 sites.The ESTHER perspective led the SPOTI and the Army to jointly adapt RESIDENT G2 objectives to put in line the two programmes in terms of objectives and priorities on technical and operational issues :For operational issues : Coupling with the SIR, presentation to LOCON of a valid perceived situation, coupling with JANUS deployed in army application schools, choice of RESIDENT G2 second site at Engineering School (ESAG) in Angers.For technical issues : Set up a SIR Simulation Gateway, a Line Of Sight (LOS) server based on JANUS capabilities, design a new Graphical User Interface (GUI) based on JAVA, design a new After Action Replay capability, insure HLA compliance.In addition, as for previous versions, developments of this new version were to be assessed within a series of experimentations between SPOTI and ESAG.This paper addresses the RESIDENT G2 approach, the development main issues related to the selected objectives, and the trials and their lessons learnt.RESIDENT G2 development approachRESIDENT aims at building know-how and skills in the French MoD for setting up distribution simulation training. As a PEA, it is subject to technical, methodological and contractual constraints. Consequently, it is not a standard federation of simulations in the sense it is usually understood, but a framework offering common tools for preparation, execution, and analysis of a federation. Nevertheless, it was found interesting to present the approach used for RESIDENT according to the FEDEP methodology, having in mind to initialize the process for the PEA ESTHER to come. The “REDEP” (RESIDENT Development Process) is described below.Define federation objectivesSponsors Needs : The primary objective is to develop skills in HLA applied to training for forces readiness. To provide a realistic operational basis, it was decided to place the exercise inside a battalion level – Combined – SIR using context.Federation objectives : In order to combine availability of tactical skills, of the SIR system, and of an adequate infrastructure, it was decided to use as the distant site one of the JANUS Centers of the COFAT (Army Education Command). The reference site being the SPOTI, the selected COFAT center was the Engineering Application School (ESAG) in Angers. The ESAG is to host the Trainee, LOCON are to be splitted over the two sites, the EXCON and Supervision being on the SPOTI Site.	Under these conditions, the federation is to provide the LOCON with (1) a “perceived situation” corresponding to the common picture it would get on the terrain from its subordinates, and (2) with operational means (SIR) to exchange situation with the Trainee.Develop federation conceptual modelDevelop scenarios : In order to demonstrate the interest of a federation to put the Trainee and (partially) the LOCONs in realistic conditions, it was chosen to define simple scenarios of 4 to 6 hours duration. Maneuvers take place over the Mailly le Camp where is located the French Combat Training Center. Different phases of increasing complexity have been defined : Simple engagement – Artillery support – Engineering support.Perform Conceptual Analysis : Only conventional army entities are to be used, within NATO Article V scenarios.Develop federation Requirement : JANUS is to be used on each site. Capability to exchange entities and Combat Support actions in DIS and HLA modes between the two distant JANUS servers are to be verified, in order to run combined engagement exercises (Cavalry, Infantry, Engineering, Artillery).Design federationSelect federates : Use of JANUS on both sides is a requirement. Training services are to be accomplished by RESIDENT federates so as to conduct exercises with the following role : EXCON, LOCONs, Analyst, Technical supervision, …Allocate Functionalities : JANUS federates build the synthetic environment for the scenario. RESIDENT federates subscribe to the following information : For LOCONs : Their subordinate entities and what they see,EXCON and Analyst : All information and capability to adopt the viewpoint of LOCONs,Supervision : All information for Logging and analysis of technical capabilities.Prepare plan : Specificity of the approach, development of RESIDENT tools is part of the federation development. At this step, it consists in building the contractual frame of RESIDENT, and conducting initial work of rapid prototyping or mock-up of the GUI. In addition, coordination with the army is needed for site, materials and staffing planning in conjunction with ESAG JANUS Center. The coordination is settled with redaction of the Experimentation Master Plan and the Experimentation Combined Program.Develop federationDevelop FOM : Given the JANUS reuse requirement, including its DIS capability developed by CROSAT (Army Simulation Operational Research Center), and given the requirement of preserving the ability to use the DIS mode, migration to HLA is to be done according to RPR-FOM.Establish Federation Agreement : Simulations on both sides are identical, which eliminates the Terrain Database compatibility problems, RESIDENT using RASTER Format Maps. In order to provide perceived situation to LOCON, simulations have to produce Observation Reports according to RESIDENT Interface Specifications. Finally, RESIDENT using VR-LINK Library when JANUS uses InterSIM (THALES) library, this gives constraints on RTI and RPR FOM versions (see §  REF _Ref518268875 \r \h 3.9)Implement Federates Modifications : RESIDENT developments and JANUS adaptations are to be accomplished inside this step. Main development issues are presented in §  REF _Ref518268892 \r \h 3.0.Integrate and test federationThis work is done within validation and acceptance contractual phases of RESIDENT development. Given the diversity of subjects, materials, actors (Industry, SPOTI, Army), the EVASIO product realised by SPOTI is used. It allows information handling for complex systems development management, particularly to maintain tracability by mapping the system requirements and the series of tests and experimentations.Execute federation and prepare resultsFollowing development and acceptance tests, experimentations are to be accomplished with military personnels from ESAG and CROSAT in order to verify the added values and gains provided by RESIDENT compared to current tools of the army. Principles, execution and results are presented in §  REF _Ref518268920 \r \h 4.0.Development Main IssuesAlthough the third version of the RESIDENT family, RESIDENT G2 represents a technological gap above the previous versions. According to operational and technical objectives presented above, and except the lower communication layer elements, the entire system is new. The key elements are presented below.RESIDENT G2 User Work StationIn the category of requirements related to RESIDENT G2, the notions of standardisation of workstation and of user profile were introduced, overwhelming the notion of role already existing in RESIDENT G1. Roles of EXCON, Analyst, Scenario Designer (responsible for constitution of the ORBAT), Exercise Designer (responsible for Federation Definition), LOCON and Operators, are no more rigidly affected to a dedicated Work Station (WS). At the contrary, within a given federation, it is planned to affect from 1 to 3 user profiles on every WS. From the moment the exercise is emitted by EXCON, it is possible to access the WS according to the user profiles that have been given to them. In the perspective of ESTHER where the federation will be distributed over a significant number of sites, this principle will allow for controlling the activity on the WS.Once the profile has been chosen on a given WS, a tool bar offers access to the functions available in the user profile : specific functions (for instance scenario or exercise design) and common functions such as mail between RESIDENT WS, RESIDENT data Library, Roger Wilco radio-like system, and above all the tactical situation which displays on a raster map the situation of entities taking into account the “right to see” associated to the user profile (see §  REF _Ref518268970 \r \h 3.2). Limitations to this WS standardisation logic are the following : The EXCON profiles is mandatory and unique ; Supervision profile are played on dedicated WS, one for Network Supervision, the other for DIS/HLA supervision. It is possible to play exercise and scenario designer profile on any workstation when no exercise is running.LOCON Tool Bar LOCON – Perceived SituationAn important lack identified in previous versions was the fact that LOCON WS displayed the real situation instead of the perceived situation of the subordinates. The origin comes from the missing of a LOS engine in RESIDENT. To eliminate this drawback, capability to use Observation Reports from an external simulation has been added to RESIDENT : For each LOCON profile is associated a list of entities subordinated to the controller. In the simulation flow, Observation Reports are filtered to keep only those interesting the entities of the profile. External entities are then displayed on the tactical situation of the profile with location, identification level and status contained in the report. This “perceived situation” capability necessary for LOCON can only be operated if the simulations send Observation Reports according to RESIDENT specifications. In order to guarantee this capability to RESIDENT, the implementation of the function in JANUS has been decided. Obviously, if another simulation than JANUS has to join the federation, it has to respect the specifications in this area.The perceived situation is offered primarily to LOCON profile which should not have access to the real situation. The EXCON and Analyst profiles offer also this capability to provide as needed the situation of any LOCON.SIR-Simulation GatewayA main objective of RESIDENT is to integrate the necessary tools to create around the Trainee a as realistic as possible context. Subordinates of the Trainee having access through the LOCON profile to the convenient perceived situation, it is necessary to give them the means to exchange this situation with the Trainee through the actual operational tool : The SIR.The SIR-Simulation Gateway is dedicated to transform the situation into messages usable by the SIR. To do so, a JAVA module from the SIR development program has been derived and inserted into RESIDENT. This module permits communication between RESIDENT and SIR using NT Mail 4 (GORDANO Ltd). Two modes are available : Diagram SIR-SimulationSituation Report mode : A SitRep message is sent by RESIDENT to the SIR mailbox. Exploitation of this message (Friendly and Enemy forces) is done inside into a “SitRep situation” tab. Integration of the information content into the “Recognized Picture” tab is done by explicit action from the SIR operator.PosAuto mode : A PosAuto message is sent by RESIDENT to the SIR mailbox. Exploitation of this message for information related to friendly forces is done directly into the “Recognized Picture” tab without SIR operator action. Enemy forces are presented inside a SitRep Tab which can be transferred by the operator into the Recognized Picture.The application contains necessary configuration tools to enter the SIR operational network data, particularly the operational and technical addresses of the source and destination WS. In addition, RESIDENT tools take into account in the exercise definition the mapping between simulation entities and the SIR “real world” entities compliant with the army naming convention (see §  REF _Ref518372682 \r \h 4.3.5).New GUI in JavaIn order to provide necessary adaptability to run rapid prototyping work on GUI, and to maximise reuse capability, use of JAVA has been considered. A study was conducted to verify applicability of Java to RESIDENT requirements. The result of this study according to criteria used are the following :CPU performances : Use of JIT compiler or native Windows Compiler compensate for latency induced by Java (originally an interpreted language),GUI : SWING package provides RESIDENT with necessary elements. The Java BEANS integrate those elements.Memory Management – Garbage Collector : Special care has to be taken on this point, with preference on object reuse rather than destruction/re-creation.C++ module call : It is easy to access C++ code from a Java application to use existing code or improve performances.Launch external applications : Access to MS Word and MS Power Point is available from Java.Plan view display : Tests show capability to integrate geographical application VISUGEO on which SIR and RESIDENT PVD have been built.Others : Tests show capability to develop multithread applications with Java. The XML file format has been selected for RESIDENT data storage (ORBAT, scenario, …)GUI Rapid PrototypingRESIDENT G2 GUI had the following objectives :Respect the general ergonomic principles of public software applications, and those of Windows NT/9x OS. Those principles are to be used as guidance rather than requirements,Take into account ergonomic remarks collected during RESIDENT G1 trials, while insuring compatibility with G2 functional requirements,Implicate the end user asap in GUI design, before development phase.Rapid prototyping work has been incrementally organized alternating development phases and demonstrations to end-users. Remarks during demonstration phases were to be taken into account into next development phase. In order to provide more concrete remarks, the software development platform had been partially duplicated to allow for modifications with the users directly in some elements of the mock-up. Those modifications were then sent back to the developer team rather than lines of requirements.The prototyping was accomplished in a 4 month duration, including 3 development/Demonstration cycles. The tool chosen was Java Builder from IMPRISE. The main RESIDENT GUI elements involved in the prototyping were the following :The graphical PVD,The scenario, materials, federation and exercise design tools,The AAR tools.The mock-ups have permitted to describe and specify the following elements :Static design of GUI, with components (screens, objects, …), their positions, labels and menus,Dynamic design of GUI with transition, user action, responses to user actions, consistency checking, …The RESIDENT PVD GUI is shown below.New After Action Analysis CapabilityThe AAR functions had been the source of significant amount of lessons learnt from RESIDENT G1, with participation of military officers from CENTAC (French CTC), CROSAT, and Armor School of Saumur. An important part of the rapid prototyping was dedicated to this part of the GUI, with a total re-foundation of the AAR capability. The AAR tools are divided in 5 parts :Replay : It allows fast replay of the exercise (forward, backward, reach a Point). All run-time period display capabilities are available.Bookmarks : It allows to place marks at the time of significant events of the exercise. Two kinds of bookmarks exist : (1) Automatic bookmarks according to user-defined filters to be applied on the simulation flow, (2) manual bookmarks at user’s will with attachment of comments and situation snapshots. Bookmarks are to be displayed associated to the tactical situation on a list mode or on a graphical mode (with time on x-axis).Snapshots and replay sequence : They can be extracted during the replay to evidence significant tactical events. Snapshots can also be captured during run time and associated to bookmarks.Indicators : They allow to obtain interesting statistics on the exercise through composable filters and curves displays. Filters are to be applied to objects (platforms, munitions, …) and interactions (move, fire, detonation, …) and on attributes defining those elements. For instance, filters combinations may give answers to the following questions : “How many Tanks X have been destroyed by Tank Y in the area Z of the terrain ?” or “Among detected vehicles in the area W how many have been destroyed by artillery ?”IndicatorsDebriefing : On the basis of information collected with bookmarks, replay and Indicators, it is possible to build an AAR Report File. This file contains a composable series of elements of the types above. This file can be used directly from RESIDENT for a debriefing or exported to PowerPoint for a take-away presentation.AAR ToolsetJANUS couplingModifications incorporated into JANUS (French DIS version developed by CROSAT) aim at improving the reliability of the DIS capability (InterSIM Library), allowing for the DIS/HLA dual mode and providing Observation Reports, all being RESIDENT interface specification compliant.PDUs or HLA Objects, Interactions produced by JANUS and the different routines involved have been investigated. The mechanism is the following : Simulation flow management is performed by calling the GlobalMngCyclicTreatment function at a given time step. This function calls in turn first the EntitiesMngLocalCyclicTrt function which updates InterSIMLayerDataStructures for internal entities. Then InterSIM-Executive function is called to send the updates to entities and receive the last PDU. Next, external interactions and entities are processed through EventsMngCyclicTreatment, and EntitiesMngRemote-CyclicTrt respectively. Finally, SIMAN messages are treated with SimanMngCyclicTreatment.Insuring RESIDENT compliance involved following actions on PDUs or HLA Object updates, Interactions :Neutralization : CreateEntity and RemoteEntity emitted by RESIDENT are neutralized in JANUS. DataQuery and Message unused by RESIDENT are also neutralized.Modification : ActionRequest is modified to receive RESIDENT Ping, when ActionResponse is also modified to answer this Ping. SetData enable the Observation Report function, DataAcknowledge the activation and EventReport carries the Observation Report information.Release : EntityState, Fire, Detonation are improved to be more robust. EventsMngCyclicTreatment and EventsMngGetFire functions are also modified.Implementation of Janus HLA capability consisted in installing the HLA/DIS release of InterSIM library. This implementation is performed without troubles. To be noted nevertheless a modification of JANUS to avoid an insufficient EntityType description which could lead to an unstable state of the InterSIM layer.In order to display the perceived situation on LOCON WS, it is necessary to maintain in JANUS a dynamic array containing for each (observing) entity : a list of detected entities, levels of identification, positions. The lists are updated in the following cases : Appearance of a new external entity, new detection, update of a current entity detection level.Migration to PCThe objective of the migration to PC/Windows NT was to standardise at low cost the type of computers installed on administration platforms, on the SPOTI and the ESAG sites, in the perspective of ESTHER. Moreover, previous versions of RESIDENT were in the SUN/UNIX world for historical reasons linked to the SIR. But the SIR being transferred on PC, RESIDENT was to follow.Taking the occasion of the transfer to PC world, the software have been reengineered with the introduction of the notion of Work Stations standardization, of user profiles, and the adoption of the new GUI. The low layer communication main principles have not been modified with a 100 Mbits/s LAN on each site linked together through a 4 ISDN lines (total of 256 Kbits/s) WAN with 2 gateways/multiplexers.The architecture has been modified with introduction of the RESIDENT Server dedicated to centralise the federation data, to synchronise applications on the WS, and to facilitate the release of applications.Special care as been given to the performances of the WS and graphical cards. The following technical choices have been made :DIS/HLA Supervision WS : PIII 800 MHz – Windows NT4 serveur – 128 Mo SDRAM 100 MHz.RESIDENT WS : PIII 800 MHz – Windows NT4 WS – 256 Mo SDRAM 100 MHz – 20 Go UDMA/66 – Video AGP 64 Mo.Server WS : PIII 800 MHz – Windows NT4 WS – 256 Mo SDRAM 100 MHz – 2 x 9,1 Go SCSI.On every WS, a “Communication layer” based on VR LINK library provides the interface between the communication flow and the RESIDENT tactical situation display process, hiding the HLA or DIS mode of the flow. For cost reasons, Network supervision, which insure low communication layer analysis has been maintained on HP/UNIX. Consequences on RTI and FOM choices are presented below.Migration to HLAOne major RESIDENT G2 requirement was to have the dual DIS/HLA capability. In addition, co-operation between RESIDENT and JANUS for building a perceived situation was an important constraint. In order to insure RESIDENT working in both modes, it was necessary to adapt RESIDENT workstations. In DIS mode, and according to previous versions architecture, RESIDENT WS are listening to broadcasted DIS flow. In HLA mode, RESIDENT WS become real federates which have to subscribe to data they need according to their role in the federation (EXCON, LOCON, Analyst, …). This double capability is obtained through executables depending on the federation type. At RESIDENT launch on every WS, specific DLL are linked to the main executable depending on the DIS or HLA mode of the exercise. In addition, a script is run in order to define the role of the WS as a federate and specially the classes it has to subscribe to.Given the relationships between RESIDENT and JANUS, it was necessary to choose the RTI and FOM versions compatible of both systems. The situation was the following :JANUS uses InterSIM 3.1 (THALES) Library which is compatible with RPR-FOM 0.8,RESIDENT uses VR-Link 3.5 (Mäk Technologies) library compatible with RPR-FOM 1.0. It is however compatible with 0.5, 0.7 and 0.8 RPR-FOM versions through use of FOMMAPPER.The version selected for RESIDENT is V0.8.For the RTI, persistence of JANUS HP workstations, for which RTI 1.3 NG version is unavailable with InterSim 3.1, led to the choice of DMSO RTI 1.3 V6. However, RESIDENT is compatible with RTI 1.3 NG and RPR-FOM 1.0.RESIDENT G2 TrialsExperimentation principlesExperimentations expanded in a series of 3 campaigns one week each, from mid May to end of June 2001. The content of those campaigns had been defined jointly between SPOTI, CROSAT and ESAG through the production of 2 documents : Experimentation Master Plan, and Experimentation Joint programme. Those documents were to define the campaigns objectives, schedule, assets, staffing and principles of experimentations :The first campaign was to perform assets deployment on each site (SPOTI and ESAG) and verify system capability with a limited company level DIS exercise,The second campaign aim was to set up and execute a BattleGroup level exercise in DIS mode and in HLA mode,The third campaign was to perform a battalion exercise and to build an as realistic as possible exercise using the SIR coupled to RESIDENT via the Gateway.Two sites deployment over France mapAssetsThe assets deployed over both sides were the following :RESIDENT : The server, 3 standardized WS and the 2 supervision WS on the SPOTI site, 2 standardized WS on ESAG site. EXCON and OPFOR profiles were to be played by SPOTI, Blue LOCONs by ESAG, the Analyst profile being moved between the SPOTI and ESAG.JANUS : 1 JANUS server and 1 JANUS client on SPOTI site for Red forces, 1 JANUS server and 3 JANUS client on ESAG site for Blue forces.SIR : The SIR WS for the Trainee at Regimental Layer on SPOTI site, and 2 SIR WS at company level on ESAG site coupled with the RESIDENT Blue LOCON WS.Communication means from RESIDENT G1 were re-uses, with 2 ISDN lines (256 Kbits/s) and one gateway/multiplexer on each site. In order to insure co-ordination between both sides, a VTC link was available between exercise time frames. During exercises, audio communications channels based on Roger-Wilco free ware were also available, customised inside RESIDENT software, to provide communication means between profiles insuring tactical radio needs.RESIDENT assets deploymentCampaigns executionIn accordance with the Experimentation Joint Programme, RESIDENT G2 grew up progressively on several axes :Materials : JANUS configuration increased, and the SIR was deployed at the 3rd Campaign,Functionality : RESIDENT Mailing system, Graphical Editor and SIR-simulation gateway were accessible for the 3rd Campaign,Scenario : From company level in first campaign to battle-group in second, and combat support, Battalion in the 3rd.Protocols : DIS only for first campaign, both modes were used alternately during 2nd and 3rd campaign.The 1st campaign which aimed at deploying the assets has been nearly trouble free, once communication means reconfigured, and did not produce special lessons learnt. Following campaigns have been fruitful in events and lessons learnt for federation set up and execution. Main steps characterising the three campaigns are presented below.DIS-mode exercise configurationThis first part corresponds approximately to the 1st campaign. It permits to define the main elements of the federation which will be partially reused or slightly modified for the HLA part of experimentations. It consists first in the ORBAT which has been defined to integrate JANUS requirements, both in terms of tactical aspects (representation of entities) and technical aspects (Id of entities for simulation flow). Finalisation of ORBAT took several runs of exercise. The exercise definition goes on with definition of RESIDENT federation that is to say identify sites, assets and applications which participate. Authorised user profiles for the different WS are also defined. Mapping of ORBAT entities to simulations, then to LOCON profiles, and finally linkage between simulation entities and their image in RESIDENT, complete the exercise definition.Once the exercise defined, EXCON “emits” the exercise. This allows the RESIDENT WS connected under an authorised user profile to receive needed information : Terrain, Orbat, owned entities, … JANUS simulations are started. Once their planning phase completed, they wait in play mode for the Start signal from EXCON.In the DIS mode, the exercise is similar to those run in RESIDENT G1. However, affectation of entities to LOCON WS, new capability linked to the implementation of the perceived situation, and the notion of user profile, change significantly the configuration. In addition, RESIDENT server provides an efficient mean to insure consistency of the federation, especially through the synchronisation server which allows for time consistency of all WS situations. DIS-mode exercise executionFor this first exercise, the SIR not being in use, the aim was to demonstrate and verify the technical aspects of the federation.EXCON briefs the LOCONs about the principles of the Battle-group level exercise. RESIDENT provides the LOCONs with the perceived situation (locations and status) from their subordinate units. On the basis of the scenario, each LOCON gives orders to the JANUS operator in charge of its respective units through a Roger Wilco Channel.The exercise management is performed by EXCON with the technical support from the Supervision WS. SIMAN functions are available to freeze, resume and restart the execution, analysis tools give information on the federation status and on the characteristics of the simulation flow. This flow is recorded for AAR purposes.Federation Status Panel The exercise being satisfactorily executed at the Battle-group level, up sizing to Battalion is decided. The ORBAT is refined during several exercise runs in order to finalize mapping between RESIDENT and JANUS entities (tactical symbols). The relationships between actors on both sides are also refined to prepare the introduction of the SIR. At the end of exercises, AAR tools are used by the analyst from CROSAT.On the technical viewpoint, throughput data are measured on each side of the gateway (LAN and WAN). No overflow is detected.DIS Throughput curvesHLA-mode exercise configurationRunning the exercise in DIS mode was based on the broadcast of the DIS flow to all WS of the federation, including RESIDENT WS. In the HLA mode, RESIDENT modules which operate the user profiles, and some supervision processes, become real HLA federate. JANUS servers are as well commuted to HLA. Information related to federation set up (.fed and .rid files) are available in each WS environment data.The set up of the federation is as follows :On Supervision WS (which is not yet a federate), FMT is launched to start FEDEX on this WS. The RTI executive is running permanently on the RESIDENT server,Red and Blue JANUS servers are launched, and they wait for EXCON start. They join the federation and appear on FMT display,EXCON emits the exercise whose status changes to “Emitted”. The Network Supervision Federate joins the federation.EXCON launches the exercise whose status changes to “Running”. EXCON joins the federation, with all RESIDENT WS whose Tactical Situation process is running. This process creates the “Communication Layer” on each WS and updates the exercise name and federation name. The “communication layer”, which embeds a HLA DDL, uses necessary information (.rid and .fed) to join the federation.Once the exercise launched is finalized, each federation WS is synchronized by the synchronization server.Federation Chart HLA-mode exercise executionConversion to HLA introduce no modification on RESIDENT Tools except those dedicated to exercise supervision which become HLA compliant. FMT and commercial FedDirector allow to get specific insights into the federation execution. Particularly, initialisation and permanent execution modes may be supervised. At the end of federation initialisation, the situation displayed by FedDirector is the following :FedDirector displayStatistics are obtained with RESIDENT supervision tools on the Battalion level exercise. This time, frequent communication overflow situations are displayed as it can be seen on following curves :HLA communication overflow chartsThis situation may be explained by the fact that InterSIM library used by JANUS DIS is configured to update not only the modified attributes but the whole object, which could make the difference between DIS and HLA mode flow.Introduction of SIRIn order to build the heterogeneous RESIDENT – SIR – JANUS federation, the mapping of relevant elements from three systems has to be accomplished :Insertion of RESIDENT WS as Command Post in the SIR ORBATCorrespondence between ORBATs : the most demanding requirement comes from the SIR which has to be Army naming policy compliant, with a 14 letter name limit,Configuration of  SIR mailing system to take into account the message diffusion logic between all RESIDENT and SIR WS according to actors organizational structure,SIR mailbox over Common Picture DisplayThe use of the capability is the following : During the exercise, the perceived situation is periodically captured by the RESIDENT LOCON WS operator. The situation is automatically inserted into an operational MELISSA message - a SitRep or a PosAuto, according to the choice of the operator,The message is then transmitted into the actual SIR mailing system to the SIR workstation selected by the operator, for instance the LOCON WS,The LOCON then receives this information inside its MailBox. Depending on the type PosAuto or SitRep, exploitation of the message is whether automatic insertion into his “Recognised Picturee, or creation of a SitRep Tab on the SIR display. The content of this SitRep can be included at will in the Recognised Picture.The subordinate (LOCON) can then make modifications on the situation. When he is ready, he sends a message to the Trainee with all the SIR communication system capabilities. The messages are sent by the LOCONs depending on the nature and status of the maneuver : On each report line if the operation is on schedule, in case of unexpected event.The Trainee receives in turn the situation messages from his subordinates. He integrates the elements in its Regimental Recognised Picture which allows him to assess the situation and prepare new orders for its subordinate.This process has been successfully implemented during the exercises of the 3rd campaign. Of course, as the Battalion level was limited to a single personnel instead of a real Command Post, the operational meaning of the experiment was limited, in accordance with the duration and objectives of the scenario.Lessons learntThe work undertaken within RESIDENT G2 has produced the following technical findings presented below.CommunicationsThe simulation flow transmission has been successfully achieved via the communication means, but the set up of means is sometimes difficult at the beginning of a campaign. The relationships between gateway /multiplexers on both sides are very sensitive. As number of sites will increase on ESTHER, a special emphasis has to be made on this subject.The coordination flow with Roger Wilco is somewhat instable. The protocol used may be of lower priority compared to the other flows and conduct to loss of information or disconnection. Anyway, VTC appears much more satisfying, if it is possible to establish different channels between actors. That is an objective or ESTHER.Federation/Exercise configuration tools : The new GUI in this domain has permitted to improve the configuration process. Nevertheless, other improvement areas have been identified as a result from SIR Simulation connection experimentations: The different tools should be more flexible to facilitate relationships between RESIDENT, Simulation and C4I objects. They also need to be more integrated.Coupling JANUS and RESIDENTThe cooperation between CROSAT and Industry in this domain has been fruitful. The CROSAT JANUS DIS/HLA capability has been improved in terms of capability and robustness. The use of different DIS/HLA library has not been a problem.Migration toward HLAThe data flow observed for HLA exercises is much higher than in DIS mode. This results from the update mode chosen in InterSIM HLA library : the whole object is updated instead of the modified attribute. This advantage is that the situation is more easily provided to a new federate or a federate coming back into the federation. The balance bandwidth vs flexibility has to be found.The RESIDENT federates are usually only listening to the flow. After a adjustable but limited time-out, this silence conduct the FEDEX to eject the federate. To avoid this phenomenon, RESIDENT federates have been configured to restore a kind of long period heart beat inside the time-out. This is achieved by checking periodically if the federate has been active inside the federation, and if not, to ask for updates using a VR-LINK service.GUIThe choice of JAVA has been successful. The objectives in terms of capability, involvement of user, timeline have been respected. Some elements lately introduced have been taken into account. Anyway, some improvement have been identified in this area too, for the PVD display, or the AAR, and they will be specified and implemented in ESTHER.AAR toolsThe rapid prototyping of the GUI emphasized on the AAR tools with involvement of different military officers from CENTAC, CROSAT and Armor school. This allowed for taking into account the need mainly in terms of functionality. However, the ergonomic part of the job has not been enough customized for the operational need. As the static part of the prototyping has been very demanding, the dynamic part has not been sufficiently searched because of time. This will have to be finalized in ESTHER.Perceived situationThis important function has been introduced satisfactorily in RESIDENT G2. However, the display of friendly forces from other client of the same JANUS server has not been implemented for bandwidth reason.Any simulation to join the federation needs to comply the RESIDENT interface specification.Introduction of SIRDue to the complexity of the SIR architecture, reflecting the Battalion GroupWare complexity, coupling RESIDENT to SIR has not been an easy task. It has been chosen to enter the system at the SMTP level using NT Mail 4. In addition, RESIDENT workstations had to be declared into the SIR ORBAT to join the operational mailing protocol. The distributed architecture of SIR and RESIDENT over two sites has obviously complicated the task. Rapidly achieved on the SPOTI reference site, a troubleshooting phase during the last campaign has been necessary to complete the functionality on both sides.The capability has been achieved, allowing full operational  C4I connection between the training audience and the response cells. Despite the limited scope of the scenario, consistent with the restricted staffing of the Trainee’s CP, the interest of  RESIDENT coupled to SIR has been demonstrated.In order to improve efficiency in configuration and utilization areas, some improvement have been identified to be done in ESTHER. It consists of SIR to RESIDENT configuration process optimization, mainly in the procedure area, because of the impossibility of making modification in the SIR software. For the RESIDENT part, the improvements are related to the integration of SIR constraints in terms of ORBAT (naming convention, definition of CP,…) and to the LOCON GUI used to send messages.ConclusionAfter the work and skills learned on the two first versions, reconsidering the objectives and renewing the main elements legacy from RESIDENT G1 was a real challenge: New GUI resulting from a rapid prototyping, new programming language with JAVA, new capabilities with perceived situation and a special effort on AAR, introduction of coupling with JANUS and SIR, migration to HLA.Despite some initial troubles inherent to youth of the product engaged into operational trials immediately after the end of development to respect a tight planning, RESIDENT G2 kept its promises as PEA (Research Study Program). Lots of tracks have been initialised and experimented during trials with the Army Engineering School. Improvement areas have been identified in the existing functions (multi-sites connection, coupling to SIR, AAR), information to help specifying new capabilities have been collected (audio and VTC communications between actors, participation of other federates, …).This work provides a valuable basis for ESTHER whose first version will be experimented end 2002, with an HLA federation deployment over 4 sites including 3 army application schools. AcknowledgmentsThe work presented in this paper was done under the sponsorship of the French Ministry of Defense.Special thanks to all the participants for their practical support in this research and demonstration :For French Ministry of Defense side : COFAT: CBA LeonardESAG: CBA Bodenes, Lt EchardCROSAT: LCL Lafont, LCL Fatz, CBA Bazan, M. FillySPOTI: Melle Favre Petit Mermet, M. Bonnavaud, M. GougeatFor the Industry side:Matra Système & InformationThomson Systèmes AéroportésReferences“PICTES : A UK Technology Demonstration of a Combined Distributed Training Exercise using National Simulations ” 98F-SIW-126“RESIDENT : Distributed Interactive Simulations Framework for Forces Readiness ” 99F-SIW-053Author BiographiesLIONEL KHIMECHE works within the French MoD simulation team of the SPOTI (Information Telecommunication and Observation Programs Service). He holds a Master degree in electronics from INSTN and an Engineer diploma in computer sciences from Orsay university. He is currently responsible for several research programs (RESIDENT, ESTHER and APLET) which address the forces readiness and support to operation areas. As a technical specialist supporting French army C4ISR Program Directors, he is involved in simulation activities in the areas of training and exercising Army forces. In addition, he has the following international responsibilities : French Technical Project Officer for the DEA1188 dealing with Training Devices and Simulation Technology, French co-chairman of the NATO technical activity PATHFINDER, and French chairman for the simulation group of the French-German Electronic Commission. He regularly attends international simulation workshops (SISO, ITEC, ITSEC) to present French distributed simulation experiences and emerging technologies for the coupling of C4ISR and simulation. PAGE 2/ NUMPAGES 2 PAGE 1/ NUMPAGES 1 PAGE 1/ NUMPAGES 1SitRep PictureEni ForcesOwn ForcesSitRep modePosAuto modeRESIDENTESAG (Angers)JANUS LANs100 Mbits/s LANSPOTI (Paris)GatewayMultiplexerJANUSJANUS ServerJANUSJANUSGatewayMultiplexerRESIDENT DIS/HLARESIDENT SupervisionRESIDENT ServerJANUS ServerJANUSJANUSRESIDENTRESIDENTSIRSIRRESIDENTRESIDENTRESIDENTSIRSIRSIR MailBoxSitRep MsgRecognised PicturePosAuto MsgPerceived SituationSitRep Picture EMBED PBrush  ESAGSPOTIAngersParisFRANCENANTESCANNESMARSEILLELYONBORDEAUXRENNESBRESTMAILLY LE CAMPPARISSPOTI EMBED Word.Picture.8  