Coalition Interoperability through Standards-Based Collaborative EnvironmentsJohan BendzPer JohannissonGunnar OhlundAnders FrankFMVJudith DahmannThe MITRE CorportationCol Kenneth Konwin (AF)Office of Secretary of DefenseStaffan LofPitch ABRichard BriggsVirtual Technology CorporationKeywords:Interoperability; System of Systems; Coaltion; StandradsAbstract:  Modeling and simulation supported by international, commercial standards provides the technical means to create collaborative environments which can be used by coalition partners, throughout the development and employment process, to ensure that systems deployed by partner nations can effectively work together in coalition operations. Today nations face specific issues of forming coalition partnerships to address the issues they face each time they find themselves in a crisis situation.   The nature of coalition force composition and operations is addressed on a case by case basis, often only at the point when action is required.  This project will demonstrate the capability to apply information technology based on open industry international standards and resulting commercial products, to accomplish this recurring task using a structured, systematic, low cost approach.   In this effort, the US and Sweden are working together to create a simulation-based environment to assess the interoperability between force elements from their respective force inventories to support coalition operations.  This environment will be based on open, international standards (shall we refer to the IEEE 1516  (HLA), ISO 15288, STEP 233) , which will support future participation by additional coalition partners.  Beginning with a small set of key force elements (e.g. airborne weapons platforms, C2 systems, sensor systems) and building on these, a versatile environment will be evolved which will support interoperability assessments of current and proposed force elements and concepts of coalition operations.  This project is developing the framework for this environment and the initial components of that environment as a working demonstration of the approach and the basis for continued collaborative development and application.1  IntroductionDevelopment, deployment and employment of military forces today is a coalition enterprise.  Only very rarely are force deployments in world crises undertaken by a single nation.  Coalitions of national forces are the norm for almost all current operations, making agile and effective force interoperability a key element in the ability to quickly and effectively respond to crisis situations.  Unfortunately, today’s national C4ISR and force developments and employment strategies tend to be done individually on a national basis, posing serious obstacles to effective coalition operations. Modeling and simulation supported by international, commercial standards provides the technical means to address this issue through the creation of  simulation-based collaborative environments which can be used by coalition partners, throughout the development and employment process, to ensure that systems deployed by partner nations can effectively work together in coalition operations.  The US and Sweden are working together to create a simulation-based environment to assess the interoperability between force elements from their respective force inventories to support coalition operations.  This environment is to be developed in partnership with an ongoing cooperative effort between the two nations to address issues of interest to ground force cooperation.  The introduction of additional tools and processes based on open, international standards, will support both the current applications as well as future participation by additional coalition partners. 2  The ProblemForces deployed to support world crises are drawn from the force inventories of multiple nations joined together in response to the crisis.  In most cases, this may be the first time these force elements will have the occasion to operate together, leaving open questions about how to effectively counter the crisis with the mix of available assets.  Even when force elements have been used collaboratively in prior employments, continued upgrades and improvements in the force elements by their national militaries mean that any subsequent use may involve new elements that could affect the interoperability of the force as a whole.  Some cost-effective means is needed to allow nations to assess the interoperability of their forces, prior to a crisis situation, to know that the means exists to operate effectively as a coalition before the need to do so is at hand.3  Technical ApproachA simulated representation of the operational situation can provide an environment for assessing the ability of selected elements to work effectively as part of a coalition force.  Such an environment can be created using current open systems simulation interoperability standards (IEEE 1516 High Level Architecture/OMG Distributed Simulation Specifications 1.0, hereafter referred to as ‘HLA’).  Coalition nations can introduce simulated (digital) representations of their force elements into a standards-based simulated operational environment and evaluate their ability to operate as part of the coalition force.  The development of such a simulated environment is based on the specification of a coalition concept of operations in which force elements from participating nations work together to accomplish a specified mission.  Devloping a clear description of the coalition concept of operations or ‘conops’, the expected roles of force elements in executing the conops, the interactions among these elements, and the respective roles of coalition nations in supplying force components is all part of the process of creating the proposed environment.  In HLA, the accepted federation development and execution process (or FEDEP), incorporates this type of activity under what is termed the ‘conceptual model’ stage of the process.  In this project, this stage is particularly important.  The resulting federation and its execution will allow for an examination of the proposed conops, as well as the ability of coalition nation force elements to interoperate in its execution.Because of the open systems nature of the HLA, a simulation federation can be developed which will allow new elements to be introduced through the manipulation of the interfaces to simulated force element simulations provided by the nations.  This allows for independent development of national force element representations and collaborative assessment of coalition forces through the federation of these elements with representations of the rest of the operational environment.  In addition to allowing nations to bring simulations of their force elements into the operational environment federation, the proposed effort will investigate other methods for allowing assessments of systems that have not yet been simulated by their host nations. By allowing potential participants to provide structured descriptions of their force elements, and by using these structured descriptions to configure force representations be in the federation, the impacts of incorporating these added systems on operations would be assessed.  To the degree that these structure descriptions can be built on open international standards (ISO 233, as a candidate starting point), this approach will have the potential for easy extension to include other systems and other nations in an open way.Figure 1 depicts this federation approach.As shown in the figure, four types of components will be incorporated into the federation:Simulated Representation of the Operational Environment:  A set of federates will be configured to represent the operational environment for a selected mission area and set of scenarios.  These will include friendly and enemy forces, environmental representations, etc. needed to reflect the critical operational elements.  Supporting these federates, as well as the rest of the federation is a basic scenario and baseline system characteristics.  These and the other federates in the federation will be supported by a federation object model (FOM) which will define the data to be shared across the federation.  The FOM will provide the framework for the full set of federates to be incorporated into the federations, and will evolve as the use of the federation evolves.Simulations of Specific National C4ISR Force Elements Participating in Operation:  Also included in the federation are the specific systems or force elements of particular interest.  These simulated representations interoperate with the representations in the federates described in Figure 1 in the same way that these force elements interoperate in the actual battle space environment.  These representations may be fully simulated representations, operator in the loop simulations or hardware in the loop (either lab or range based).  They may also be interfaces to actual operational systems.Reconfigurable Simulated Representations:  In addition, this federation will have a set of federates which provide a ‘reconfigurable’ representation of the force element ‘type’ (e.g. aircraft, sensor) which can be ‘tailored’ to represent specific actual systems or force elements.  They could also be tailored to represent systems or elements with proposed changes incorporated.  These federates will be used to examine interoperability effects of added elements not available in national simulations or future proposed systems.Federation Support Utilities to Set-up, Monitor, and Control the Federation, and to Collect Data on Federation Executions:  Finally, the federation will include a suit of supporting tools which will allow for the set up and monitoring of federation operations, as well as the collection and analysis of data generated by the federation executions.  As part of this suite, the use of a control federate to change parameters of the reconfigurable representation federates, between federations executions, using the standard HLA object models and interface functions.  In addition, the project will examine the potential for using newly proposed (ISO 233) product description component of the STEP standards, which to date have primarily focused on Computer Aided Design specifications.  Use of ISO standards for the product descriptions would offer the potential for an international standards based way of describing key system parameters for the purposed of coalition system acquisition collaboration.By structuring an extensible component-based simulation environment with these types of components, it will be possible to examine the effect of  incorporating new force elements or systems into an operation in terms of their ability to interoperate with the force package as a whole.  PlanThis federation will be developed and iterated over multiple phases applying different aspects of standards and standards-based commercial products to the elements of the collaborative environment and to the processes used to formulate, develop, configure and test the federation.  The value added of these systems will be assessed in terms of the immediate problem being addressed and by the extensibility and flexibility of the federation to addressing new issues or adding new participants.The Coalition Interoperability Through Standrads based Collaboation Environments (CISE) concept will be examined through participation in a federation development undertaken in a partnership with an ongoing cooperative distributed simulation program between the US Army CECOM and the Swedish Army.  Phase 1 of this activity was completed in April 2001 resulting in a demonstration of the basic infrastructure to support a variety of collaborative investigations between the US and Sweden.  This environment exemplifies the type of environment envisioned by the CISE concept with some use of standards (HLA for interoperability, for instance).  This initial demonstration federation which incorporated ground and air elements in a Joint Suppression of Enemy Air Defense (JSEAD) mission context is shown in Figure 2, with an overlay of the CISE terminology introduced above.  Based on the success of the phase 1 activities, phase 2 of this program will begin this fall by addressing a high priority interoperability problem of interest to the US and Sweden.  Candidate areas of investigation include:Multi-Sensor Airborne Platform (ala US Aerial Common Sensor) in a coalition environmentBlue Force Situational Awareness (ala US Coalition Combat ID Advanced Concept Technology Demonstration) data sharing issues and approaches among coalition systems Multi-source Ground Picture Fusion (ala Common Ground Station) with Coalition sensor feeds and coalition usersTo address the issues in the selected problem area, a federation will be developed incorporating operational environment representations, including representations of US and Swedish force elements central to the investigations and simulations of the C4ISR or weapons systems provided by the owning nations.  As an overlay to this process to support the development and demonstration of the CISE concepts, activities will be undertaken to incorporate standards based runtime federates and processes to augment the ongoing project activities.  Existing standards-based commercial simulation development tools and supporting utilities will be used to provide the reconfigurable representation federates and federation support systems configured using data provided by a standards-based structured product description.  The degree to which this is feasible and the degree to which this provides flexibility in the conduct of experimentation will be assessed.The  HLA federation development and execution process (FEDEP) is typically used to guide the development process.  In this activity, we will follow this common process but we will map the process to the ISO 15288 draft standard systems engineering process.  This is based on the idea that the FEDEP is actually a systems engineering process, and as such it could be expressed as a specialized form of a standard process description.    In each step of the process, opportunities to apply standards or standards based commercial tools will be identifiedand the extent possible applied to the process.(i)	Problem Definition:  A mission area and notional operation will be identified, along with a notional proposed coalition force deployment.  Key force elements will be identified along with those from different nations which would operate together to support the mission.  The problem would include the need to assess the impact on other systems in the force package of including a newly developed system (not yet available for test, perhaps) into the force mix.(ii) 	Conceptual Model:   The problem will be reviewed in terms of the proposed approach to executing the mission.  As a coalition operation, this may be an area where there is no established, agreed upon approach.  In this case, the first step is to define the proposed concept of operations for the coalition.  This may be done in several ways.  If one of the participants has a concept of operations that is appropriate, this ‘national’ approach may be used as the starting point.  There may be an international approach to mission execution that could be used.  In either case, the coalition team will develop and describe the proposed coalition concept of operations.  This concept of operations will be operational analyzed to identify key force elements, their roles in the mission thread representing the notional operation and the interactions among the force elements (systems) from participating coalition nations.  Included would be an identification of the prospective impacts of introducing the ‘new system’.(iii) 	Federation Design:  Using the conceptual model as the basis, federates will be selected, the roles of each federate in representing force elements will be designated, and the federate data exchanges defined in the FOM.  Federates will be selected from available simulations and tools, which can be adapted to support the first built of this federation.  Reconfigurable representation federates would be used as the means to introduce representation of the new system capabilities into the federation and to rapidly generate federates for needed force elements when no simulation representing them currently exist, possibly without the release issues associated with a national representation.  The use of these ‘reconfigurables’ using both available systems descriptions and systems descriptions reformulated into the ISO 233 descriptions will allow for an assessment of the potential for standards based product descriptions(iv) 	Federation Development:  Participants will then take responsibility for updating or configuring the different components of the federation in accordance with the FOM and to exercise the scenario.(v) 	Federation Integration and Test:  A series of federation integration a test events will be executed, with a executable federation as the product.(vi) 	Federation Execution:  Finally, the federation will be used to address the notional problem posed in step one of this process.This is the process that was used in the federation development in phase 1 of the CECOM/Sweden project, which implemented a notional JSEAD mission in simulation.  A similar process will be applied in phase 2 as well, with the CISE overlay activities bringing a specific emphasis on the places where standards and standards-based commercial tools and processes can be applied.   The identified standards, tools and processes will be implemented where they appear to make the most sense, and the experience and value added will be assessed as part of the effort.SummaryIn sum, CISE is a concept of applying standards and standards-based tools and processes to the creation and use of simulation-based collaborative environments to support the development and assessment of coalition operations.  The HLA as an open system for distributed simulation provides a natural basis for creating of open environment for coalition applications.  As an open system, multiple users can participate in the federation with their force representations.  New force elements or new partner organizations should be able to be more easily incorporated into the coalition force planning process. Commercially available HLA-based tools for both runtime support and for reconfigurable federate development environments should add to the ability of such environments to be developed and shared by coalition partners.  Finally, standardized data representations and processes should further openness in the ability to participate in the environment.  The way standards can be used to foster coalition collaborations will be examined in partnership with an ongoing US Sweden effort to apply simulation to common operation problems, providing a problem focused environment to investigate the CISE concepts.BiographiesMr. Johan H. Bendz, Pricipal Technical Officer at the Swedish Defence Materiel Administration (FMV), currently working in the Systems Architecture group within the Joint Systems Command. Mr. Bendz has been involved in Swedish Armed Forces C4ISR and IS/IT for more than 10 years, both as a consultant and since 1994 as an FMV employee. He has been the Technical Editor of the SwAF IS/IT strategies since 1994 and is now the PM for the ongoing SwAF C4ISR Architecture effort. Mr. Bendz has a somewhat unorthodox background, being a trained agricultural scientist with a special interest in creative thinking methods.Gunnar Öhlund is a Project Manager with the Defence Materiel Administrations of  the SwdeishJoint Materiel Command.  Mr, Ohmund graduated in 1975 as Electronic Engineer and has worked in the defense industry since that time in different positions from service engineer to project manager. He joined  the Defence Materiel Administration (FMV) in 1996 responsible for R&D within the area of Advanced Distributed Simulation (ADS) and participated in writing the Swedish Armed Forces "M&S Masterplan". For the past two years, he has been with  the Joint Materiel Command. at FMV workingwith M&S aspects within the systems architecture for the next generation C4I systems for the Swedish Armed Forces.Pelle Johanisson is currently a System Architect in the RMA Program  at the Swedish FMV.  In prior activities, he was the Commander of Electronic/IT Deputy in The Naval Shipyard in Stockholm, IT Architect at The East Tactical command of Naval forces and the System Architect in the Naval Program for Swedish Defence Materiel.Staffan LöF is president and CEO of Pitch Kunskapsutveckling AB. He holds an MSc in Computer Science from Uppsala University. He has extensive experience from running high-tech companies and managing R&D programs and projects. During 1995-96 he was Attaché of Science and Technology at the Swedish Office of Science and Technology in San Francisco.Anders Frank is project manager at the Centre of Modeling and Simulation at Swedish Defence Materiel Administration. He has been working in the defence sector with 3D-graphics, Visual Simulation, Virtual Reality and Gaming studies since 1995. He was previously stationed in Menlo Park, CA at the Swedish technical attachée office responsible for computer games industry. Anders earned a M.Sc in Computer Science in Uppsala and is a member of the ACM and IEEE. Dr. Judith Dahmann is a principal senior scientist at the MITRE Corporation and the Scientific Advisor to Dr. Garber, Director of Interoperability for the US Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics.  In this capacity, Dr. Dahmann provides technical review, assessment and recommendations on interoperability plans, issues and initiatives, including the application of emerging commercial technologies throughout the system acquisition cycle.   Prior to this, Dr. Dahmann was the Chief Scientist for the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office for the US Director of Defense Research and Engineering, a position she held from 1995 to April 2000.  In her role as Chief Scientist, Dr. Dahmann led the development of the High Level Architecture, a general-purpose software architecture for the development and interoperation of simulations, now an IEEE Standard (IEEE 1516).COL. (USAF)  Kenneth "Crash" Konwin is Special Advisor to the Director, Interoperability, OUSD(AT&L).  Col Konwin is a past Director of the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO), former Chairman of the NATO Modeling & Simulation Group (NMSG) within the Research and Technology Organization, and original Deputy Director of Requirements and Chief of M&S for the Joint Strike Fighter program office.  He holds a Masters Degree in Operations Research from the Air Force Institute of Technology, a Masters of Arts in Management & Human Relations from Webster University, and a Bachelors Degree in Civil Engineering from the US Air Force Academy.Richard Briggs is Vice President of Technology and Projects at Virtual Technology Corporation and has led the development of simulation applications, infrastructure systems, and Distributed Simulation Environments for the past 6 years. His experience with the High Level Architecture includesFederation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP); design and productization of the DMSO Run-Time Infrastructures (including F.0 through the current RTI-NG), Federation Performance and Optimization, and Integration approaches for several large distributed simulation programs.Mr. Briggs is currently the M&S Integration lead for the Joint Virtual Battlespace program developing a component-based framework to support Joint simulation-based acquisition initiatives initially focused on supporting the Army's Future Combat System (FCS) and the Objective Force.Figure 2:  Depiction of the configuration of the US CECOM/Sweden Phase 1 demonstration with overlay of CISE federate types Figure 1:  Depiction of the Key Component Types in the Proposed Coalition Force Interoperability Assessment Federation Simulated Representations of the Operational EnvironmentHLA Runtime InfrastructureSimulations of Specific C4ISRNational Force ElementsParticipating in OperationReconfigurableSimulated RepresentationsFederation Supporting Utilities toSet-up, Monitor, and Control theFederation, and to Collect Dataon Federation Executions