Weather Impact Decision Aids for the WarfighterRichard C. ShirkeyDavid SauterArmy Research LaboratoryBattlefield Environment DivisionWSMR, NM  88002-5501(505) 678-5470, (505) 678-2078HYPERLINK "mailto:rshirkey@arl.army.mil"rshirkey@arl.army.mil,  HYPERLINK "dsauter@arl.army.mil" dsauter@arl.army.milKeywords:Decision Aids, Weather, Target AcquisitionABSTRACT:  Target acquisition modeling plays an important role in the mission planning process associated with both man in the loop and autonomous command and control systems.  The type of information required typically varies as a function of the amount of time before a mission.  Qualitative information in the form of a sensor being marginally or unfavorably impacted by environmental factors can be very useful in the early planning process.  However, as the mission time draws nearer, quantitative information such as detection and recognition ranges for specific targets becomes more valuable.  To effectively present options with respect to the use of these target acquisition devices, a simple tool needs to be available for computing and displaying both types of information.  Such a tool exists in the U.S. Army Tactical Decision Aid (ATDA).  The ATDA is comprised of the Integrated Weather Effects Decision Aid and the Target Acquisition Weather Software, rule- and physics-based tactical decision aids respectively.  The ATDA can be used by commanders to assess the impacts of weather on systems, platforms and operations.  This paper describes the ATDA, its automatic weather ingests, and its output products consisting of, in part, color-coded map overlays and probabilities of acquisition for various discrimination levels.IntroductionWeather affects all military operations including mobility, aircraft performance, ability to start engines, refueling, acquisition/identification of targets, operating limits, soldier effectiveness, and operating speed.  The military commander needs to know how severe a degradation adverse weather has upon the system under consideration.  In addition to knowing weather impacts, it is also important to be able to apply current or forecast weather to the situation under examination.  Such information allows for better planning and a higher probability of mission success.  Tools that currently exist to aid in answering such questions include the rule-based Integrated Weather Effects Decision Aid [1] (IWEDA) and the physics-based Target Acquisition Weather Software [2] (TAWS).  IWEDA uses system’s operating limits and environmental restrictions collected from technical and field manuals, and proponent training centers and schools.  TAWS, on the other hand, employs physics calculations that have their basis in theory or measurements.  Thus, under existing or predicted weather conditions, TAWS ascertains the probability of detecting a target(s) with a selected sensor(s) whereas IWEDA concurrently compares a user selected system(s) for optimal usage.  These two models are being combined into one planning tool called the Army Tactical Decision Aid (ATDA).The Integrated Weather Effects Decision AidIWEDA provides current and forecast qualitative impacts for over 100 weapon systems and operations (e.g., attack helicopters, fixed wing aircraft, personnel, etc.) to both military weather-support personnel, planners and decision makers throughout the Army Battle Command System (the Army’s tactical command and control system) via the Integrated Meteorological System (IMETS).  IWEDA rules, which range from soldier to system performance, are concerned with weather impacts and allow the commander to examine the operation of selected systems, subsystems or components under various weather conditions.  The rules may also be tailored [3] to accommodate specific exercises, and rules of engagement, such as peacetime vs. wartime values, or users, such as beginner vs. experienced pilots.  Results are displayed in an easily understood graphical format with associated concise text messages.To effectively use these rules the current or forecast weather must be available in the area under consideration.  This is accomplished by the Army’s Battlescale Forecast Model [4] (BFM).  BFM is a hydrostatic mesoscale forecasting model that is used to obtain basic 4-dimensional meteorological field parameters (e.g. winds, temperature and moisture) over complex terrain.  The Atmospheric Sounding Program [5], coupled to the BFM, then calculates other atmospheric parameters such as clouds, precipitation and turbulence.  BFM currently has a horizontal resolution of 10 km and covers an area of up to 500 km x 500 km with a vertical extent of 7 km above the highest terrain feature in the model domain.  To use IWEDA, users select the systems they wish to see impacts on, then click a button to have the impacts automatically computed via internal queries to a relational database.  For example, the AH-64 system may be configured to have as subsystems the Hellfire, night vision goggles, and the Target Acquisition Designation Sight (TADS).  The TADS is comprised of a thermal sight, a TV/direct view sight and a laser rangefinder/designator; these latter three are components of the TADS subsystem.  Once the queries are completed, a color-coded (red, amber, green) “weather effects matrix” (WEM) is displayed conveying the impact of the environment on the systems of interest (see figure 1) – note the R, A, and G, for use with non-color printers.  By interrogating the colored cells on the WEM, abbreviated, or condensed, impact statements are presented.  In figure 1, the AH-64 on 22/12 is being examined.  The user can also view the spatial distribution of these impacts, for a specific time, via a map overlay (figure 2) and obtain the detailed text impact statement.  For example, by clicking the left mouse button anywhere over the map overlay, the full weather impact statement on the particular item of interest is retrieved and displayed to the user.  A full impact statement for the AH-64 TADS thermal sight component might be “Any occurrence of visibility ( 2.5 miles (4000 m) decreases the target acquisition range.”  This full impact statement is obtained by interrogating one of the amber areas (shown as diamonds on the upper center of the map).Target Acquisition Weather SoftwareThe range at which a target can be detected on the battlefield is a valuable piece of information for the battlefield commander.  Acquisition ranges depend upon the target and background characteristics, atmospheric propagation, and sensor performance.  TAWS, which replaces the Air Force Electro-Optical Tactical Decision Aid [6], has been developed to evaluate the combined effects of target to background contrast, atmospheric transmission, and sensor performance on the range at which a target can be detected by an imaging device.  TAWS supports systems in three regions of the spectrum: mid- and long-wave infrared (3 - 5 microns; 8 - 12 microns); visible and near infrared (0.4 - 0.9 microns); and laser (1.06 microns).  The visible includes both television and night vision goggles systems.  TAWS has been designed to provide three types of analyses, 1) illumination analyses, which provides solar and lunar ephemeris information for a specified location; 2) single point-based analyses, which calculates detailed performance predictions for a particular location; and 3) multiple map-based analyses, which provides detailed performance predictions for locations along a mission route.  TAWS includes Tri-Service targets, backgrounds, sensors, and an updated Windows® graphical interface that allows for user supplied or automatic weather ingest.  Performance is expressed primarily in terms of maximum detection or lock-on range.  Results are displayed in graphic and tabular formats. In TAWS, weather information is specified by either manually entering it or by automatic download from either the Air Force Weather Agency or the Navy’s Tactical Environmental Data Server.  Information is required for the surface, boundary layer, upper layer, and cloud layer(s) for a 30-hour window.  TAWS output is available for a 24-hour window bracketing the time of interest; the infrared model requires an additional 6 hours of antecedent weather data for thermal model initialization. An example of TAWS output is shown in figure 3.  Here the detection range as a function of time has been calculated for a thermal sensor viewing a non-operating T-80 tank from the front against a snow background.  Additional information may be found in the figure 3 header.For the geographical location chosen (Seoul N. Korea), local noon is at 0400 UTC.  Thermal crossover is easily seen at 0200 and 0800 UTC.  Sunrise and sunset, as determined from an illumination analysis, occurs at approximately 2300 and 0900 UTC, respectively.  The diurnal cycle is clearly seen, as is the impact of reduced visibility starting at 1300 UTC.  The Army Tactical Decision AidThe Army Tactical Decision Aid (ATDA) integrates the BFM, IWEDA and TAWS into one simple, easy to use model that resides on the IMETS.  The salient differences are in allowed user input: TAWS has numerous GUIs to allow automated or manual input and manipulation of meteorological parameters.  ATDA has automatic ingest of weather conditions through the Gridded Meteorological Data Base (GMDB) produced by BFM.  Output from ATDA is, in the case of operational capability, as depicted in figures 1 and 2 above, or for optimal sensor selection, output is in the form of bar charts for detection and recognition ranges (figure 4).  Thus for target acquisition the user can click on any location on the IWEDA map overlay (figure 2) to have the detection and recognition ranges computed for a specific target/sensor pairing.  Once the user clicks on the map overlay, a simple GUI pops up prompting the user for the specific sensor and target information.  Weather data required for the computation is automatically retrieved from the GMDB for the specified point.  Allowing the entry of a different device allows alternate sensors to be evaluated in the event the current sensor is inadequate for the acquisition.  In the future, a weapons fan will be overlaid on top of the map display (figure 5).  This feature will color-code the detection and recognition ranges for numerous azimuths either over a full circle or some smaller arc as specified by the user.  Future plans will also incorporate digital terrain elevation data, such that masking due to intervening terrain is incorporated into the weapon fan display.  Eventual incorporation of threat sensors will allow comparison of friendly and threat systems for aiding in the determination of when and where one force may have the tactical advantage over another.SummaryThe combination of BFM with IWEDA allows commanders, testers and evaluators to examine the effects of current or forecast weather on tactical operations, personnel, systems, subsystems or components in the form of easy to read red-amber-green stop-light charts overlaid on a map of tactical interest.  When coupled with TAWS, users also have the ability to determine detection ranges under these same weather conditions.  Thus, coupling of these three programs into the ATDA gives the user a powerful tool to examine the effects of weather on many aspects of military systems.  ReferencesSauter, D., Brandt, J.D., Torres, M., McGee, S., “The Integrated Weather Effects Decision Aid: A Common Software Tool to Assist in Command and Control Decision Making”, Proceedings of the Command & Control Research & Technology Symposium, Newport, RI, June 1999.Gouveia, M .J., Morrison, J.S., Bensinger, R. B, Turkington, R. B, Wylie, J. L., and Tattelman P., “TAWS and NOWS: Software Products for Operational Weather Support,” in Proceedings of the Battlespace Atmospheric and Cloud Impacts on Military Operations Conference, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado, April 2000.Torres, M.A., “DIRECT: Dynamic IWEDA Rule Editor and Database Control Tool”, in Proceedings of the 1997 Battlespace Atmospherics Conference, Space and Naval Warfare Systems Center Technical Document 2989, San Diego, CA, December 1997.Henmi, T., Dumais, R. Jr., “Description of the Battlescale Forecast Model,” Army Research Laboratory Technical Report ARL-TR-1032, White Sands Missile Range, NM, June 1997.Passner, J., “The Atmospheric Sounding Program: An Analysis and Forecasting Tool for Weather Hazards on the Battlefield,” Army Research Laboratory Technical Report ARL-TR-1883, White Sands Missile Range, NM, 1999. Touart, C.N., Gouveia, M.J., DeBenedictis, D.A., Freni, J.M.L., Halberstam, I.M., Hilton, P.F., Hodges, D.B., and Hoppes, D.M., “Electro-Optical Tactical Decision Aid (EOTDA),” Phillips Laboratory Scientific Report No. 48, Volume II, Lexington, MA, January 1993.Author BiographiesRICHARD SHIRKEY is a physicist with the Army Research Laboratory’s Computational and Information Sciences Directorate, Battlefield Environment Division.  He received his doctorate in Astronomy from the State University of New York at Albany in 1977.  Dr. Shirkey was one of the initial developers of the Electro-Optical Systems Atmospheric Effects Library (EOSAEL) and has worked in the area of atmospheric modeling and simulation for the past 23 years.  He is currently engaged in atmospheric effects for target acquisition and their impacts on wargames.  He holds an adjunct position in the Army Modeling and Simulation Office as the Army’s Standards Category Coordinator for Dynamic Atmospheric Environments.  DAVID SAUTER is a meteorologist with the Army Research Laboratory's Computational and Information Sciences Directorate, Battlefield Environment Division.  He received his M.S. in Meteorology from the University of Wisconsin in 1984 and has worked with ARL since 1985.  During that period he has worked primarily with developing automated decision aid software for military applications. Several of these software packages have been fielded via the Army's Automated Battle Command System, to include the tactical command and control system for weather, the Integrated Meteorological System (IMETS).PAGE  PAGE  2Figure 1.  IWEDA Weather Effects Matrix (WEM) with Condensed Impacts for AH-64 TADS componentsFigure 2.  IWEDA Map Overlay for AH-64 TADS Figure 4.  ATDA Example Sensor SelectionFigure 5.  ATDA Example Weapons FanFigure 3.  TAWS detection range