The Utility of Distributed Testing for Network Centric Warfare RDT&EDr. Larry McKeeScience Applications International Corporation6200 Uptown Blvd NEAlbuquerque, NM 87110 505-830-7442 HYPERLINK mailto:Mckeel@saic.com mckeel@saic.comKeywords:HLA, distributed testing, utility, NCW, RDT&EABSTRACT: Defense Network (DNet) is a Naval Air Systems Command (NAVAIR) project to establish an RDT&E network of selected facilities for RDT&E applications and support of Network Centric Warfare (NCW) across NAVAIR.  The initial implementation integrates nine laboratories/ranges with both HLA interfaces and an integrated series of tactical communications links using a network of T&E open air ranges and simulation resources.  The first application of DNet was a distributed test in which the Multi-functional Information Distribution System (MIDS) was the system under test (SUT).The DNet Test Event evaluated the utility of using DNet to perform NCW RDT&E and involved a simulation of a counter-air/strike mission in which F/A-18 platforms used MIDS to communicate with other friendly aircraft via Link 16.  Testing was completed in June 2001, and preliminary evaluation of integration testing results supports the conclusion that DNet has utility for NCW RDT&E.  This paper presents results supporting this conclusion and describes various NCW RDT&E applications for which DNet is believed to have utility.  Limitations in applying distributed testing to NCW RDT&E are identified, and the benefits of using distributed testing are also discussed.1. OverviewThe Defense Network (DNet) is a Naval Air Systems Command (NAVAIR) project to establish a research, development, test, and evaluation (RDT&E) network of selected facilities for RDT&E applications and support of Network Centric Warfare (NCW) across  NAVAIR.  The initial implementation integrates nine laboratories/ranges with both High Level Architecture (HLA) interfaces and an integrated series of tactical communications links using a network of test and evaluation (T&E) open-air ranges (OARs) and simulation resources.  The initial nine laboratories/ranges constitute the collaborative environment composing the DNet Network, as shown in Figure 1.  The first application of the DNet Network was the DNet Test Event completed in June 2001.The DNet Test Event provided a checkout and validation of portions of the DNet infrastruture.  Interfacing the infrastructure to provide a testbed for the Multi-functional Information Distribution System (MIDS) system under test (SUT) also provided direct support of NCW concepts by exploring the capabilities of the F/A-18 aircraft to link to other aircraft and ship systems.  The existing infrastructure (nine NAVAIR laboratories) with the added capabilities of the DNet Network was used to evaluate the benefits and utility of distributed RDT&E and its application to NCW concepts.The DNet Test Event involved a simulation of a counter-air/strike mission in which F/A-18 platforms use the MIDS.  Distributed testing techniques were used to link various simulations representing air and surface platforms to each other and to weapons simulations.  Execution control messages, entity state data, Identification Friend or Foe (IFF) messages, and weapons interactions were exchanged via the RTI (1.3NG-v3.2).  Tactical links (i.e., not using the RTI) were used for tactical message traffic, including Link 16 and Link 11.  These techniques allowed a mission-level evaluation of the MIDS SUT to be performed.The federation used for the DNet Test Event consisted of 10 simulation/range federates, a test control federate, a logger federate, and up to 22 viewer federates.  The usual federation size was about 30 federates. 2. DNet Test Event DescriptionThe battlespace simulated in the DNet Test Event was divided into two areas by a Forward Edge of the Battle Area (FEBA).  The blue force was on the west side of the FEBA and the red force on the east side.  This scenario was a day 20 engagement, where all air defense had been destroyed but there were still some red air forces operational. Geographically, the scenario was centered near the China Lake, California area. When the mission began, a P-3C was in orbit about 20 miles west of the FEBA, and an E-2C was in orbit southwest of the FEBA.  Two two-ship F/A-18C/D flights and an F-14 were also in orbit west of the FEBA awaiting orders.  Three civilian commercial aircraft were flying north and south, crossing the northern edge of the FEBA.  An AEGIS cruiser was located off shore.  The hostile forces had two flights of aircraft waiting for engagement assignments from their commanders.  One two-ship Mig-29 and one two-ship SU-27 interceptor flight were in orbit east of the FEBA.  The IFF systems operated as designed among all air targets, hostile and/or friendly.  The beginning of the mission is illustrated in Figure 2.  The starting positions of the entities are marked with crosses.  The scenario also included three Red reporting posts (RPs) which reported to a Red command post.The DNet Test Event scenario was broken up into three stages: Link-16 Orbit Checks – the aircraft maintained the orbits shown in Figure 2, and all Link-16 participants (E-2C, AEGIS, F/A-18s, F-14D) exchanged Link-16 messages, including surveillance checks, fighter-to-fighter checks, and AIC control.  The purpose was to exercise as many types of Link-16 messages as possible for the MIDS SUT.Counter-Air Mission – the Strike F/A-18 flight proceeded toward the enemy command post (ground target) and was challenged by the Migs.  The BARCAP F/A-18 flight left orbit to counter the Migs and defend the Strike F/A-18 flight.  This part of the scenario ended with the lead BARCAP F/A-18 engaging one of the Migs with an AIM-9 missile.Strike Mission – the F-14D left orbit for reconnaissance of the enemy command post.  Command post coordinates were transmitted from the F-14D via Link-16 to the E-2C and AEGIS and relayed by the AEGIS to the orbiting P-3C via Link 11.  The F-14D also sent a target image to the P-3C.  The AEGIS issued an attack order to the P-3C via Link 11, and the P-3C left orbit and proceeded to the designated waypoint for launching a Standoff Land Attack Missile – Expanded Response (SLAM-ER) missile.  At the waypoint, the SLAM-ER missile was launched, and it attacked the command post (ground target).  The F-14D then returned to the ground target for battle damage assessment.For the DNet Test Event, the scenario entities were represented as indicated in Table 1.Figure 2.  Initial ScenarioTable 1.  DNet Test Event Entity RepresentationsEntityRepresentationLocationP-3CMITL, HWIL simulatorP-3C AIP Lab, Pax RiverE-2CMITL, HWIL simulatorESTEL, Pax RiverStrike F/A-18C/D FlightFirst AircraftSecond AircraftMITL, HWIL simulatorConstructive (JIMM)AWL, China LakeACETEF, Pax RiverBARCAP F/A-18C/D FlightFirst aircraftSecond aircraftMITL, HWIL simulatorConstructive (JIMM)AWL, China LakeACETEF, Pax RiverF-14DMITL, HWIL simulatorWSIC, Pt. MuguCivilian Airline TrafficFirst AirlineSecond AirlineThird AirlineLive aircraftLive aircraftLive aircraftLand Range, China LakeSea Range, Pt. MuguATR, Pax RiverMig-29 FlightConstructive (JIMM)ACETEF, Pax RiverSU-27 FlightConstructive (JIMM)ACETEF, Pax RiverAEGIS CruiserConstructiveSea Range, Pt. MuguRed Ground TargetConstructive (JIMM)ACETEF, Pax RiverAIM-9HWIL simulationIBAR, China LakeSLAM-ERDigital simulationIBAR, China LakeMITL = man-in-the-loop					HWIL = hardware-in-the-loopJIMM = Joint Interim Mission Model			ESTEL = E-2C Systems Test & Evaluation Laboratory3. DNet Test Event ResultsIn preparation for the DNet Test Event, extensive integration testing of the DNet federation was performed from October 2000 through May 2001.  After completing integration, the DNet Test Event took place during the period 19-21 June 2001.  During this period, the complete scenario was executed in segments three times.  Findings from the testing are as follows:The DNet infrastructure provided a valid test bed for the MIDS SUT.  Platform entity state data exchanged in the test were valid truth data, and Link-16 terminals at the blue platform facilities (F/A-18, F-14, E-2C, AEGIS) permitted valid exchanges of tactical Link-16 messages.  Specifically, a MIDS SUT expert reported: Procedures were valid for MIDS/Link-16 testing.Data transfers were error-free.The F/A-18 responded correctly to received Link-16 J-messages.Link-16 messages were valid and representative of actual lab and flight test data.The DNet infrastructure, including the network, was reliable.  Each scenario segment took up to two hours or so, and the federation was able to function correctly for this relatively long period six times.HLA message losses over the DNet network were negligible.  All interactions used reliable transport, and there were no losses of these.  There were occasional losses of best effort messages (entity state and federate health check), but these were usually less than 0.3% of the total messages published.  Use of dead reckoning by subscribing federates ensured that entity state dropouts had an insignificant effect on entity behavior.Average HLA message latency values between federates ranged from about 50-300 milliseconds.  Processing of entity state data resulted in total latency values of up to one second or so for some federates.  Latency effects were partially compensated for by implementing dead reckoning at the subscribing federates based on the time of validity of the entity state data, rather than time of arrival at the subscribing federate [Ref. 1].HLA message traffic resulted in negligible network bandwidth utilization.  Even though 18 entities were simulated, implementation of a dead reckoning error publication rule kept entity state message publication rates below 1 Hz overall.  Typical peak HLA message data rates were less than 50 kbps total.  In contrast, test communications data rates were about 400 kbps, and video required about 4-8 Mbps.Test control and monitoring techniques were very effective.  Federate health check messages were exchanged between all federates at a 1-Hz rate, and these were monitored in real time at the Test Control Center (TCC) in China Lake.  The TCC also had a 2-D display which was used for real-time scenario adherence verification.  The network status was also monitored in real time during the test.4. DNet Test Event Utility AssessmentNCW applies information technology to the battlespace, making distributed testing especially well suited to supporting NCW RDT&E.  The key concepts of NCW include [Ref. 2]:The use of geographically dispersed force.  Distributed testing, as demonstrated by the DNet Test Event, involves geographically dispersed simulations, labs, and live entities.The force is knowledgeable, derived from a shared awareness of the battlespace.  Distributed testing allows players to exchange information in the same manner as in the real battlespace, e.g., by means of tactical datalinks and messages, as in the DNet Test Event.Effective linking among entities in the battlespace using a robust, high-performance information infrastructure, or infostructure.  DNet provides just such an infrastructure. The DNet infrastructure is also able to represent the major components of NCW, including:Sensors.  Sensors represented in the DNet Test Event included radars for the blue platforms, F-14D reconnaissance imagery, and the SLAM-ER seeker.  The radars responded to all other aircraft within their field-of-view and detection range (via simulation), including live aircraft being tracked by the OARs.C2. The DNet infrastructure supports decision-maker-in-the-loop capability using realistic information exchanges and communications links.  In the DNet Test Event, tactical Link-11 and Link-16 messages permitted realistic C2 procedures to be implemented and allowed platforms to share battlespace information. Warfighter.  The DNet infrastructure accommodates real platform operators and permits the employment of realistic tactics.Weapons.   The DNet infrastructure contains HWIL weapon labs which use tactical inputs from the shooter.  The AIM-9 HWIL simulation in the DNet Test Event used tactical MIL-STD-1553 messages between the shooter and missile, Stores Mangement System hardware, and a tactical umbilical cable to initialize and launch the missile.  During flyout, the AIM-9 seeker viewed an IR source which was driven by the motion of the target in real time.The DNet Test Event provided direct support of MIDS SUT RDT&E. The DNet infrastructure was able to generate valid MIDS SUT data, permitting a number of MIDS SUT measures to be evaluated.  The scenario selected for the DNet Test Event was especially well suited for evaluation of MIDS interoperability and functionality measures.  The DNet infrastructure readily permitted variations of the scenario, allowing additional MIDS issues to be evaluated in real time.  Test control and 2-D displays were used to quickly set up and verify the scenario variations.  MIDS analysts got immediate feedback from each scenario step, resulting in very efficient testing.However, the DNet infrastructure used for the DNet Test Event could not adequately address all measures specified in the MIDS Test and Evaluation Master Plan (TEMP).  In particular, measures requiring real platforms operating in the real environment, such as MIDS operational communications functions, operational navigation functions, and suitability measures could not be evaluated.Although some limitations existed for the DNet Test Event, future applications of the DNet infrastructure could extend its utility for MIDS RDT&E.Use of simulators for other types of platforms (e.g., F-15 or F-16 fighters) with the basic DNet architecture could extend the utility of the DNet infrastructure for MIDS/Link-16 interoperability testing.MIDS operational communications functions could be evaluated by using a live F/A-18 equipped with MIDS flying on an OAR.  The live fighter could exchange Link-16 information with simulated platforms by means of a ground-based antenna connected to the DNet infrastructure.  This configuration would use real propagation of Link-16 messages to and from the live fighter (an airborne relay could be used for even more realistic propagation geometry), and the live fighter could interact with many more platforms than could be practical or affordable if the other platforms were all live.  The DNet Test Event demonstrated that the DNet OARs can integrate live aircraft with simulated platforms into a common scenario.In conclusion, the current DNet infrastructure has definite utility for supporting the RDT&E of NCW systems, and this utility can be extended by incorporating other types of platforms and by integrating live and simulated platforms.  However, the DNet infrastructure cannot be used to evaluate all SUT measures; live testing will still be required in some cases.   In other words, distributed testing can be used to supplement or extend live testing, but not replace it. 5. Benefits of Distributed TestingResults of DNet distributed testing support the conclusion that not only is there utility in using the DNet infrastructure for NCW RDT&E, there are also benefits. These benefits are best realized when this technique is added to a total testing program.  Distributed tests are not meant to replace any of the current testing techniques, including live tests, but rather to supplement current techniques and provide a more comprehensive evaluation of an NCW system or system of systems.  When the appropriate mix of testing techniques is used, benefits are realized from the addition of distributed testing, including:More realism than testing with digital simulation models alone because actual hardware is used in the HWIL labs and real operators/decision makers are used in the MITL labs.Better reproducibility of test results for greater confidence in findings.  Testing using simulations and HWIL labs is more reproducible than live testing, because scenario conditions are more readily controlled and trials can be replayed for additional SUT responses.  This allows more trials to be combined for analysis, giving greater confidence in evaluation results.Affordable mission-level testing.  Distributed testing allows the force density of the scenario to be increased.  The number of friendly and threat systems can be increased by representing them with either manned laboratories (if realistic man-in-the-loop control of the systems is needed) or digital simulations (if scripted behavior is acceptable).  The inability to evaluate system performance in combat-representative environments is a common limitation in operational test and evaluation and an area in which distributed testing can improve the operational test environment6. References[1]	McKee, L., "Latency Compensation in Distributed Network Centric Warfare RDT&E," 01F-SIW-084, Proceedings of the 2001 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, Florida, 9-14 September 2001. [2]	Alberts, D.S., Garstka, J.J., Stein, F.P., “Network Centric Warfare: Developing and Leveraging Information Superiority,” DoD C4ISR Cooperative Research Program, Washington, D.C.,  HYPERLINK http://www.dodccrp.org http://www.dodccrp.org, 1998.Author BiographyDR. LARRY MCKEE has over 30 years experience directing and performing RDT&E programs in distributed testing, nuclear weapon effects, system survivability, neutral particle beam interactive discrimination, and high energy laser effects.  This experience includes 20 years as an Air Force officer with duties in management of advanced R&D programs in directed energy weapon technology, R&D leadership at the Air Force Branch and Division levels, development and instruction of advanced graduate courses, and technical direction of underground nuclear tests.  He joined SAIC in 1989 and currently supports the DNet program as Lead Analyst. MIDS is a low volume Link-16 terminal designed for certain fighters including the F/A-18.APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE