SIMULATION BASED RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT IN THE AIR FORCE RESEARCH LABORATORYMr. James M. Zeh Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL/VAC)Wright-Patterson AFB, OH 45433-7531Mr. Bret R. GivensVeridian EngineeringDayton, OH 45431ABSTRACT:  This paper discusses the purpose, architecture, and capabilities being developed under the Simulation-Based Research and Development (SBR&D) initiative of the Air Force Research Laboratory.  The goals of SBR&D are: to reduce the time and cost for developing and maturing promising technology, to integrate the technologist and the warfighter into the Science and Technology (S&T) acquisition process, and to provide analytical input into the Air Force S&T planning process.  SBR&D combines a variety of critical research and technology-development capabilities, including engineering-level modeling, design, and analysis tools, mission- and campaign-level simulations, cost analysis tools, and database tools in a networked, distributed environment.  Early SBR&D capabilities combine high fidelity manned and unmanned vehicle simulations to create a common synthetic battlespace for technology assessment in a mission environment.  This simulation environment is being combined with engineering models, design tools, and an intelligent database to allow differing degrees of fidelity to be used at different times and in different parts of a simulation analysis.  This will provide the capability for researchers to evaluate the impact of different technologies in a warfighting environment, providing a link between AFRL technologies and warfighter mission needs. The paper will discuss the simulations, tools, and capabilities that are being integrated to create SBR&D.1. IntroductionThe development of Simulation Based Acquisition has been slow to materialize.  This is primarily due to the complexity of developing Air Force systems and the many organizations involved in the development of these systems.  The SBR&D team realized the complexity of tackling this problem across the Air Force and determined that the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) is truly a microcosm of the Air Force in which many of the organizational boundaries are eliminated.  Therefore, SBR&D modeling and simulation initiatives could be developed and evaluated across AFRL technology programs while continuing to engage in the broader Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) development and   develop a modeling and simulation capability that will address weapon system development from cradle to grave. 2. OverviewThe main benefit of SBR&D is enabling rapid transition from the Science and Technology base through the effective use of modeling and simulation to reduce the time, resources, and risk associated with the entire acquisition process and thereby increases the quality and military worth.  SBR&D is a combination of Modeling Simulation and Analysis technology, process and culture shifts for reducing S&T development cycle time and life cycle cost. It is also defined as a subset of Simulation Based Acquisition focused on Science and Technology.  An analogy of SBR&D process, culture, and technology shifts is the development of the word processor.    Before the word processor was readily available, scientists and engineers primarily developed reports by hand writing the reports on paper.  These reports were then typed by secretaries and proofread by the engineers who typically penciled in changes and fed these changes back to the secretary.  To change this process and the culture, two primary technology developments were required.  The first was the development of the affordable personal computer and the second was the development of the word processor.   These two technology developments changed the process in developing reports.  Secretaries were no longer required in this process.  However, the culture did not immediately change.  Many engineers resisted this change, but the personal computer and word processor technology continued to improve until a total culture change occurred. It should be noted that the process and culture probably would not have changed dramatically without the technology development.    Technology developments must also occur for SBR&D process and culture changes to occur.   An example of this would be the development of modeling tools to eliminate the coder in the development process.   There are several modeling tools that have improved over the years just like the word processor.  Also, computing power is now available to enable software generated by these tools to be operated real-time.  These types of technology developments will enable process changes and in turn will change the culture on how modeling and simulation is used in the Science and Technology development cycle by increasing fidelity, reducing cost and increasing the speed of developing simulation models and evaluating those models in complex simulations. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1: Turning Vision Into RealityThe primary objective of SBR&D is to provide a common, affordable, and flexible environment to improve all phases of a technology’s or weapon system life cycle as depicted in Figure 1. The cornerstone of SBR&D Development is a Common Synthetic Battlespace, which can be used across organizations.  Current and future systems can be inserted into the Common Synthetic Battlespace where technologies can be assessed and evaluated with the Warfighter in the loop or operated in a constructive or batch mode.  However, to achieve this stated objective SBR&D must address tools, data and people interoperability.  2.1 Tool InteroperabilityThe tools consist of design analysis tools, weapon system analysis tools, and cost analysis tools.   The current toolset has been developed over the years throughout the Defense Department.  The toolset is quite capable.  However, many improvements must be performed to realize the vision of Simulation Based Research and Development.The design analysis tools consist of conceptual design tools, which are used for quick analysis, and detailed finite element design tools.  SBR&D initiatives are underway to link the detailed design tools using a web-based architecture in which a Multi-Disciplinary Design team could rapidly design future weapon system.  This design capability would also enable design optimization.  An output of this process would be 3-Degree of Freedom (3-DOF) or 6-DOF models able to run real-time in a MATLAB type software package.  This would enable AFRL researchers to conduct technology assessments while eliminating many steps and speeding up the development process.Weapon system analysis is focused on assessing the technologies inserted into the Common Synthetic Battlespace.  The Common Synthetic Battlespace consists of models throughout the DoD modeling and simulation pyramid.   The key to the SBR&D development is to create a “common” synthetic battlespace that can be used across DoD programs.  The closer the modeling and simulation community can get to a common synthetic battlespace then the closer we can truly realize the full potential of SBA and SBR&D.Cost analysis tools would be used together with weapon system analysis to rack and stack technologies.  Cost analysis will be performed at the development, production, and operational level. Total Ownership Cost and Return on Investment must also be addressed.  There are many efforts throughout DoD that are addressing cost tools.  However, many of these tools are historical based or are based on simple models consisting of lines of code, vehicle weight and material makeup.    The historical cost models are not adequate for many Air Force Research Laboratory models since there is no historical data for many advanced technology products.  In addition simple cost models based on lines of code and weight are no longer accurate when addressing advanced technology products.   Therefore, new cost techniques are being developed to fill this gap.2.2 Data InteroperabilityA common data repository is the heart of the data interoperability.  Data must be stored to streamline the processes and gain rapid access to the data.  The data stored must be of high enough content to support detailed design, weapon system and cost analysis.  2.3 People InteroperabilityFinally a Collaborative Engineering Enterprise is required to link the technologists, analysts, testers, Warfighters, and decision makers into the Simulation Based Research and Development process. 3. GoalsThe 3 primary goals of SBR&D are to: 1) guide Air Force Science and Technology investment; 2) reduce Research and Development (R&D) time and cost to develop and mature promising technologies and 3) integrate the Warfighter and technologist into the S&T acquisition process.   3.1 Guide Air Force S&T InvestmentWhile the current S&T investment planning process embodies the principles of “top-down” planning, the SBR&D initiative seeks improvements in several areas.  First, the current process is substantially driven by multiple deliberations by technology subject matter experts.  The vision is to enhance the current process by ensuring these subject matter experts dialogue early and often with Warfighters.  Second, the current process does not provide sufficient opportunity for analytical experts to assist with operational utility vs. technology assessments.  The vision is to bring additional analytical rigor into the technologist-war fighter dialogue.  Third, affordability/cost aspects associated with innovative concepts/technology are often treated in a less-than-adequate fashion.   The vision is to bring affordability  EMBED MSPhotoEd.3  Figure 2: Current S&T Investment Planningand cost into play in the beginning to drive more realistic concept evolution efforts and associated technology investments.  Fourth, the current process has difficulty in integrating across technology areas.  The vision is to arrive at optimum investment profiles that integrate (both the magnitude of the efforts and their scheduling) across the technology areas.  Figure 2 depicts the “Current” process and Figure 3 depicts the “Vision” process.Figure 3: S&T Investment Planning Vision3.2 Reduce Research and Development CostSBR&D is also focused on reducing research and development cost through the technology maturation process.  AFRL transitions applied technologies (6.2 programs) through technology demonstrations (6.3 programs).  SBR&D seeks to improve this process as shown in Figure 4.  Many applied technology ideas (i.e. ideas > 10) will be evaluated rapidly using increasing levels of modeling and simulation.   These competing applied technologies will be matured and evaluated through a series of simulations including hardware in the loop.  Once the number of ideas is reduced to say 1 or 2, a technology demonstration program will be conducted.  The flight test vehicle could potentially be a research Advanced Fighter Technology Integration-Unmanned Air Vehicle (AFTI-UAV) in which the vehicle design would allow many technologies to be evaluated in a cost effective manner. This will provide the Air Force with the capability to reduce R&D cost by early prototyping in software.  Therefore, enabling optimized hardware development and test matrices.   Figure 4: Neck Down Technology ConceptsAdvanced design tools and manufacturing processes have enabled the rapid development of air vehicles. This is particularly true for UAVs since design freedoms are expanded since there is no pilot onboard the vehicle. By reducing this lead time, new variants (each with limited production runs) can be designed and built at a significantly lower development cost than we do today for manned aircraft.Combining this type of rapid prototyping capability with SBR&D could provide the Air Force with the ability to rapidly field low production run systems in which the Warfighter needs and innovative technologies were an integral part of the design process as depicted in Figure 5. This is a concept that may not be realized for 25-35 years, but this conceptual idea could revolutionize the Air Force acquisition process.Figure 5: Technology Payoff4. ApproachThe SBR&D approach is based on two primary concepts.  These two primary concepts are to link SBR&D development initiatives to AFRL Technology programs and build on existing modeling and simulation capability.   In addition, a business approach will be addressed so the SBR&D capability can be matured in a consist manner.4.1 Link SBR&D initiatives to AFRL programsLinking SBR&D initiatives to AFRL technology programs is the key to a successful development of the SBR&D capability.   The SBR&D initiatives are defined as projects that enhance the SBR&D tools, data, and people interoperability capabilities shown in Figure 1.  With this approach, the SBR&D initiatives will be able to be exercised and evaluated by technologists who are developing and evaluating new concepts in support of an AFRL technology program.  The development will begin with a limited scope, which is to evaluate technologies for an AFRL advanced air vehicle concept called SensorCraft while encouraging broad involvement across AFRL Technology Directorates (TDs), users, Air Force product centers and industry.  A spiral development process of the SBR&D initiatives will be used.  This will allow lessons learned to be applied in the next development cycle.  Finally, the capability will be expanded to other AFRL technology programs such as Future Strike Aircraft, Directed Energy concepts, and Unmanned Air Vehicle research.   4.2 Build on existing capabilityThe SBR&D initiatives must build on existing efforts across DoD, NASA, and industry to also be successful. First, many efforts are already ongoing within the Simulation Based Acquisition community to address the tools, data, and people interoperability capabilities required for SBR&D. However, this work is far from over to truly impact how the Department of Defense develops new weapon systems including technology development.   Therefore, SBR&D initiatives will target these ongoing efforts and team with these other modeling and simulation activities to provide an increased capability to enhance the system engineering process.  Second, requirements must be considered up front in developing a capability that can be used to support technology development, acquisition, test and evaluation, and training across DoD.  Therefore, identifying and leveraging efforts across DoD provides insight into defining the requirements.  The approach of SBR&D team is to identify efforts, which have the highest stated requirements, which includes DoD system engineering technology development and test and evaluation.  Finally, a business approach must be addressed.  This business case must address government owned software, Commercial Off the Shelf Software (COTS), and DoD contractor proprietary software.  Several elements within SBR&D must be government owned software to truly mature the SBR&D capabilities, expand the capabilities across programs throughout DoD, and to thoroughly understand the software to access AFRL technology.  The government owned capabilities primarily consists of the engagement, mission, and campaign level models within the modeling and simulation pyramid and the databases that make these functions operate.  This includes multi-spectral databases to stimulate various sensors.   Engineering level models may also be required to be government owned if the researcher must have access to the software to conduct technology assessments.  These engineering level models would typically be flexible models in which various concepts could be evaluated and software could be readily modified as the technology matured.  In addition, the engineering level models could be developed based on commercial products such as MATLAB.   Commercial Off the Shelf Software will be used whenever possible to truly benefit from the commercial sector. COTS will typically be used when commercialization of the product exists beyond the DoD and true price reduction of the product can be realized.  This area includes design tools, software development tools, database development tools, image generation run-time tools, and many others.  It should be noted that the research community typically has far greater fidelity requirements than the training community.  Many of the COTS modeling and simulation products have been developed for the training community, which simply do not address the Air Force research community’s needs. Proprietary DoD contractor software must be evaluated using the SBR&D capabilities.  Capabilities must exist to evaluate the software at the contractor and government facilities.   Therefore, Government owned software will be provided as Government Furnished Equipment to DoD contractors as required to conduct technology development programs. The government will conduct configuration management control of the software.    5. Program StructureTo address all the SBR&D modeling, simulation, and analysis requirements, the following ten SBR&D initiative areas have been defined.  A brief description and examples of these areas are provided to give the reader an understanding of each of the SBR&D initiative areas: Scenarios, Design Tools, Modeling, Cost Models, Data Repository, Simulation and Analysis Tools, Model Federation and Distributed Links, Computational Culture, Hardware in the Loop, Flight Test.5.1 ScenariosThe scenario functional area consists of the scenario databases and models to conduct engagement, mission, and campaign level trades.  The scenarios are based on defense planning guidance scenarios and technology excursions, which are required to support technology trades. It also includes multi-spectral databases to support human in the loop simulation, commonly referred to as virtual simulation. 5.2 Design Analysis ToolsThe design analysis tools consist of conceptual design tools, which are used for quick analysis, and detailed finite element design tools. Initiatives are underway to link the detailed design tools using a web-based architecture in which a Multi-Disciplinary Design team could rapidly design future weapon systems.  This design capability would also enable design optimization. 5.3 ModelingThe modeling category is primarily focused on engineering level models and addresses modeling abstraction with respect to the engagement, mission, and campaign level models.  Modeling tools such as MATLAB are addressed in this area and logistic models are included.5.4 Cost ModelsCost models must address development, production, life cycle cost, Total Ownership Cost (TOC), and Return on Investment (ROI). There are many efforts throughout DoD that are addressing cost tools.  However, new cost techniques need to be developed that evaluate advanced technologies in which historical data is not relevant.5.5 Data RepositoryA common data repository is the heart of the data interoperability.  Data must be stored to streamline the processes and gain rapid access to the data.  The data stored must be of high enough content to support detailed design, weapon system analysis, and cost analysis.5.6 Simulation and Analysis ToolsSimulation and analysis tools consist of improvements in conducting the actual simulations.  This includes tools to improve the scenario setup, simulation execution, observing, and conducting analysis.  Some examples are:  Stealth Viewers, Analysis Tools, PC Based Visual, Intelligent Agents, and Graphical User Interface Setup Tools. 5.7 Model Federation and Distributed LinksFederation of existing models using proven techniques such as the DoD’s High Level Architecture (HLA) object oriented interface will be used whenever feasible.  Other techniques such as shared memory interfaces will be used when real-time performance is required.  In addition, specialized interface software will be used to link design tools such as TechnoSoft Inc’s Adaptive Modeling Language and Ball’s Knowledge Kinetics.5.8 Computational CultureMany modeling and simulation tools are used within AFRL.  These tools make up the total AFRL computational culture.   Process improvements on how some of these tools are used will be considered when developing SBR&D initiatives.  Codes to compute Computational Fluid Dynamic (CFD) are an example of the computational culture.   Improvements on the process in which CFD data, wind tunnel data, and flight test data are generated, stored, and compared will be examined to improve the efficiency and accuracy in this process.5.9 Hardware in the LoopTransition from a software simulation to hardware in the loop simulation is critical in reducing the time and cost in developing advanced technology.  Advanced techniques will be examined such as automatic generation of operational flight program software using tools such as MATLAB.  This process should be achievable with the advancement in computational power, compilers, shared memory interfaces, and engineering tools.  The hardware in the loop testing must be integrated with the flight test as described in the following section.5.10 Flight Test	Finally, the transition to flight test is probably the most critical in reducing the time and cost in developing advanced technology.  	Updating the ground-based simulation quickly based on flight test results is critical in using ground-based simulations during flight test.    If the ground-based simulations are not updated in a timely fashion then the ground-based simulations will not be used.  Techniques such as common data repositories will be considered when addressing flight test transition.  In addition, the use of an experimental UAV aircraft, as shown in Figure 4, is also being considered in developing a hardware transition plan.    The development and use of validated modeling and simulation for use will be a key element in efficiently evaluating performance, effectiveness, suitability, and life cycle sustainment of a weapons system.  Test-validated M&S is required to reduce open air range flight.  Existing models must be improved and combined with new testing methodologies to ensure fast and effective model validation.  A practiced integrated test and evaluation methodology with reliable M&S would significantly increase Test and Evaluation (T&E) process efficiency and reduce the overall AF expense.  If properly applied, the model repository and improved tools will reduce program risk and satisfy weapon development needs across the DoD.SBR&D effort will leverage and will be coordinated with existing ground and flight test center modeling and simulation development plans.6. Current Status and Road AheadThe SBR&D effort is well underway within AFRL.  SensorCraft modeling and simulation macro level roadmaps and draft neck down roadmaps, as shown in Figure 6, have been developed.  Initial SensorCraft survivability and tech assessment studies have been conducted and SensorCraft effectiveness study development is well underway.  In addition, several SBR&D M&S initiatives are now underway.   This section will briefly describe these activities and current planning efforts underway within the AFRL.Figure 6: SensorCraft Draft Neck Down Roadmap6.1 SensorCraft Technology Assessment StudyIn a time of shrinking S&T budgets and changing direction, careful planning is essential to the success of AFRL Air Vehicles’  (VA’s) Directorate overall technology development program.  It is critical that we pursue the technology development paths that maximize Return on Investment and show a contribution to VA’s Focus Area goals.  The technology assessment process being explored by the Technology Assessment Team and led by VA’s Multidisciplinary Technologies Center will provide the VA Corporate Board with additional data to make buy plan decisions. The Technology Assessment Teams vision is to provide a responsive technology assessment process that will relate AFRL technology programs to system performance, focus area goals, and Warfighter payoffs. The core of the Technology Assessment Team is comprised of engineers assigned to the VA’s Multidisciplinary Technologies Center, the Controls Center of Excellence, the Aeronautical Sciences Division, the Structural Sciences Division, and the Control Sciences Division. In addition, the team included appropriate members from other Directorates, specifically Sensors and Propulsion.The Phase I objectives (Oct 99 – Mar 00) of the Technology Assessment Study encompassed both process and technical elements of technology assessment.  The primary process objective was to explore how the people and the software tools could work toward the technical objectives.  The primary technical objective was to understand the technology requirements and design drivers for SensorCraft concept demo, and therefore do a technology assessment in a system design context.   During Phase II (Apr 00 – Nov 00), the SensorCraft requirements were clearly defined by a team of AFRL Air Vehicle, Sensors, and Propulsion Directorate engineers and frozen in time on 1 May.  Design and analysis refinements were made to the SensorCraft concept such that the credibility of the technology assessments was improved while a direct link was established between analysis methods and the survivability and effectiveness simulation.During Phase II, the Computational Sciences Center of Excellence also provided a computational fluid dynamics (CFD) analysis of the SensorCraft configuration. A significant effort was directed at defining the in-house technology, process, and cultural issues associated with technology assessments.  Technology assessments identify what information is needed (technology), who needs it (process), and how information flows from person to person (culture) or from software product to software product.  The current study established some pathways by which information flows to and from the right experts and the right software products at the right time.6.2 SensorCraft Survivability & Effectiveness StudiesA key element in technology assessment is the ability to immerse a concept in a battlefield simulation. The ability to relate benefit to the warfighter with a technology program is imperative to creating a successful, believable, and credible technology plan.  The simulation objective for this study was to identify a process by which analysis and simulation can be linked and to identify issues that require additional study.  Currently, mission-level simulations define how a system under test operates within a system-of-systems architecture in an operationally relevant mission or context.  The results of a simulation provide information such as survivability, lethality, and ultimately the system effectiveness based on the scenario and mission.  This information is to help planners understand the utility of a current system in the battlefield.  The use of these systems for Research and Development  purposes could extend this concept by mixing current systems with new technologies or future systems to evaluate the overall system level operational utility for a given mission in the operational framework which the Warfighter and decision maker understand.  The simulation would enable technology planners to understand the effect of technology trades in an operational context, while generating advocacy from the Warfighter.The Phase 1 objectives (Oct 00 – Feb 01) of the SensorCraft Spiral 0 Simulation Study was focused on Survivability Analysis of SensorCraft using a High Value Asset Attack (HVAA) mission scenario. The HVAA mission addresses SensorCraft survivability for varying threat levels of awareness and sought to establish vehicle and mission performance characteristics or “attributes” most important for vehicle survivability. This analysis used a Design of Experiments to explore a mix of vehicle and mission attributes such as signature, setback from the forward edge of the battle area (FEBA), self-protection, and protective assets necessary to ensure a desired level of survivability for a given SensorCraft configuration. The Air Force Legacy Model, Man in the Loop - Air to Air System Performance Evaluation Model (MIL-AASPEM), was the air-to-air simulation environment used to expose SensorCraft to manned and digital air-to-air and surface-to-air threats. Phase 2 and Phase 3 (Feb 01 – Nov 01) objectives of the SensorCraft Spiral 0 Simulation Study will focus on SensorCraft effectiveness relative to varying levels of Sensor Performance.  The sensor performance will be derived from advanced engineering level radar models and implemented in MIL-AASPEM and the Joint Integrated Mission Model (JIMM).    The primary interest of the mission level effectiveness study will be evaluating SensorCraft sensor performance impact on mission performance within a theater level scenario. In addition a rough order of magnitude cost analysis will be performed on the various sensor suites.  Providing input to the mission effectiveness study will be three separate studies based on the same Design of Experiments.  A SensorCraft conceptual design feasibility study will be performed to determine unit cost, size and weight.  A mission level analysis will be performed to determine fleet sizing and a radar performance analysis will be performed to determine area coverage and reliability requirements.  The Phase 2 and Phase 3 constructive simulations will scope a follow-on Phase 3 mission level virtual effectiveness simulation focused on SensorCraft sensor performance.  The current plan is to develop a SensorCraft operator station in which a SensorCraft operator can control target designation and sensor modes based on the Phase 3 constructive theater level missions.  Follow-on SensorCraft spiral simulation studies will focus on how SensorCraft fits into the “To Be” Command, Control, Computer, Communication, Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) architectures. This will require several simulation enhancements including increasing sensor modeling fidelity; implementing synthetic aperture radar; and developing SensorCraft operator vehicle station concepts.   Current plans are to network to simulations being developed by Air Force Materiel Command’s Joint Synthetic Battlespace initiative to address how SensorCraft fits into the “To Be” C4ISR architecture.   6.3 SBR&D Modeling and Simulation Initiatives  The current SBR&D modeling and simulation initiatives are well underway, as partially shown in Figure 6, and briefly described in Section 5 of this paper.  Several of the projects shown are funding wedges and four primary planning efforts are currently underway in working the details of this draft roadmap.   The first efforts is the continue development of a constructive and virtual SBR&D Unmanned Air Vehicle laboratory.   The primary focus of the laboratory is weapon systems analysis at the engagement and mission levels.  This capability is linked to the SBR&D design and cost analysis. This effort is well underway within the Air Vehicles Directorate.  Several initiatives are funded and facility modifications are underway. The second effort consists of developing a comprehensive plan to mature the design analysis tools used in the technology assessment process.  This planning team consists of members of AFRL Air Vehicles, Propulsion, Sensors and Materials Directorates and Aeronautical Systems Center’s Engineering Design Branch.  The third effort is looking at developing a comprehensive roadmap to mature sensor modeling in advanced simulations to support acquisition, systems engineering and test, and the synthetic databases which provide data to these models.  This planning team currently consists of members from across the Department of Defense.  The fourth effort is focused on improving transition from applied research to Advanced Technology Demonstrator programs.   AFRL Air Vehicles and Propulsion Directorates are just beginning to work with Edwards AFB on modeling and simulation initiatives. 7. SUMMARYMany agencies within the Department of Defense are focused on exploiting the continuing improvements in simulation technologies.  The many initiatives to reform and streamline research, development, and acquisition have lead to the SBA initiative.  SBR&D is a subset of this activity focused on Air Force Science and Technology.  At WPAFB, the AFRL Air Vehicles Directorate has developed draft roadmaps to support SBR&D initiatives and is now in the process of expanding SBR&D to other AFRL directorates.  The SBR&D initiative is successfully applying SBA methods to guide Air Force science and technology investment; reduce research and development time and cost to develop and mature promising technologies; and integrate the Warfighter and technologist into the S&T acquisition process.   The approach is to link SBR&D initiatives to AFRL technology programs. With this approach, the SBR&D initiatives will be able to be exercised and evaluated by technologists who are developing and evaluating new concepts in support of AFRL technology programs.  Therefore, SBR&D initiatives will not be developed in a vacuum enabling a more robust and useable modeling and simulation capability.   SBR&D will be a key in developing a robust SBA capability for the Department of Defense.   Author BiographiesMR. JIM ZEH holds a 1980 BS in Electrical Engineering from the University of Cincinnati and a 1987 MS in Computer Science from the University of Dayton. He has over 20 years of experience in Modeling and Simulation to support Air Force Research Laboratory 6.2 and 6.3 research and has authored several conference papers and technical reports.  Since coming to the Laboratory in 1981, Mr. Zeh  has spent the majority of his career involved with advanced cockpit simulations.  Since 1983, Mr. Zeh has been assigned a simulation team lead for several advanced simulations projects including: STOL/Maneuver Technology Demonstrator F-15; Integrated Control and Avionics for Air Superiority and the Joint Strike Fighter Virtual Strike Warfare Environment (VSWE).   Mr. Zeh is currently the project lead for the Simulation Based Research and Development effort within the Air Force Research Laboratory.  This involves coordinating the Simulation Based Research and Development effort throughout the Department of Defense, NASA, Industry, and Academia.  BRET GIVENS received his BS degree in Computer Engineering in 1985 and his MS degree in Computer Engineering in 1990, both from Wright State University.  Mr. Givens works for Veridian and has more than fifteen years of technical experience in software engineering.  He is currently supporting the Joint Strike Fighter Project, and is also the secretary of the Research, Development and Engineering (RDE) Forum for the Simulation Interoperability Workshop. 			