THE AIR FORCE SYNTHETIC ENVIRONMENT FOR RECONNAISSANCE AND SURVEILLANCE (AFSERS)	Ron McDaniel	USAF/AFAMS/OPDABSTRACTThe Air Force Synthetic Environment for Reconnaissance and Surveillance (AFSERS) is the primary virtual Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR) simulation system used within the Air Force for Joint Service command and staff level training.  AFSERS was developed by the Joint Technology Center/ Systems Integration Laboratory (JTC/SIL) at Redstone Arsenal, AL.  Over the past five years AFSERS has evolved into an integral element of the Air Force Modeling and Simulation Toolkit, the model suite managed by the Air Force Agency for Modeling and Simulation (AFAMS).  In fact, AFSERS represents the collaborative JTC/SIL work with many USAF organizations, including the Aerospace Command & Control and Intelligence Surveillance and Reconnaissance Center (AC2ISRC), the Air Force Agency for Models and Simulations (AFAMS), and Numbered Air Forces (NAFs) throughout CONUS and overseas.  Without the close cooperation between the JTC-SIL and these Air Force organizations, this simulation would not have been possible.     AFSERS is a sophisticated Intelligence Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR) model designed to support command and staff training at the theater and component levels, providing improved simulation support for Predator, U2, Global Hawk, JSTARS, Weapons System Camera Video and National Technical Means.  The simulation can also be configured as an embedded trainer for squadron and crew-level ISR process training.  The model includes the mission planning, tactical communications, and simulation interfaces essential to integrate with the Air Force’s complex C4I environment.  Current development efforts will provide theater-specific mission rehearsal and mission visualization capabilities using dynamically linked, high-resolution imagery with embedded fixed targets.  The AFSERS simulation provides a virtual bridge between Air Force constructive models (e.g. AWSIM and JQUAD) and the actual ISR systems used by the C2 Warrior.  The model is fully interoperable with the Joint Training Confederation and the developing Joint Simulation System environments, enabling the extensive use of AFSERS in a broad range of exercises and experiments.  Throughout the five-year spiral development and upgrade process resulting in the current configuration, AFSERS has supported most NAFs in conjunction with numerous military exercises and demonstrations worldwide.INTRODUCTIONThe AFSERS model consists of four major components – an imagery database, six degree-of-freedom models of the actual ISR systems, and a series of surrogate workstations designed to functionally emulate the tasking, collection, processing and dissemination tasks associated with the imagery collection assets.  The fourth component is a commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) imagery generation capability - a state of-the-art process capable of near-real-time generation of video or large still frame imagery in the proper formats required by ISR ground stations.  The imagery generator currently creates a range of electro-optical (EO), infrared (IR), and synthetic aperture radar (SAR) products compatible with the Distributed Common Ground Station (DCGS) and various derivative and legacy imagery handling systems.  The imagery rendering consists of a three-dimensional battlefield with simulated fixed and mobile targets.  A generic ISR platform control station can be used to conduct mission planning and execution, where operators perform the typical tasks associated with a given platform.   EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  For instance, the AFSERS Predator surrogate provides dynamic air vehicle and payload control functions using a six-degree-of-freedom model of the Predator, the payload, and the data link.  Imagery is generated in near-real-time and passed to a UAV Exploitation Station (or another AFSERS surrogate) for exploitation and reporting into Theater Battle Management Core Systems.  The AFSERS provides a realistic flow of information to the C2 Warrior, supporting the development of Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (TTPs) and Concept of Operations (CONOPS).  This capability allows the warfighters to experiment with relatively inexpensive assets prior to the deployment of actual ISR systems, obtaining critical operational insights in a low-risk training and rehearsal environment and optimizing the use of actual ISR assets that are rarely available for trainingVISUALIZATION SYSTEMThe AFSERS visualization component is a Commercial Off the Shelf (COTS) product that generates an Electro-Optical (EO)/ Infra-Red (IR) or Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) payload scene with system-specific overlays for the particular platform/sensor combination.  The JTC/SIL Video Interface Design Document (VIDD) for AFSERS is openly available to visualization system vendors for developing an interface to the AFSERS.  MetaVR, Inc. developed and maintains a fully compliant imagery generator most commonly used with AFSERS - the Virtual Reality Scene Generator (VRSG) application for PC-Based Windows 95/98/NT/2000 systems.  The VRSG meets all VIDD requirements for EO, IR and SAR scene generation. MetaVR is DIS compliant, interoperable with ModSAF, and has an HLA Real-Time Platform Federation Object Module (RPR-FOM) Dynamic Link Library (DLL) add-in.  Terrain databases are derivable from Compact Terrain Data Base (CTDB) format, MultiGen OpenFlight, or user definable sources using the MetaVR Database (MDB) Applications Programmers Interface (API).  The VRSG can dynamically change between normal out-the-window (OTW), Infra-Red (white being thermally hot or black being thermally hot), and daylight television mode (Day TV) views.SIMULATION ARCHITECTUREThe various AFSERS simulations, in conjunction with the current Air Force Modeling and Simulation Training Toolkit (AFMSTT), are designed to train commanders and staffs in critical operations and intelligence processes, including situational awareness, targeting, cross-cueing, and battle damage assessment.  The AFMSTT simulation architecture includes the following major components: Air Force's Air Warfare Simulation Model (AWSIM), the Air Force Synthetic Environment for Reconnaissance and Surveillance (AFSERS), the Joint Intelligence Operation Center (JIOC) JQUAD simulationThe AFSERS is interoperable with almost all major simulations used at the command and staff level.  The Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) protocols are fully supported, and High Level Architecture (HLA) compliance is evolving at pace with the JSIMS development effort.  AFSERS can interoperate with other DIS simulations such as JQUAD Joint Ground Game, and the Modular Semi-Automated Forces (ModSAF).  AFSERS is fully integrated with the suite of constructive models under the Joint Training Confederation (JTC).  The JTC currently includes the Army Corps Battle Simulation (CBS) and Tactical Simulation (TACSIM), the Navy's Research, Evaluation, and Systems Analysis (RESA) model and the Marine Air-Ground Task Force Tactical Warfare Simulation (MTWS).  These simulations are confederated to generate the complete spectrum of battlespace interactions and stimulate the C4I systems of the training audience.During joint exercises, CBS has been one of the principal data feeds for the AFSERS.  CBS is an aggregate simulation that utilizes the High Resolution System Stimulator (HRSS) to deaggregate CBS units from TACSIM into individual entities that can then be positioned correctly on the synthetic battlefield.  HRSS utilizes templates and force disposition information (assembly, defense, attack, march) from TACSIM to deaggregate units into individual entities for AFSERS.  AFSERS surrogate systems can target these entities, providing electronic or voice reports into targeting systems for insertion back into CBS.  If CBS adjudicates the destruction of any targeted entities, AFSERS will display the damage, supporting the battle damage assessment process.   JSIMS DEVELOPMENT SUPPORTAFSERS has been certified to be High Level Architecture (HLA) compliant and selected as the first Air Force, Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) and National Air and Space Model (NASM) virtual federate.  AFSERS began the HLA conformance certification process on January 18, 2000 with the submission to the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) the HLA Conformance Notebook, passing the DMSO testing without modification.  The Conformance Notebook includes the AFSERS federate Simulation Object Model (SOM) and the federate Conformance Statement, which specifies the services in the HLA interface specification that a federate uses to implement its SOM.  On February 18, 2000 the AFSERS software passed the DMSO interface test using the DMSO RTI 1.3 Version 6 and was officially certified as HLA compliant at the conclusion of the After Action Review with the DMSO HLA Testing Organization.  The AFSERS SOM is included in the DMSO Object Model Library.VIRTUAL DATABASESAlthough AFSERS is not intended to provide rigorous training for imagery analysts in the exploitation of imagery products, the simulation outputs must include critical ingredients for supporting the command and staff level processes – situational awareness, targeting, and battle damage assessment.  AFSERS databases meet the technical requirements for these processes while satisfying the user’s perception of realism.  Since AFSERS is typically employed in support of warfighters exercising actual contingency mission assignments, a realistic virtual database contributes significantly to user knowledge of the potential battlespace.AFSERS terrain databases are composite structures containing several types of National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) imagery products.  The AFSERS terrain database is developed with high-resolution imagery, such as Controlled Image Base (CIB), LANDSAT or SPOT.  Since most wide area coverage contains defects or sporadic cloud cover, inserts of imagery from secondary sources are employed to provide contiguous, complete coverage, when such products are available.  This orthorectified and geo-registered imagery is then draped over NIMA Digital Terrain Elevation Data (DTED), providing the elevation postings to create the three-dimensional payload scene.  The force dispositions are overlaid on the terrain database in accordance with the input provided by the ground model for a given exercise – typically either the JQUAD Joint Ground Game, Corps Battle Simulation, MTWS, or a DIS simulation.  Force dispositions are depicted using over 1000 different three-dimensional models of military vehicles and equipment.  These forces are dynamic, and can be targeted by the warfighting audience by reporting target locations and initiating simulated engagements within the ground model.  Burning vehicles and equipment represent attrited forces, allowing warfighters to practice ISR taskings in support of battle damage assessment requirements. Recently, AFSERS added the ability to support fixed target engagements.  Two prototype processes are under review.  The first, most simplified, approach is to insert craters over fixed targets adjudicated as destroyed within the ground model.  This relatively simple approach provides the warfighter audience with visual verification of a strike, and can be correlated with more definitive information provided by a text report from a ground model such as JQUAD.  A more sophisticated approach is also under test – the use of imagery chips representing specific damage to a specific target.  These chips are stored by Basic Encyclopedia/ Desired Mean Point of Impact (DMPI) reference number and Protocol Data Unit (PDU) number, and placed upon the terrain when damage is assessed within the ground model.  Once damage against a specific target is assessed, the PDU is distributed to all AFSERS imagery generators in the exercise environment, and any sensor tasked against that target will portray the assessed effect. The use of geo-registered, orthorectified imagery as the basis for products presented to the warfighter has many advantages.  First, actual imagery creates the situational awareness essential for presentation to theater and component-level commanders and staffs preparing for operations in assigned areas of responsibility (AORs).  Exercising with imagery increases participant knowledge of the actual AOR and provides the opportunity to use AFSERS in mission rehearsal activities.  Second, use of accurate imagery creates a realistic environment for the execution of fixed targets, permitting NAFs to employ actual target lists in exercises - verifying war plans and further enhancing mission rehearsal benefits.  This approach meets Air Force requirements to simulate targeting down to the DMPI level, and avoids requiring staffs to create exercise target folders for less-accurate exercise databases.Incorporating the level of accuracy required to support situational awareness, targeting and BDA within training databases creates singular opportunities for actual mission applications.  Emerging Air Force doctrine emphasizes continuous Intelligence Preparation of the Battlespace (IPB) and Predictive Battlespace Awareness (PBA).  A dynamic virtual battlespace with embedded target characteristics, relationships, and damage states can assist in managing actual combat operations.  Simulation interfaces with comprehensive target damage folders correlated with weapons-target and weapons-terrain interactions can support mission rehearsals and PBA assessments.  Virtual battlespaces can depict target dependencies, macro-effects on infrastructure, and other complex interactions that are not currently embedded within actual target folders.  These dynamic simulations can play critical roles in effects-based targeting and combat assessment as well as the management of Global Strike operations.       DRIVERSThe AFSERS driver simulates the flight and sensor dynamics of the ISR platforms.  The AFSERS driver receives flight control, mission planning, and payload pointing commands via telemetry link from a tactical or simulated ground station.  The ISR platform and sensor are operated in accordance with the mission pan, and sensor-pointing information is sent to the payload visualization system.  The AFSERS Driver runs under Windows 95, 98, NT and 2000 environments, and communicates (via Ethernet Sockets or serial 232/422) with both tactical and simulated ground control systems.The AFSERS Driver can communicate with tactical UAV ground systems.  Since the AFSERS Driver stimulates the real tactical interfaces, operators in tactical ground systems could train as if they are communicating with a real UAV over tactical datalinks.  The Army’s Shadow 200 shelter employs this simulation as an embedded trainer. The AFSERS Driver provides a 6-Degree of Freedom (6-DOF) autopilot model. Modifying air vehicle data configuration files can change the flight models for different air vehicles, including the Hunter, Pioneer, Shadow 200, Outrider, Predator, CL-289, and U2, JSTARS, and Weapons Systems Camera Video (WSCV) for F-15/16 platforms.  CONTROL STATION SURROGATE (CSS)The Control Station Surrogate (CSS) is a configurable workstation capable of functionally emulating or stimulating various ground stations.  Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs) are provided to conduct mission planning for EO, IR, and SAR missions and to generate tactical messages and imagery products for dissemination to actual C4I systems.  GUIs support the generation of Weapons System Video segments for insertion into APEX processing, development of constructive JSTARS mission plans, or tabular entry of coordinates to generate Secondary Imagery Dissemination (SID) files representing national or commercial imagery.  The CSS TACCOM segment allows the operator to generate US Military Transmission Format (USMTF), Intelligence and Electronic Warfare (IEW) COMCAT, and TACFIRE messages and electronically disseminate via File Transfer Protocol (FTP), E-Mail, Network File System (NFS), or Tactical Communications Interface Module (TCIM) to C4I systems. All Source Analysis System (ASAS), Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data System (AFATDS), Theater Battle Management Core System (TBMCS), Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (JSTARS) Common Ground Station (CGS), and the Advanced Deep Operations Coordination System (ADOCS) are a sampling of supported C4I systems.  The CSS can be tailored to support most tactical message formats for a given C4I system.  The CSS supports the output of RS170 motion video and National Imagery Transmission Format (NITF) 2.0 still frame imagery into imagery handling systems within TBMCS.AFSERS OPERATIONSAFSERS is typically employed to simulate a range of joint ISR assets across the battlespace, providing joint and component commanders with the opportunity to actively integrate ISR coverage and exercise specific imagery processes for national, theater and tactical sensors.  AFSERS models are installed in a distributed architecture designed to inject imagery at the Point-of-Presence – the location within the C4I architecture where actual imagery products would enter the networks.  This approach permits commanders to evaluate the actual challenges associated with the dissemination of critical products, defining the trades associated with moving large data elements across already crowded communications systems.  Actual issues, such as timeliness of data, exploitation responsibilities, and the trades associated with reachback support can be addressed through experiments, rehearsals, and exercises.  Personnel workloads, communications loads, system interfaces, product compatibilities, storage capacities and process throughputs can be tested.  Other quantitative factors, including target location accuracies, required imagery resolutions, and optimal file sizes can be established for specific theater architectures and combinations of systems.     An integrated suite of AFSERS equipment provides continuing opportunities to experiment with sensor tasking, cross-cueing and integrated operations.  For instance, C2 Warriors within intelligence and operations cells can employ a queuing sensor such as JSTARS Moving Target Indicator to vector a Predator UAV toward a probable high value target.  Following positive target identification, the supporting UAV Exploitation Station could initiate a targeting sequence, and request a retasking of a Global Hawk or U-2 for battle damage assessment.  The availability of a robust sensor suite for routine training and CONOPS development is highly unlikely, but AFSERS can establish an integrated simulation for recurring training, providing the capability to practice situational awareness, targeting, BDA and PBA. The AFSERS is specifically designed to support Distributed Mission Training across a variety of simulation and actual C4I architectures.  Since the AFSERS is fully compatible with the Multiple Unified Simulation Environment (MUSE) used by other services, a single virtual imagery architecture can be established for large-scale joint exercises such as Ulchi Focus Lens 01, shown below.   EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  The AFSERS/MUSE systems within an exercise can be connected through the simulation architecture to minimize the bandwidth required to move imagery throughout the battlespace.  In lieu of moving actual imagery, the simulation data necessary to regenerate imagery is transmitted to particular sites, permitting the exercise of typical processes without consuming bandwidth required for mission-essential operations.  When adequate bandwidth is available, the simulated imagery can be transmitted to realistically load communications systems and exercise end-to-end processes.AFSERS HISTORYThe AFSERS has been successfully used in more than 50 exercises and demonstrations over the last six years, supporting all services as well as many unified commands.  This broad base provides a unique opportunity to generate a common simulation picture across all components.  Military Intelligence units at these exercises have used the AFSERS to assess UAV CONOPs and to develop TTPs for UAV employment.  A real benefit of the AFSERS is that it can be utilized to stress test the actual tactical links over which UAV imagery and tactical reports are distributed.  The JTC/SIL AFSERS exercise support team assists these units in understanding the connectivity and distribution issues that a UAV company would have to address and solve in a war-time environment.  Operational issues, such as how UAV flight plans are approved and inserted into the Air Tasking Order, dynamic retasking, UAV frequency allocation, collection management and maintenance, are some additional areas of UAV operations that are addressed during an exercise.AFSERS PROPONENCYThe Air Force Agency for Modeling and Simulation (AFAMS) in Orlando, Florida is the proponent of AFSERS and uses the AFSERS to model Air Force UAV systems such as the Medium Altitude Endurance Predator, High Altitude Endurance Global Hawk, JSTARS, U2, National and Commercial Orbital assets.  AFSERS has been certified to be High Level Architecture (HLA) compliant and selected as the first Air Force, Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) and Nation Air and Space Model (NASM) virtual federate.  CONCLUSIONThe AFSERS promises to provide warfighters with a valuable ISR training and assessment tool that can be used during Joint command and staff training exercises, as an embedded trainer for these systems, and for sensor / platform evaluation studies.  The AFSERS is continually being enhanced to include new payload models for SAR, IR, and EO that can be flown on a variety of platforms as directed by program sponsors. The AFSERS is a cost effective “turn-key” system for modeling multiple UAVs and National ISR assets in military experiments and training exercises.  This reduces the need for maintaining redundant ISR simulations within the DoD and lowers support and training costs to the Joint Warfighter.