Common global geographic visualization, good, great, or grand challengeRichard E. SharpNational Air Intelligence Center4180 Watson WayWright-Patterson AFB, OH 45433937-257-8683richard.sharp@naic.wpafb.af.milKeywords:Geographic visualization, mapping, geographic data plottingABSTRACT: The complexity of operational planning and execution is ever increasing. The integration of land, sea, air and space assets requires a common view of a player’s location and activities. While numerous planning tools and simulations exist, they usually have their own unique way of presenting information to the user. The advent of digital maps and imagery has opened the door for commonality and entry can be obtained via standards. This paper will discuss the establishment of standards applicable to all digital maps and imagery. These standards will include 2-D, 3-D, and space applications. Likewise, standard symbology will be required to display the growing number of items a CINC or operation coordinator must deal with. With standard data and plotting formats the results of an initial plan, simulations of potential outcomes, and real time data feeds of actual activities can be combined to provide a comprehensive and dynamic window of local, regional, or global operations. Such a capability would have a broad impact on military, law enforcement, humanitarian, and transportation planning and operations.. 1. The big pictureThe complexity of operational planning and execution is ever increasing. A commander needs to know the details of the area of operations, friendly force locations, hostile force locations, military and civil communications infrastructures, friendly and hostile sensor locations, and weather conditions.  These elements can be located on land, sea, air, or in space.  These elements can also move, appear suddenly, and disappear. Other operations such as humanitarian relief, law enforcement, and air traffic control have similar needs. The challenge is how to display all this information in a way that is useful, manageable, and allows the commander to conduct a successful operation.2. The need for standardsOperations are generally planned and conducted from a map of some kind. Traditionally, these maps have been printed on paper. The data of interest is plotted on that map and that map is used as a basis for decision making. Maps come in many formats; each designed for a specific purpose. Land, sea, and air operations would use maps tailored to their unique needs.Digital maps and plotting programs provided greater flexibility, but were initially patterned after the traditional printed formats. The digital world, however, opened the door to 3-D representations, animation, and plotting real and simulated items on a common display.  Likewise, the types of data to be plotted grew to include dynamic outputs from various sensors. Still, there in a tendency for each operation to use it’s own unique plotting and display technique.Joint operations, involving land, sea, air, and space elements, require a means to bring all these visualizations together into a common composite view. To achieve this, integration standards for data formats, coordinate transformation, and display methodology will be needed.  These standards will need to apply to both real world data and data that is produced by a model or simulation.Data standardsThe National Imagery and Mapping Agency has done much to establish geographic data standards. Additional standards will be required to deal with object position and movement, space dynamics, imagery and other sensor outputs, and weather. The formats will need to support all necessary coordinate transformation and operate with static and streaming data sources. In addition, the formats should allow real and simulated data to be seamlessly intermixed to support training activities and exercises.  Plotting standardsVisualization should cover global “God’s-eye” to detailed imagery overlays. The data should be able to be displayed on any map format chosen by a user. Ideally, one could zoom in on any area to any level of detail that is available. Standard icons and standard labels would be used to make the display easy to understand. 2-D and 3-D visualizations should be available and all coordinate transformations of both static and streaming data should be done automatically. In essence, a user could look at any portion of the world to any level of detail with all activity and items being shown clearly.The payoffWith standard data and plotting formats the results of an initial plan, simulations of potential outcomes, and real time data feeds of actual activities can be combined to provide a comprehensive and dynamic window of local, regional, or global operations. Such a capability would have a broad and significant impact on military, law enforcement, humanitarian, and transportation planning and operations.  The objective of this challenge is to provide a dynamic and robust window to the world of the 21st century.RecommendationGiven that the foundation of common global geographic visualization is standards, this activity is clearly within the domain of the SISO mission.  It is recommended that SISO form a Study Group to look into this area and a Product Development Group to generate the necessary standards.Author BiographyRICHARD E. SHARP currently is in charge of Modeling and Simulation Research and Development at the Advanced Programs Division, National Air Intelligence Center, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, OH. Mr. Sharp holds a BS and MS in Electronic Engineering from the University of Dayton and has spent over 27 years working in Modeling and Simulation Research and Development and Scientific and Technical Intelligence analysis. He currently chairs the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) Grand Challenges virtual forum and is a member of the IO-ISR PRP.