A Comprehensive DOD Logistics Architecture ModelDavid PayneThe MITRE Corporation7515 Colshire DriveMcLean, VA 22102-7508703-883-6366 HYPERLINK mailto:dpayne@mitre.org dpayne@mitre.orgKeywords: Logistics, Enterprise Architecture, DOD, ReThink, Process ModelABSTRACT:  The US Department of Defense (DOD) logistics community recognizes a need for an executable reference model of the entire DOD logistics enterprise. Such a model supports DOD-wide logistics architecture efforts, multi-service collaboration, modernization and tuning of Service and Agency logistics information systems, and furthers DOD logistics transformation in general. The DOD Logistics Community Management (LCM) activity is tasked to explore and pursue the development of this DOD logistics information architecture. Two modeling efforts are currently underway within LCM towards this goal. One is an exploration of ways to link existing Service and Agency models into a larger DOD enterprise model federation. This effort is reported in the companion paper to this paper: "Federating DOD Component Logistics Architecture Models", (01F-SIW-055, Payne and Hawkins).  This paper, 01F-SIW-052, describes the second thrust of the LCM effort, building a comprehensive DOD Logistics Architecture Model (LAM). The Gensym ReThink commercial off the shelf (COTS) process modeling environment is used to rapidly prototype a custom modeling environment for capturing DOD Service and Agency logistics command, control and transactional processes. This custom environment is then used to rapidly prototype and interlink a notional set of Service and Agency supply chain and logistics command and control processes into a total DOD enterprise logistics process. This prototype is being expanded in a combined effort of LCM and office of the Deputy Undersecretary of Defense for Logistics and Materiel Readiness (DUSD (L&MR)), office of the Director, Logistics Systems Modernization (LSM). Specifically, an LSM contractor team will visit Service and Agency subject matter experts to detail and validate the notional processes in the prototype model. The expected result is a comprehensive reference process model of the DOD logistics enterprise. Future technical extensions of this effort may include using HLA or other interoperability tools to link detailed service and agency process models to the corresponding sub-processes of the LAM. The result will be a multi-resolution federated model of DOD logistics.IntroductionThe previous Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Logistics and Materiel Readiness (DUSD (L&MR)) initiated a number of efforts aimed at transforming United States Department of Defense logistics from a group of relatively independent Service and Agency systems into an enterprise, controlled by means of an integrated system of systems. This initiative involved proactive secretariat level leadership of a number of efforts in logistics architecture, logistics systems modernization, and supply chain management. It also included a structured approach to governance modeled on community management.  Under community management, the Services and Agencies, through a Flag Officer or Senior Executive each appoints, form a board of directors to guide this desired transformation. This board oversees DOD logistics transformation. One lesson emerging from this experience is that no one person or office really understands the entire DOD logistics system, since that system exists as a variably integrated composite of hundreds of Service and Agency logistics management systems. Most of these, in turn, exist as automated or semi-automated systems, with technical approaches and technologies dating from the1960s to latest implementations of e-commerce, and everything in between. Preparing for Y2K drove home the need to understand DOD logistics as a system of systems. Subsequent logistics transformation efforts aimed at introducing specific modern business practices and measuring specific logistics system performance metrics similarly have proven difficult, partly due to the lack of a system-wide model of the DOD logistics enterprise.The PlayersThis section is provided for those unfamiliar with the organization of US DOD, Service, and Agency logistics, and the system of governance introduced by the previous DUSD (L&MR), which currently remains in place.The DUSD (L&MR) reports to the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics (USD (AT&L)), who in turn reports to the Deputy Secretary of Defense and the Secretary himself [1], [2]. Within the Office of the DUSD (L&MR) is the office of the Director, Logistics Systems Modernization (LSM) [3], [4]. The LSM Director chairs the Logistics Information Board (LIB), effectively a board of directors made up of individual Service and Agency Flag and Executive (typically 0-7 and junior SES) representatives. The Offices of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Director for Logistics (JCS J4), the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence (ASD (C3I)) and the United States Transportation Command (US TRANSCOM) also send representatives to the LIB. The LIB in turn oversees the O-6/GS-15 level Logistics Information Requirements and Resource Council (LIRRC), which assists the LIB in a working group role and whose members interface with their parent Service or Agency to coordinate LIB issues and initiatives.  These groups are both supported on a day to day basis by Logistics Community Management (LCM), a small government led and contractor augmented activity hosted by the Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) and reporting to the Office of the DUSD (L&MR) through the LIB and the LSM [5]. LCM acts on LIB assigned initiatives, via an annual formal intra-government contract. The LSM and the LCM are the sponsors of the LAM effort. LCM commissioned the LAM environment and notional prototype as part of their assigned task of coordinating a DOD wide community based approach to logistics enterprise architecture development. LSM, with LCM assistance, is now transitioning the LAM framework to a LSM contractor team to leverage and extend the initial LCM effort. LCM, in turn, will use the resulting populated model as the reference model for the current and emerging state of the information architecture of the DOD logistics enterprise. LCM is supported by a logistics operational architecture team made up of contractors from The MITRE Corporation and KPMG.  This team has supported LCM for the past several years and was the source of the recommendation that LCM explore process modeling as a way to document the DOD Logistics Enterprise Architecture, thus initiating the LAM effort. LSM is supported by The Enterprise Integration Center (e-IC) of ManTech Advanced Systems International, Inc. based in Fairmont, West Virginia, which provided the Y2K modeling support to LSM. They will use this experience, the LAM technology from LCM, and visits with Service and Agency Subject Matter Experts (SME) to upgrade the currently notional LCM processes with current and valid Service and Agency logistics processes.1.2 The NeedThe 1980s saw the computer move to the desktop, into the hands of the end users. The 1990s saw those computers and their end users linked through extensive internal networks, and then linked to the world at large via the Internet. These transitions both triggered and made possible the move to enterprise computing. The factory, staff division, subsidiary, company, and corporation no longer managed itself using an autonomous management information system.  Successful enterprises leveraged their newly connected desktop computers, as well as their servers and legacy main frames, to manage themselves as one highly coordinated entity. Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems rapidly emerged as the enterprise computing method of choice. In parallel, the World Wide Web brought electronic commerce, and with it the need to interoperate internal corporate systems with those of customers, partners, and suppliers. Industry as well as de facto standards emerged to facilitate this interoperability. But something else is needed to achieve world class performance. This “something else” is enterprise engineering—documenting and then designing, modernizing or reengineering processes, systems, organizations and networks guided by Enterprise Architecture. Such an architecture addresses how both the functions and the supporting technology of an organization work together to focus the enterprise on its stated missions. Moreover, the architecture provides the framework and strategy for modifying the enterprise infrastructure over time, to adapt to changing market requirements and incorporate new technologies. The US Government and especially the Department of Defense has embraced Enterprise Architecture for the same reasons. DOD in particular sees change as a constant, and thus recognizes a fundamental requirement to manage that change on ongoing basis. Documenting and then using an Enterprise Architecture to plan and manage information systems is a US Government and DOD mandate. Moreover, the ability of DOD to move its business practices to conform to best commercial practice is directly tied to its ability to transition and integrate its information systems to conform to leading commercial standards. This is especially true in the realm of DOD logistics. DOD logistics operators recognize the benefits of commercial standard supply chain management (SCM) and ERP systems.  They already interact with most of their suppliers, and an ever-increasing number of their customers, using e-commerce technology and standards. DOD Services and Agencies have a number of efforts ongoing to replace legacy backbone supply systems with modern Commercial Off The Shelf (COTS) systems, such as ERP, SCM, and Web Portal frameworks. But each change is fraught with risk since the DOD logistics enterprise is already a system of systems, evolved more than designed to work together via a loose system of data standards, business rules, and a relatively small number of touch points. These touch points are currently managed by interagency agreements on data exchange. Thus, one system’s dependence on another system may not be apparent. Additionally, as more legacy systems join individual Service and Agency networks, and are linked to feed other DOD systems, unexpected data exchanges become more common and problematic. An Enterprise Architecture is an ideal way to identify and manage these system dependencies.Finally, managing logistics transformation also involves managing overlap and redundancy. In the US, DOD Services and Agencies have a great deal of autonomy to define their internal processes and systems. The Services rights and responsibilities are clearly defined by federal law. Yet DOD, the Services and the Agencies are also bound by Congress to safeguard taxpayers dollars through prudent and efficient management. With the move to COTS enterprise systems, there is clearly great opportunity to leverage investments, as well as avoid redundant systems. The accepted way to do this is through Portfolio Management applied against Enterprise Architecture. Portfolio Management looks at the benefits of proposed information technology investments as compared to current performance. The Enterprise Architecture provides the reference for current performance as well as systems interdependencies.  Changing the architecture first, than assessing the impacts of proposed changes provides objective data for Portfolio Management. Moreover, it shows the true costs and impacts, as well as the overall benefits, of a proposed change on an enterprise basis. This helps avoid the common problem of expensive unforeseen impacts resulting from what was seen as a simple change, as well as highlight substantial enterprise-wide benefits and savings from what might outwardly look like an obscure localized initiative.  The DUSD (L&MR), its LSM office and the LIB all recognize the value of a DOD Logistics Enterprise Architecture. But how to get one is not as clear, with little consensus on a way forward. The LIB charged the LCM to look into what was involved in producing Logistics Enterprise Architecture, and to propose a framework for the DOD logistics community.  ASA (C3I) has mandated a general framework for DOD information architectures. This is the C4ISR Architectural Framework [6]. This framework mandates a number of required and supporting products aimed at documenting three “views” of an architecture. The Operational View addresses the process and participants in a specific function or functions. The Systems View addresses the actual hardware and software components and the network components that connect them. The Technical View documents the technical standards the systems must comply with or is to be built around. Together, the three views document the purpose and design of the system and support development, testing, fielding and life cycle maintenance. One problem for LCM was that the DOD Architectural Framework was focused on systems level architecture, rather than enterprise level architecture. Adapting the systems level products to an enterprise made up of systems of systems looked like a daunting task--one which the LIB was reluctant to support. The task was scoped down to focus on the Operational View of the DOD Logistics Enterprise. Even this looked like a larger task than the LCM had resources to address or the LIB was willing to authorize. The problem was, with such a large set of enterprise functions and systems, where should DOD Logistics start its architecture effort?1.3 The ResponseTurning to the DOD Framework, and specifically the Operational View products, the LCM Architecture Team noted that the most general required products, and especially the Operational View 1 (OV 1) product called the “High Level View”, would be a useful product by itself for understanding the DOD Logistics Enterprise. But drawing up a High Level View of all of the major DOD Logistics processes was challenge in itself. This would be a major Power Point graphics effort. The MITRE support team then suggested they be allowed to try to draw this High Level View using a COTS process modeling environment. This would be as or more efficient than using a graphics environment, since the COTS modeling environment proposed, Gensym’s ReThink, provided the capability to rapidly define systems engineering graphics appropriate to the task at hand, as well as the ability to define multiple nested levels of process detail, and then rapidly reproduce (“clone”) the resulting detailed objects. And the result would be a working executable model, a simulation of the DOD logistics enterprise, not just a collection of static drawings. LCM gave MITRE the go ahead to see what a limited effort would produce. MITRE was able to leverage the COTS object oriented, graphical programming environment of ReThink to produce not only the prototype model but also a logistics architecture development environment. And in only two and a half staff weeks! The Logistics Architecture ModelThe overall Logistics Architecture Model (LAM) effort includes a customized development environment, a prototype notional model of the emerging DOD logistics architecture as a composite of Service and Agency logistics architectures, and a work strategy to refine this prototype logistics architecture model into an owner-validated reference model of the composite DOD logistics enterprise.  Once built, this reference model will be used to explore new logistics management and delivery concepts, the impact of new concepts and other component systems changes on the operation of the overall DOD logistics enterprise, and as a tool to identify and access the so-called “portfolio” implications of policy or systems changes under consideration by the DOD logistics community and its members. The Modeling EnvironmentThe LAM was implemented in the Gensym Corporations ReThink modeling environment for business process reengineering [7]. A key reason for using ReThink was that a large number of existing Service and Agency logistics process and architecture models were built in ReThink. The hope was, and still is, that these models can be leveraged by eventually linking them to the high level processes modeled in the LAM. This will result in a robust multi-fidelity model of DOD logistics as an integrated enterprise. Additionally, both the MITRE development team and the ManTech knowledge capture team were experienced in ReThink, and both teams already possessed several licensed copies. This allowed a rapid start without resource, acquisition, or training prerequisites.Planning the EffortThe key to the promised rapid development was the ability of ReThink to support the development and then the extensive reuse of components.  The object oriented, graphical programming underpinnings of ReThink make this possible, but at a price. Past experience made it clear to the developer that a potential pitfall lies in premature cloning of component objects. Much time is lost if poorly designed or incomplete objects are reproduced and used throughout a large model. Then the only recourse is to systematically find and fix each component, or rebuild the model correctly from scratch. A related problem is building a model, and especially a modeling environment, on a poorly designed object hierarchy. In ReThink a key use of objects and object hierarchy is for work flow control. Work objects move between activity blocks and are often routed most easily by object type. A substantial reduction in logic blocks can be had by carefully crafting a rich object hierarchy. This allows a number of related object types to be routed along one path or another with a single logic block, but also allows very fine differentiation among objects types when required. If the object hierarchy is not sufficiently robust, a large number of logic blocks working in a sequence is required in many places in the model to route objects correctly. This degrades performance. Taking the time to adequately plan the design of components design and the object hierarchy is essential to a successful rapid prototyping effort with COTS environments such as ReThink.  Developing the Development EnvironmentThe design chosen for the LAM was a set of Service and Agency activity blocks, representing specific types of logistics operations, made up of a number of standard logistical function blocks.  These function blocks each modeled a basic logistical process, such as order entry or inventory control. These function blocks are in turn built with standard ReThink components. The current LAM function blocks are both notional and generic. That is, the basic steps of a given function are modeled but no attempt is made to model the specific process actually in use today in a specific Service or Agency logistical activity. However, the basic process should provide a solid starting point for modification to specific organizational processes. The current LAM has fourteen functional blocks: Logistics Planning, Log C2, Order Entry & Tracking, Materiel Release, C2 Routing, Routing (i.e. transaction routing), Distribution, Receive Store & Issue, Consume, Forecast Requirements, Retrograde Unserviceables, and Repair Unserviceables. These fourteen blocks each encapsulate a working sub-process model. A blank LAM function block is also provided. They are arranged on a ReThink workspace to form a menu palette, which is linked to the top level ReThink menu, under “Model”. Figure 1, next page, shows this palette. FIGURE 1. The LAM Function Menu PaletteBuilding the PrototypeThe LAM functions are used to define the inner workings of typical Service and Agency logistical activities. Most of these activities are organizations such as military support units or fixed base logistical organizations. Some are more functionally defined, such as “Inventory Manager”. Linking these logistics activities produces Service supply chains. Adding the links to DLA and US TRANSCOM as well as the interactions between Service supply chains produces the model of the DOD Logistics Enterprise.  Figure 2, next page, shows the overall LAM, linking the Service and Agency activities. Below it, Figure 3 shows a typical Service activity, made up of LAM functions. Figure 4 on the following page shows a typical LAM Function.One design goal is to depict the currently loose relationship between logistical command and control (log C2) systems and the transactional processing systems. The DOD, JCS, Service and Agency logistical command and control (log C2) systems are used to manage the logistics enterprise. The Service and Agency transactional processing systems actually automate order taking and fulfillment, and the distribution processes in between. However, getting management direction to affect the transactional processes is currently a manual function. In Figure 2 the log C2 systems and linkages are largely above the horizontal “Log C2 Bus”.  This models the current practice throughout DOD. Logistics supervisors take direction from their superior and supported unit commanders and use this in turn to direct their logistics management personnel to enter or process orders using the transactional systems provided by their Service or Agency. One major DOD logistics information technology effort currently ongoing is the Global Combat Support System (GCSS). This is both a specific next generation Joint log C2 system as well as a next generation “system of systems” made up of a family of Service and Agency logistics transactional systems modernization efforts. However, as the architecture shows, unless a specific link is made between log C2 systems and the supporting transactional systems, the only way to effect a command or policy directed change in logistics support is through a manual entry at the lowest levels.Figure 2 – The Logistics Architecture ModelFigure 3 – A Typical LAM ActivityFigure 4 – A Typical LAM FunctionAdding Performance MetricsThe LAM attempts to quantify these dynamics by measuring Situational Awareness latency between the higher command levels and the lowest level logistical operators. Currently the LAM prototype models the Situational Awareness latency between the JCS J4 and a forward unit supply element. What it attempts to measure is the time between issuance of a J4 policy directive or J4 operational guidance and receipt in the field, resulting in changed behavior and adjustments to the active orders in the transactional systems. A second metric currently built into the LAM is Customer Wait Time (CWT). In the LAM this is the time between entering an order in the customer transactional system and receipt of the requested supplies. In both cases the object creation time, recorded by ReThink whenever an object created, is measured by a standard ReThink instrument, the time probe. This was easy to incorporate into the LAM but it immediately added great utility to the model. One other standard ReThink feature was used in monitoring CWT. Each “materiel” class work object is also a ReThink “bpr-container” object. This allows a standard ReThink “insert” block to attach the requisition work object to the requested materiel at the issuing warehouse. Then when the customer receives the materiel object the requisition object id removed using a standard “remove” block. The creation time of the requisition, rather than that of the materiel is then used to measure CWT. Figures 5 and 6, below, show these processes. Figure 5 – The LAM Fill From Inventory FunctionFigure 6 - The LAM Consume FunctionRouting BussesLAM mimics the actual log C2 and log transactional systems by using information busses to route information exchanges between logistical activities. These busses are constructed with LAM routing function blocks. The Routing blocks also incorporate ReThink copy blocks which simulate routing documents and other information exchanges to two or more different addressees. One place this is done extensively in LAM is to route copies of reports up to a Joint headquarters element as well as rearward to a superior Service headquarters element. This provides a mechanism for estimating the divergence in Situational Awareness caused by one headquarters element using earlier, later, or more detailed information than another headquarters involved in the same C2 action. Physical distribution of materiel is modeled using a similar LAM Distribution function block. Figures 7 and 8 shows part of a typical LAM information bus and a Log C2 Routing function block.Figures 7 – Part of the LAM Information BusFigure 8 – LAM Routing BlockTesting and DebuggingA significant amount of the short development time (20%, or 20 staff hours) was required to get the LAM working. Most of this involved correctly setting the busses and routing blocks. However, once set, these blocks and busses have operated very reliably. One ongoing concern is performance. The longest run so far is 67.5 simulated hours in 18 clock hours. This is too short a time to correctly simulate CWT, which is typically in the range of 5-20 days (120-480 hours). The cause of this slow performance is a proliferation of C2 traffic and supply transactions as the model run progresses. The traffic levels can be lowered, but this is a key facet of the actual DOD logistical enterprise operation. The current plan is to continue with enhancing the accuracy of the simulated functions and then addressing performance enhancements that fairly portray the actual DOD logistical enterprise.Transferring the TechnologyThe LAM prototype configuration was locked on February 14, 2001. This version of the LAM was transferred to ManTech soon after that. ManTech has studied the model and is comfortable with the technology and the technical approach. Currently LSM is working with the Services and Agencies to identify Service and Agency SME contacts to work with ManTech to customize the generic LAM functions into Service and Agency specific logistics processes.  The initial effort will be with the Navy and is expected to take several months. Other Services and Agencies processes should be added to the LAM over the next year.3.0 ConclusionThe Logistics Architecture Model (LAM) development environment and notional prototype is a first step towards a comprehensive DOD logistics enterprise information architecture reference model. The use of a COTS process modeling environment made possible a rapid and efficient prototyping effort.  The LAM prototype is now being transferred to another support contractor, supporting a different DOD sponsor. Again, the use of a COTS process modeling environment eased this transition since the receiving contractor team was already familiar with the COTS environment. The next year should see the notional logistics processes depicted in the LAM prototype replaced with validated Service and Agency processes. The result will be an executable logistics architecture model available for use throughout DOD to support Service, Agency, and DOD level logistics transformation.4.0 References[1]	Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), Defense Link, web site, organizational index page: http://www.defenselink.mil/osd/index.html[2]	Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics (USD (AT&L)), ACQWeb web site: http://www.acq.osd.mil/ ;  Office Navigator page: http://www.acq.osd.mil/acqweb/nav/index.html [3]	Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Logistics and Materiel Readiness (DUSD (L&MR)) web site, organization chart page: http://www.acq.osd.mil/log/docs/orgcht.htm [4]  Director, Logistics Systems Modernization (LSM) web site: http://www.acq.osd.mil/log/lsm/lsm.html[5]  Logistics Community Manager (LCM), as well as information about the LIB available at web site: http://www.lcm.dla.mil/[6]  C4ISR Architecture Working Group (AWG). C4ISR Architecture Framework, Version 2.0. Department of Defense, 18 December 1997.  Web site at: http://www.c3i.osd.mil/org/cio/i3/AWG_Digital_Library/index.htm [7]  Gensym Corporation Web site: http://www.gensym.comAuthor BiographyDavid Payne is a Simulation and Modeling Engineer in the Operations Research Department of the MITRE Corporation’s Washington Command and Control Center. He is currently working on a number of projects for several US DOD sponsors aimed at achieving Army Transformation, Focused Logistics, and Joint Vision 2020. In prior logistics and analytical jobs, he has helped develop the Army’s Revolution in Military Logistics vision, support combat units in Desert Storm and Korea, spread arms control in Germany, fix the Army’s logistical and financial information systems, build artificial intelligence systems, and field real time weapons simulations for live operational tests.