Federating DOD Component Logistics Architecture ModelsDavid Payne and Aricka HawkinsThe MITRE Corporation7515 Colshire DriveMcLean, VA 22102-7508703-883-6366 HYPERLINK mailto:dpayne@mitre.org dpayne@mitre.org HYPERLINK mailto:aricakh@mitre.org arickah@mitre.orgKeywords:Logistics, Enterprise Architecture, DOD, ReThink, Process Model, Interoperability, HLA, Army, USALIA, USTRANSCOM, DLA, SDMI, Army Logistics Process Model. “Rock Drill”, federating COTS process modelsABSTRACT:  A number of organizations in the United States Department of Defense have independently documented their logistics processes using commercial off the shelf (COTS) process modeling environments. The majority have built models in Gensym Corporation’s ReThink environment. Other organizations have built logistics process models using Extend, SimProcess, and Arena. There are probably other models in parts of DOD logistics using other environments.  The Office of the Deputy Undersecretary of Defense for Logistics and Materiel Readiness (DUSD (L&MR)), lead by the Director, Logistics Systems Modernization (LSM), has been working for the past few years to document the overall DOD logistics process and enterprise architectures. LSM has recently teamed with the DOD Logistics Community Management (LCM) organization to investigate how the existing DOD logistics models can be linked to form a virtual interoperable model of cross Service and Agency logistics processes. This paper describes progress toward this objective. The technical approach is multistage. First, two models built in the ReThink environment were linked using ReThink and underlying G2 interoperability tools supply by Gensym. These models are the US Army Logistics Process model (often referred to as the “Rock Drill” model) and the US Transportation Command (US TRANSCOM) / Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) Strategic Distribution Management Initiative (SDMI) model. The second stage will replace the Gensym links with High Level Architecture (HLA) links, using the Gensym HLA Gateway. The final stage, if attempted, envisions linking non-ReThink, non-G2, models into a DOD Log Architecture Federation.  The goal is to leverage the existing body of work in DOD logistics to produce a comprehensive DOD logistics enterprise simulation capability. This objective capability would then support logistics transformation analysis, planning, and portfolio management.IntroductionThe United States Department of Defense (DOD) logistics community sees a benefit in documenting the architecture of the systems of systems that has grown out of almost forty years of logistics management automation efforts in the various DOD Services and Agencies. Moreover, most of the community and the DOD logistics leadership see the advantages of having this architecture available as an executable simulation model. The Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Logistics and Materiel Readiness (DUSD (L&MR)) and Logistics Community Management (LCM), following direction from the Logistics Information Board (LIB), have collaborated on a small effort to explore how to quickly achieve such a model. Two small pilot efforts are on going. One is a new top-down process model and modeling environment which was used to prototype a comprehensive DOD logistics architecture, and is planned to be used to expand that notional prototype with valid Service and Agency processes. This effort is the Logistics Architecture Model (LAM), documented in a companion paper [1]. The other effort, the subject of this paper, is a limited proof of principle exploring the feasibility, practicality and desirability of linking existing Service and Agency logistics architecture models to form a larger architecture model. The expected benefit is to be able to leverage and directly reuse existing logistics process models previously built by the Services and Agencies to model, analyze and improve their individual business processes. The two efforts are also linked, in that the hope is that the comprehensive LAM could be federated with Service and Agency detailed models, providing a multi-resolution model of DOD logistics. Two models are available that are mature, detailed, and built in the same commercial off the shelf (COTS) environment. These are the US Army Logistics Integration Agency (USALIA) Army Logistics Process Model (commonly called the “Rock Drill” model, or RDM), and the US Transportation Command (USTRANSCOM) and Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) Strategic Distribution Management Initiative (SDMI) model. These models are both built using the Gensym Corporation ReThink process modeling environment. Initially in this project these two models have been linked with Gensym Corporation supplied extensions to ReThink that provide cross-model and cross-processor interoperability. The long-term goal is to use HLA to interoperate the process models and bring other models, running in a number of different COTS environments, into a logistics federation.The general techniques and lessons learned should apply to interoperating COTS-based process models in any field, not just defense logisticsThe ModelsSeveral US terms and concepts. One key US DOD architecture idea needs to be explained before going into details of the models and the federated architecture, That is the idea of “as-is”, “emerging”, and “to-be” architectures. A primary purpose of information technology architecture is change management. That is, how will systems and components of systems be brought on line, and how will their presence or delayed arrival impact other existing and planned systems and components? The “as-is” architecture is what is running now—whenever “now” is. The “to-be” architecture is the planned future state under design or analysis. Usually, the “to-be” system or system of systems is the reason driving the architecture model. However, it is becoming apparent to those working DOD architecture issues that a third, interim, architecture must be addressed—the “emerging” architecture. Emerging architecture is the system or systems an organization is currently buying. In the US approach to funding government programs, there is considerable lead time between developing a concept and getting funding, and another considerable lead time between funding and delivery of large enterprise systems. This is often two years or more. Thus the “as-is” architecture of today is largely irrelevant in evaluation of planned “to-be” systems when a number of already planned and/or funded modernization initiatives are underway at varied stages of completion.  The real “as-is” architecture then is the completed “emerging” architecture.The Army Logistics Process Model (the “Rock Drill” Model)The Army Logistics Process (“Rock Drill”) model, or “RDM” throughout the rest of this paper, depicts the logistics transaction processing, materiel release, transportation and order receipt processes in the Army’s system of logistics systems. As with most process models, manual as well as automated steps in the processes are modeled, consistent with ground truth. In the actual Army system, and accurately portrayed in RDM, a series of specific logistics automated systems capture and process order requests and manage order fulfillment and delivery. These start with the Unit Level Logistics System (ULLS), provided to the customer unit supply rooms. Requisitions from ULLS are then manually (“as is” process) or electronically (“emerging” process) submitted transferred to the operational (i.e. “retail”) level logistics system. This is the Standard Army Retail Materiel Supply System (SARSS). SARSS itself is a system of three subsystems. SARSS1 is the Supply Support Activity (SSA) system that interfaces with the customer ULLS and maintains the lowest level of field inventory. SARSS2 (A/D) is the Division level systems that networks a constellation of three to five (more or less) SARSS1 systems. It also automatically queries the attached SARSS1s to support cross leveling and distributed inventory management. Finally, SARSS2 (A/D) links to the supporting Corps or Theater level system, the SARSS 2 (A/C). This system also provides lateral inventory search and transfer support, and links either directly or through so-called “gateways” to the nation logistics systems. This link to the national systems of the Army Materiel Command (AMC), DLA, and to the other Services for a few special items, is through an automated routing system called DAAS (DOD Automated Addressing System). This system of systems results in a breadth-first field inventory search pattern at (potentially) the Division, Corps, Theater, and Global levels. Then if the requested item is not found, the request is passed back through DAAS to the national level inventories of AMC and DLA (or other Services in exceptional cases). Both AMC and DLA have wholesale level supply management systems that perform similar functions, but vary subtly from one another in the details. Both not only manage the actual order fulfillment, but also support forecasting and interface with the systems that support procurement of supplies from industry. The Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) is provided logistics transactional information from both SARSS and from AMC and DLA systems. This supports billing and payment from supported and supporting unit accounts. It also supports payment of turn-in credit to supported units. This is a big money issue in DOD logistics and the original cause for RDM. Under DOD logistics policy, users of expensive major repair parts, specifically those so-called “reparables” that are reconditioned and reissued, are reimbursed part of the cost of a new part when they return the broken part. Moreover, their budgets are adjusted downward to reflect the expected credit return value. Additionally, the wholesale system is financed by a revolving fund. That fund is capitalized and managed based on the expected level of customer demands. Both DLA and AMC have these revolving funds, and depend on sales to customers to maintain support operations. DLA and AMC buy (or repair) the parts based on expected demand, depleting their funds. Then as the fiscal year progresses, customers buy parts from AMC and DLA, replenishing the funds. Thus the term “revolving funds”—money is payed out for parts and earned back through sales. However, if the quantity or specific items demanded by the customer do not align with what DLA and AMC planned, the funds can suffer a cash shortage as well as an excess of unwanted parts. Then there is not enough money to buy the parts the supported units want, which in turn further magnifies the cash shortage. This is a death spiral for a revolving fund. AMC is especially impacted, since the Army manages most all of the more expensive reparables.  RDM does a very good job of modeling, analyzing and predicting these revolving fund dynamics.RDM also models the DLA order fulfillment process and the transportation system. However, these functions are done in much less detail and from an external point of view.  RDM is designed such that these external processes are essentially plug-in components. This made RDM a good candidate to try to federate with the US TRANSCOM and DLA process model, SDMI, which models the internal detail of those parts of the supply chain that are external to the Army and thus to the RDM.The Strategic Distribution Management Initiative (SDMI) ModelThe SDMI model arose out of a joint initiative of the same name between US TRANSCOM and DLA. Both organizations came to the realization that national level supply distribution was function of both procurement and warehousing, DLA’s traditional focus, and transportation, US TRANSCOM’s mission. Neither organization alone owned the entire order fulfillment process, and, moreover, their principle sub-processes were deeply intertwined. Additionally, each organization faced recurring infrastructure and investment decisions that were to large degrees impacted by the investment decisions of their previously “silent” partner. SDMI has the goal of taking a total-supply-chain system approach to the combined DLA/TRANSCOM distribution mission, looking for globally optimal and mutually beneficial solutions. The SDMI process model lends objectivity and rigor to this process, allowing both organizations to experiment and evaluate proposed changes in light of customer service improvements as well as in light of benefits or impacts to their own internal programs and enterprises. The version of the SDMI model provided by US TRANSCOM to support the federation effort is the Joint Logistics Warfighter Initiative (JLWI) variant. It models support of Army units deployed to Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. Thus, it must model internal Army order entry and management processes up to the DAAS threshold, which hands off order fulfillment to DLA. It also models Army delivery processes after US TRANSCOM delivers the supplies to the Central Command (CENTCOM) and specifically to elements of the Theater Support Command (TSC) of ARCENT, the Army component command of CENTCOM. Thus, SDMI appeared to be a good federate for RDM, since each model had more detail about the specific processes their sponsoring organizations support.The remote-BPR-IO Knowledge BaseAlthough not a model in the sense of RDM or SDMI, the specialized blocks and methods provided by Gensym to extend ReThink were provided in a so-called ReThink knowledge base (i.e. .kb file). The authors are very grateful to Gensym technical support to have provided this production quality custom toolkit. What remote-BPR-IO does is encapsulate the Gensym G2-to-G2 API in easy to use ReThink blocks and classes. The knowledge base worked simply and easily, and greatly simplified the linking effort. A future direction for this project would be to extend the remote-BPR-IO approach to provide a set of ReThink blocks that would encapsulate the Gensym HLA Gateway API, making easy to insert publish and subscribe points into existing ReThink models.  3.0  Linking the Models3.1  Evaluating the ModelsEven with the good fit of RDM and SDMI, linking these models proved challenging. First, both models were built and are actively used to support specific demanding analyses efforts. RDM, in particular, has been in active use since 1998, supporting a series of US Army logistics transformation concept evaluations, process improvements, major trouble shooting efforts, and even on-line support of process improvement fielding. Like any other hard worked entity, it has some scars. These are in the form of sections of now unused sub-processes, older and specialized versions of classes and methods, and other “stubs” that allow USALIA to rapidly turn on and off capabilities. However, for an outsider to pick up and use the model, these stubs make it difficult to identify what is currently “on” and “off”, and even identify the core process threads. SDMI was a younger model and very “clean” from an internal configuration viewpoint. However, one bothersome problem was that the SDMI developers apparently redefined and extended a core ReThink method. This caused a definition clash, not unlike a compile error, when both models were merged into the same environment. The preferred approach is to create a subclass of the ReThink component to be customized, and then redefine the behavior of that custom subclass. Luckily, Rethink is very forgiving and the automatically generated subclass resulting from the merge of SDMI into RDM appears to work without degrading the SDMI model.Lessons learned here include:As in HLA federations, like models not built to work together usually must be modified, to some degree, to interoperate.Class hierarchy should be designed to support interoperability by ensuring that model-unique extensions are somehow segregated from standard COTS or government-furnished base code or environments.  Models should be as modular as possible, the more the better, to support future component upgrades or federation “outsourcing” of components.Models intended to be potential federates need to be maintained in a clean, configuration controlled “export” version to be of most value to the federation target community.The reader is asked to not take these comments as criticisms of either model provider. This federation effort was meant to be a small, non-intrusive proof of principle, placing no burden on the model providers. As such, they had neither the opportunity nor the requirement to prepare their models for this effort. The intent of these comments is rather to caution future federators toe check the state of the proposed component models ahead of time, and plan their technical effort accordingly. They are also aimed at model owners who want to enhance the desirability of their models to future federations.  Finally, these observations may eventually support future SISO or DMSO recommended practice efforts.Preparing the ModelsA small amount of clean up work was done to each model to simplify the linking process. Most of the so-called “inconsistencies” in RDM identified by ReThink in the load sequence were tracked down and addressed. However, the “fix” was usually to delete the offending component or method.  This of course did away with some functionality. Since this proof of principle was aimed at exploring how to link these models and show that they worked together, rather than to address specific analytical questions, the clean up was, admittedly, done more with a machete than with a scalpel. For most any serious analytical project, a much more careful, well-planned and time-consuming effort would be required. Such an effort would also require much more involvement from the model owner, impacting their other work. The next step was to identify the best “touch points” between the two models. Here, the choice was very clear in RDM, especially for the link to transportation. In RDM, transportation is an entirely separate module of well-delineated components from the transaction management module. Even within transaction management, RDM has a very clean workflow, so the hand off to DLA was readily apparent. However, the DLA item management process was not modeled at all within RDM, as would be expected for an Army model. But even here the point where DLA managed requests would go to DLA was clearly labeled as “DAAS”. This “task” block (i.e., a ReThink block that imposes a work delay on simulated objects) was readily replaced by a decision block that sent DLA requests off to the SDMI gateway for further processing by SDMI. Additionally, RDM generates transactions from an input data file, which appeared to not have any demands for DLA managed items. For the proof of principle an additional source block was added to generate and inject requests for DLA managed items. This was done in such a way as to go through the “DAAS” routing block, so any future RDM generated transactions coded for DLA management will flow correctly.The touch points in the JLWI model of SDMI were harder to find. Only a detailed understanding of the Army processes modeled allowed identification of possible touch points. These were exploited to provide provisional gateways from RDM into SDMI for DLA order fulfillment and retrograde, and back to RDM after strategic delivery by US TRANSCOM.  The input and output points were then routed through the SDMI detail blocks to allow top-level visibility of the remote-BPR-IO gateways. As mentioned above, integration of the Gensym remote-BPR-IO “model” was straightforward. The only modification was to extend the remote-BPR-IO gateway classes with what were dubbed “LogLink” gateway classes. Specifically, custom classes for four blocks are defined: an SDMI send block, an SDMI receive block, an RDM send block and an RDM receive block. These custom blocks are further augmented with built-in detail, (i.e., small process models inside each block), that handled the translation of classes and class attributes from one model into the corresponding but differently named classes and class attributes of the other model. The attribute values were also translated and transferred. For the proof of principle only a minimum set of key attributes were translated—just those required to make the receiving model function. For a serious effort, many more attributes would have to be translated, or the class structure of both models would have to be redesigned and harmonized. Alternatively, HLA could provide this object translation function through the FOM.Linking the ModelsOnce the touch points were identified and the minor modifications required in each model were made the actual linking process was straightforward. The unused parts of RDM and SDMI were turned off and disconnected. The custom send and receive blocks were then attached to the connection stubs. The models were next activated and started. This resulted in some minor errors requiring a minimal amount of debugging. Overall, however, the linking process was very simple and smooth. This bodes well for both the use of COTS modeling environments and the use of simulation components in general as an highly efficient way to build models and then to link models. However, standards of practice do need to be defined to make the potential federates more compatible and more modular. A final effort was required to make federated models perform a set of full simulation cycles. The interoperable models now demonstrate the ability to generate parts requests, materiel release orders (MROs) and retrograde parts in RDM and successfully send them to SDMI. SDMI successfully translates these incoming RDM class objects into corresponding SDMI class objects.  SDMI then processes the requests and MROs correctly, which eventually results in parts moving from the SDMI DLA warehouse to the consolidations point for packing, and on to the SDMI port of embarkation for airlift to Saudi Arabia. The remaining action that has not yet been observed is the actual placement of the Army parts on the simulated aircraft and the subsequent unpacking and delivery to the LogLink portal for transfer back to RDM, completing the interoperable simulation loop. However, the problem appears to be in SDMI and not in the linkage blocks. This problem should be solved shortly and a full order and fulfillment cycle should be available for demonstration at the Fall 2001 SIW.4.0  Future PlansThis small proof of principle effort to link the RDM and SDMI models demonstrates technical feasibility, but also highlights some practical concerns that cast doubt on the value of achieving a DOD logistics architecture through linkage of existing models. This is due to the substantial analysis and modification effort required to link models that were never intended to work together. Even so, this effort and level of effort may not be substantially different from the effort required to build a new DOD logistics architecture model such as LAM. And there is still potential to accelerate the LAM development by selectively federating appropriate component logistics process and architecture models.If this “LogLink” effort continues, the final goal, expected to be addressed in FY02, is linkage of logistics process and architecture models built in several different COTS environments using HLA. A byproduct of this effort will hopefully be a set of standard reusable software components for the various COTS environments, making this a “plug and play” capability. This would provide DOD the highest potential reuse as well as demonstrate the potential of HLA to the wider commercial process modeling community. Commercial organizations face the same problem of designing or evaluating hybrid processes made up of different parts of their own or their partners’ processes. These are often modeled with different COTS tools, and need be linked for interoperatabilty. Reusable software components leveraging HLA offers an attractive solution.5.0 References[1]	Payne, “A Comprehensive DOD Logistics Architecture Model” (paper 01F-SIW-052), Proceedings, Fall 2001 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO), Orlando, FL, September 2001. (SISO web site: http://www.sisostds.org/)[2]	Logistics Community Manager (LCM), as well as information about the LIB available at web site: http://www.lcm.dla.mil/ [3]	Gensym Corporation Web site: http://www.gensym.com [4]  US Army Logistics Integration Agency (USALIA).  Business Process Redesign Lab briefings, including information about the “Rock Drill” Army logistics model, available at web site: http://lia.army.mil[5]  US Transportation Command  (US TRANSCOM) and Defense Logistics Agency (DLA). Strategic Distribution Management Initiative (SDMI), DLA CINC Day information briefing, 7 December 2000. Download available at: http://www.dla.mil/briefings/cinc/1245-SDM.ppt[6]  US Transportation Command  (US TRANSCOM) Strategic Distribution Management Initiative (SDMI), ReThink process model knowledge base, developed as part of a Joint US TRANSCOM, Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) initiative.Author Biographies David Payne is a Simulation and Modeling Engineer in the Operations Research Department of the MITRE Corporation’s Washington Command and Control Center. He is currently working on a number of projects for several US DOD sponsors aimed at achieving Army Transformation, Focused Logistics, and Joint Vision 2020. In prior logistics and analytical jobs, he has helped develop the Army’s Revolution in Military Logistics vision, support combat units in Desert Storm and Korea, spread arms control in Germany, fix the Army’s logistical and financial information systems, build artificial intelligence systems, and field real time weapons simulations for live operational tests. He holds a Masters of Science degree in Operations Research from Florida Institute of Technology.Aricka Hawkins is an Operations Research Analyst in the Operations Research Department of the MITRE Corporation’s Washington Command and Control Center. She is currently working on efforts within the logistics community to encourage the reuse of existing information architecture products and achieving interoperability between existing executable architecture models. Prior to joining MITRE she had extensive experience maintaining and analyzing Air Force readiness data repositories. She holds a Masters of Science degree in Operations Research from George Washington University. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8   EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  