Implementing SMARTDave ThomenArmy Model and Simulation Office1111 Jeff Davis Hwy, Suite 503ECrystal Gateway NorthArlington, VA 22202david.thomen@hqda.army.milKEYWORDSSimulation and Modeling for Acquisition, Requirements and Training; SMART; SMART Concept; SMART Initiative; Collaborative Environments; ABSTRACT:  SMART is an Army Model and Simulation Executive Council (AMSEC) sponsored, Army Model and Simulation Office (AMSO) led initiative.  The SMART Concept is basically about how the Army will identify needed capabilities, develop and field systems to address the requirements, and training soldiers to use and maintain those systems over their operational life.  The primary feature that distinguishes the SMART Concept from the way Army does business today, is that SMART capitalizes on modeling and simulation (M&S) tools and technologies in all aspects of a system over its complete life cycle.  Inherent in the concept is the notion that how we acquire must be linked with how we identified what was required. How we train must be as integral a  part of development, as how we fight is inextricably connected to how we train.  SMART is a collaborative effort that cuts across the traditional requirements, training, operations, acquisition and testing communities.  The Army Acquisition Executive has indicated that the SMART concept is a key mechanism to achieve the Army vision and building of the Objective Force.  The four significant benefits to the Army in implementing the SMART Concept are: (i) reduce time to field and upgrade systems; (ii) increased military worth of fielded systems while simultaneously optimizing force structure, doctrine, tactics, techniques and procedures; (iii) concurrent fielding of systems with their training devices; and (iv) reduced total ownership costs and sustainment burden for fielded systems throughout their service lives.  This paper will covers both the concept and the approved Execution Plan to make the initiative a reality..1.	IntroductionSMART stands for Simulation and Modeling for Acquisition, Requirements and Training.  Although it originated within the Army’s acquisition community under LTG Kern1, the MilDep to the Assistant Secretary of the Army for Acquisition, Logistics and Technology, as its name implies, it is greater than just acquisition.  It goes from requirements to development and acquisition, to fielding and training, to susainment and modification, and finally, to retirement.  It spans a product’s life cycle from cradle to grave.Since it cuts across all the Army modeling and simulation (M&S) domains, it was recently passed from the Acquisition Community to the Army’s M&S Executive Council (AMSEC), which is now the proponent for SMART.  The Army Model and Simulation Office (AMSO) is its executing agent.My intent in this paper is two fold.  For those who are unfamiliar with SMART, it is to provide an orientation to the concept and the initiative.  Second, it is to provide examples of SMART that have taken place over the past year.  These examples were recognized by the community at the annual SMART Conference this past April.2.	SMART Concept2.1 	The VisionThe Army is becoming increasingly reliant on M&S technologies in our day-to-day practice.  This is true across all our M&S domains.  The SMART Concept (figure 1) is based on how exploiting M&S and related technologies can change the way we do business. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 1The factors that are forcing us to adopt this approach are several:The increased complexity of the systems we are procuring,The increase emphasis on fielding complex and integrated operational capabilities to address the unorthodox situations and environments in which we must work today and in the future,The increasing capabilities in M&S technologies we are seeing and continue to see.The decreasing budgets (more for less)Shorter cycle timesThe need to keep the technological edge on our potential advisariesThe implication of this is that we cannot continue to do business like we use to.  SMART is about the new way we do business.  It is a revolution in business affairs that must accompany the revolution in military affairs if we are to realize the goals of the latter. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 2.The vision (figure 2) was created at about the same time that SMART moved from the Acquisition Community to the AMSEC.  It reflects the commitment of the Army’s senior leadership to a new way of doing business.  The Vision was signed by the AMSEC co-chairs and the leaders of the three M&S domain areas – Advanced Concept & Requirements (ACR), Research, Development & Acquisition (RDA), and Training, Exercises & Military Operations (TEMO).2.2 	Elements of the ConceptBut we cannot just transform overnight.  It requires time, investment, education, research, development and fielding, similar to any product development.  It will also entail a cultural change.  Just as the transportation revolution fundamentally altered the way we looked at things; concepts such as “neighbor” and meanings of words such as “market place,” SMART will bring about similar changes.  For example, a program manager in the future may have duties and responsibilities that are quite different than those we associate with that position today.  The fact that we must integrate across M&S domains alone implies there will be a major cultural change.What are the elements of the SMART Concept used throughout the process of requirements, product development and fielding?  We have already touched on a few of these.  It is a business process; different from the way we do business today.  It will mean a change in Army culture, and an integration across traditional M&S domains.  M&S planning will be essential.  The concept development team or program must plan for how it will employ M&S, to include when it will be used, and what resources (e.g., data, V&V services) must be budgeted for and scheduled.  There will be a need to do more up front in the virtual world to ensure a more complete exploration of the problem and solution spaces.  Likewise, not only will we develop the new system, we must also simultaneously develop a set of representations of the system.  Finally, standards will be developed to facilitate the exchange of M&S information and promote the reuse of M&S tools.2.3 	Collaborative EnvironmentsAt the heart of the SMART concept is the concept of collaboration.  There are several different dimensions or genres of collaboration (figure 3).  At the recent National Defense Industrial Association (NDIA) Simulation Based Acquisition conference in May 2001 there were several presentations on how the science and theory of collaboration is beginning to mature. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 3Collaboration is one region on the spectrum of communications.  It represents a form of communication where the participants have a shared, common understanding of a subject.  It takes effort to obtain, and it is not necessary for all occasions.  This raises questions like: When does it make sense to establish collaborative environments?  What tools facilitate such environments?  What are the shortcomings associated with their use?  Collaborative environments are more than broad bandwidth and other technologies.  It is also people.  Successful environments depend just as much on having “broad bandwidth” people as the right technologies.In product development, the concept calls for the breaking down of existing stovepipes and enabling people of different disciplines to communicate.  M&S technologies are a key catalyst.  Further, SMART seeks to promote communications across programs and even across time.  Collaborative environments facilitate the exploration of ideas, designs and operational concepts.  Through the advances we have seen over the past decade in computer technologies, and the computational power that is now available to employ complex models and simulations, we can achieve a level of communication not possible in the past.  Further, these collaborative environments can take place in situation where the participants are geographically distributed.  Under SMART, collaborative partnerships need to be established with industry, academia and other governmental agencies (e.g. DOE, NASA) and even with non-traditional industries such as the entertainment industry.  As an example, the Army is working with the Institute for Creative Technologies to address such issues as immersive environments.3.	SMART Initiative3.1 	Built on ExperienceToday the Army is embarked on a monumental task of transforming the Army for the world of tomorrow.  Within the next decade it must field and assess an interim force, a family of future combat systems, and an objective force.  M&S will be a key enabler to making that a reality.  Inherited from the Acquisition Community were several “flagship programs.”  These programs were selected because they represented M&S efforts at different point in the acquisition life cycle.  It is from these and other programs that we gain experience from applying some of the SMART concepts.  These we seek to identify and apply to other programs facing similar situations and issues.  This is what the SMART Initiative is all about.  It is a corporate, enterprise effort to learn from our experiences and to address those barriers we face in making the SMART Concept a reality.  3.2 	Implementation in the ACR DomainFrom the ACR domain, we see opportunities of employing SMART to better define our capability needs and to determine whether these needs are best solved in terms of personnel changes, doctrinal changes, with new policies, new material solutions, or some combination of the above.  In the case of material solutions, SMART will permit the users to be part of the collaboration effort, ensuring their problems have been properly understood.  SMART explores the problem space, identifying and understanding the drivers involved.  It permits the requirements drafters to better communicate what is needed, and the users to appreciate what is realistically possible and the costs involved.An example of this type of work was recognized at the SMART conference in April 2001.  Soldiers at TRAC Monterey were given an award for the work they had done in conjunction with PM Soldier.  In particular, a head-mounted display is currently being developed and tested for the Land Warrior System.  The project developed individual and collective virtual tools and a software test and evaluation platform that enabled users (up to 50 soldiers) to evaluate the soldier computer interface for the head-mounted display.  The effort reduced both the cost and time of the project, and led to a better understanding of the user requirements.3.3 	Implementation in the RDA DomainIn the RDA Domain, we are able to explore a broader solution space.  By using M&S to create the collaborative environments we can ensure all the stakeholders are involved early.  We can identify opportunities for reuse.  We can gain an appreciation of the complexities associated with interoperability of one system with the other systems with which it must interface.  We can develop a testing and evaluation strategy to address reliability concerns early on in the program in an effort to manage risk.  The test and evaluation community doesn’t always get the credit it deserves for the work it has done to incorporate M&S into its work.  M&S can help to limit the number of tests required by focusing the testing where the greatest uncertainties exist.  SMART proposes that the knowledge gleaned from tests be used to further refine the existing models and simulations.At the SMART conference Ms. Klafter of PM Signal Warfare was recognized for her work as the IPT leader of the Aerial Common Sensor.  The program is in its Concept Exploration phase.  She and the team have demonstrated how to coordinate the M&S efforts of three competing contractor teams, ensuring their system concepts are adequately displayed in a realistic synthetic environment to reveal the merits and limitations of each.  The results of the M&S will be a major discriminator for the program in the future.  Before leaving the RDA domain, we need to highlight the recent experience of the Crusader program.  Crusader is a program that has used M&S extensively.  When the Chief of Staff of the Army directed that it make major reductions in the weight of the vehicle or face cancellation, the program, through the use of M&S,  was able to make those changes in a matter of days.  They were able to save the program because of their reliance on M&S and their making it an integral part of their program.  3.4 	Implementation in the TEMO DomainThe Army has invested in research in recent years on how and when to do embedded training so that embedded training simulations are delivered with the system.  If we are to meet the objectives that the Chief of Staff of the Army has laid out for us in terms of time to deploy and the size of the footprint, embedded systems training appears to be the approach.  Restriction on ranges and increased OPTEMPO are also factors that support this approach.  The trainers have to be involved early to ensure the training capability is in place and the soldiers are trained when the system is fielded.  M&S can facilitate both the pre-fielding training, as well as the embedded training for the future Army.At the 2001 SMART Conference, Mr. Henry of the National Simulation Center was recognized for the work he led in leveraging existing models and simulations from the different domains to create the Digital Battlefield Sustainment Trainer.  These models and simulations were linked to create a composable digital environment used to support the Joint Contingency Force Advanced Warfighting Experiment.  It linked simulation models with C4ISR interfaces and tools.3.5 	SMART Execution PlanThe SMART Initiative fosters and capitalizes on experiences such as these.  Central to the SMART Initiative is the SMART Execution Plan (the current copy is available on the web).  It is the vehicle that will guide the institutionalization of SMART throughout the Army.  The Execution Plan was approved by the AMSEC in November 2000.  It has been the basis for the justification in getting SMART into the POM.  The plan has 51 specific tasks that are to be accomplished over the coming years.  As SMART is a key enabler of the Army Transformation, a majority of the tasks of the SMART Execution Plan have been incorporated into the Army Transformation Campaign Plan. Another document that has been developed and is available on the web is the Planning Guidelines for SMART.  This provides information for the members of an Integrated Concept Team (ICT), the lead of an Army Technology Demonstration (ATD), or a program manager on how to develop a simulation support plan for an ICT, ATD or program respectively.4.	SummaryBy implementing SMART, the Army will transform the way it does business, thus enabling the Transformation of the Army itself.  Through exploitation of M&S and related technologies, the Army hopes to achieve reduction in total ownership cost through cost avoidance before and after fielding.  It will be able to field better systems, and do so in less time. The Army is in a good position to achieve these objectives.  It has the support of the Army leadership.  It has a plan of execution.  It is earmarking funding to make it a reality.5.	References[1]	Truelove, Mike and Bruce Donlin; “Beyond M&S” Military Training Technology, April 2001, pg 40.Author BiographyDAVE THOMEN, a Division Chief with the Army Model and Simulation Office, oversees the development of the SMART Concept, and the implementation of the SMART Initiative within the Army.   He holds a Master of Science degree in Operations Research from the Naval Postgraduate School.  He is retired from military service, and has spent a number of years in industry supporting OSD on Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA).  He supported the development of the Simulation, Test and Evaluation Process (STEP) Guidelines and has participated on the Government Industry Team on SBA.