Simulation to C4I Interoperability for Planning and Decision SupportJohn D. RobertsVerlynda S. Dobbs, PhDAtlantic Consulting Services (ACS), Inc167 Avenue of the Common, Suite 4Shrewsbury, NJ 07702732-460-9416jroberts@ HYPERLINK "mailto:jroberts@acsinc-nj.com" acsinc-nj.com, HYPERLINK "mailto:vdobbs@acsinc-nj.com"vdobbs@acsinc-nj.comKeywords:   HYPERLINK mailto:vdobbs@acsinc-nj.com  C2, C4I, Modeling & Simulation, Interoperability, Object Model, Planning ABSTRACT: The benefits of interoperability between Modeling & Simulation (M&S) applications and Command and Control (C2) systems are increasingly evident as successful implementations are developed and used in Army experiments and exercises. Interfacing simulation applications with actual C2 systems used by soldiers in the field is an area that promises particular benefit, especially to the training and testing communities.  Successful interoperability supports the Army desire to “train as you fight” by allowing soldiers to train with real life, go-to-war C2 systems. One barrier to interoperability is that M&S applications most often focus on specific interfaces, systems, and tests; standardized approaches have yet to be developed. This has led to a proliferation of M&S-C2 interfaces that are not reusable, are costly to maintain, and lag behind the rapidly evolving new versions and releases of C2 systems in capability and representations.  Given this situation, the development of common standards to facilitate interoperability is needed to promote reuse and reduce cost.The U.S. Army Communications and Electronics Command (CECOM) is currently sponsoring research to develop standard approaches for improving interoperability between M&S applications and C2 systems, specifically in the area of planning and decision support.  The use of simulation has the potential to positively impact the planning process in a number of areas including plan analysis, mission rehearsal, and execution monitoring.  The purpose of this paper is to describe an on-going effort to investigate approaches for defining interoperability standards between M&S applications and Army C2 systems for planning. The effort is focusing on Army C2 systems and constructive force-on-force simulations used for analysis, training, and scenario drivers (e.g., OneSAF, Eagle, WARSIM, etc.).  A pure object-oriented approach was used to define a generic C2 planning space capable of representing the concepts, characteristics, relationships, processes, and behaviors of the problem area independent of a particular simulation architecture.  Activities included review of the doctrinally based Military Decision Making Process (MDMP), surveys of existing C2 systems and constructive simulation applications, analysis of the interoperability requirements, and development of an initial C2 object model to support the exchange of planning and decision support data.   The paper will describe the problem area, present the results of work performed to date, and discuss future plans including evaluation and further evolution of the C2 object model.IntroductionCommand and Control (C2) functions are performed across the Army Tactical Command and Control Systems (ATCCS) Battlefield Functional Areas (BFAs) of maneuver, fire support, intelligence, air defense, logistics, geodesy and weather. Army digitization efforts and experiments have begun to demonstrate the benefits derived from the insertion of information technology into these processes. The C2 required for planning and decision support is defined by the Army doctrinal process known as the Military Decision Making Process (MDMP), which is detailed in Army Field Manual (FM) 101-5, Staff Organizations and Operations.  The MDMP is a deliberate process with the primary objective of assisting the commander and his staff in the development of a plan. The broad objective of decision support to the commander encompasses the applications of mission analysis, course of action (COA) development, COA analysis, mission rehearsal, orders production, and execution monitoring. Even FM 101-5 recognizes that the current method of implementing the MDMP is staff-intensive and time-constrained. The MDMP requires significant levels of personnel resources at a time when the Army is focused on smaller, more disbursed and mobile forces, and the time needed to implement the process limits the number of COAs that can be analyzed in preparation for battle. The limitations inherent in the MDMP identify it as a process that would benefit from further advances in information technology, specifically, in the context of Modeling and Simulation (M&S) applications.The benefits of interoperability between M&S applications and C2 systems are increasingly evident as successful implementations are developed and used in Army experiments and exercises. As M&S technology advances and is applied across all domains, interoperability has resulted in significant savings of time and cost as well as gains in effectiveness. Interfacing simulation applications with actual C2 systems used by soldiers in the field is an area that promises particular benefit, especially to the training and testing communities.The U.S. Army Communications and Electronics Command (CECOM), Fort Monmouth, NJ is currently sponsoring research in this area through the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program. The purpose of this paper is to describe the results of a SBIR Phase I effort to investigate approaches for defining interoperability standards between M&S applications and Army C2 systems in the area of planning and decision support.BackgroundThe ProblemInteroperability between M&S and C2 systems supports the Army desire to “train as you fight” by allowing soldiers to train with real life, go-to-war C2 systems. Simulations can provide a “wrap around” synthetic environment, portraying realistic battlefield scenarios and stimulating the C2 system with simulated message traffic to stress the operator and system with real-world conditions. For the analyst, M&S allows repeatability of scenarios, reduced hardware and personnel resources, and the ability to explore more options when evaluating the effectiveness of C2 systems in operational scenarios. The test community has realized tremendous cost avoidance by using simulated or computer-generated forces to realistically stress systems under test. Simulations have reduced the overhead required to conduct developmental and operational testing by allowing the Army to put fewer soldiers, tanks, vehicles, and communications resources in the field. This has been achieved through interoperability that allows a federation of simulations to stimulate a fielded unit with the appropriate C2 systems messaging and communications effects to make the live system under test operate as if a full complement of battlefield units and equipment were present. One obstacle to interoperability is that M&S applications most often focus on specific interfaces, systems, and tests; standardized approaches have yet to be developed. This has led to a proliferation of customized M&S-C2 interfaces that are not reusable, are costly to maintain, and lag behind the rapidly evolving new versions and releases of C2 systems in capability and representations. Difficulties in achieving M&S-C2 interoperability arise primarily from the fact that traditional C2 system development does not recognize the requirements of M&S. Similarly, M&S development focuses on support to a specific application domain, such as analysis or training, without addressing the issues of interoperability and reuse.To date, many customized interfaces between C2 systems and simulation applications have been developed. However, these interfaces are primarily message-based point-to-point links with limited two-way feeds. The message exchange focuses on status or state information about units with little progress made in the areas of passing orders or applying communications or environmental effects. For the most part, these interfaces involve translation of one message set to another. Given this situation, the development of common standards to facilitate interoperability is needed to promote reuse and reduce cost.Recognizing the importance of interoperability, the Army has chartered the Simulation-C4I (Command, Control, Communications, Computers and Intelligence) Interoperability (SIMCI) Overarching Integrated Product Team (OIPT). The objectives of the OIPT are the development of common models and standards to support reusable component interfaces with a goal of seamless interoperability between M&S and C4I systems. The SIMCI OIPT has developed a long-term strategy to achieve interoperability between simulations and C4I systems. Figure 2.1 illustrates this strategy by defining a set of “building blocks” needed to reach the ultimate goal of shared solutions that will allow both the M&S and C4I communities to achieve interoperability between legacy and future simulation and C4I systems [1].The foundation supporting the process is the alignment of architectures, which refers to the underlying data models and object models that are used to define the implementations of both simulation and C4I systems. Current development and implementations are derived from different data sources and data model representations, which result in many of the difficulties in achieving the goal of shared solutions. Common data/object models will facilitate implementations that reduce the complexity involved in arriving at interoperability. The means to achieving common data and object models is to adhere to common standards during development work. This effort and the anticipated results are consistent with the strategy and the goals of the SIMCI OIPT. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 2.1 Army vision for C4I-Simulation InteroperabilityThe Joint Technical Architecture (JTA) [2] specifies both the Defense Information Infrastructure (DII) Common Operating Environment (COE) [3] and, in an appendix, the High Level Architecture (HLA) [4]. The DII COE is both the concept and architecture to which tactical C2 systems are built while the HLA is the Department of Defense (DoD)-mandated technical framework to support the interoperability of simulations. The application of standards is an important consideration that facilitates commonality in implementations and can promote interoperability. Development efforts for M&S applications and C2 systems have evolved from different requirements, and standards efforts associated with one or the other do not lend themselves to cross-utilization. The goal of achieving interoperability between the two application domains has been further complicated by the evolution, over time, of new and different standards.Phase I ObjectivesThe purpose of the Phase I effort was to investigate approaches for defining interoperability standards between M&S applications and Army C2 systems in the area of planning and decision support. What is needed for true interoperability is a common representation of units, protocols, initialization/execution criteria, environmental conditions, communications, order of battle, situation awareness, and mission-planning data. This involves investigating the use of a pure object-oriented paradigm for defining a generic C2 planning space.  The focus of the work involves developing a unique and innovative means to represent the concepts, characteristics, relationships, processes, and behaviors of the problem that will be independent of any specific simulation interoperability architecture. As part of this process, technology alternatives were examined for demonstrating the feasibility of this approach. Initial emphasis was focused on use of the HLA.  The goal of the Phase I research was to demonstrate a capability to support battlefield C2 operations using combat simulations that allow warfighters to "train as they fight.” Simulation has the potential to positively impact the planning process in a number of areas. Faster-than-real-time combat simulations provide the capability to analyze a greater number of plan alternatives in less time. These simulations can also be used to visually convey the commander’s intent of the mission to subordinate units during the mission rehearsal phase. Another application of simulation would be to use the simulation to execute the planned mission in parallel with the actual execution of the operation, comparing the current situation with the planned operation in order to identify deviations that would require re-planning. This integrated M&S-C2 system capability could be applied to the Army’s transformation thrusts of the Brigade Combat Team (BCT) and Future Combat System (FCS) as a realistic simulation/stimulation environment to support rapid training.Investigation and ResultsThe approach for achieving the Phase I objectives involved three basic activities described as follows:  Survey Problem Domain. Review the problem domain to identify the requirements and more fully understand the issues involving interoperability between C2 systems and M&S applications with respect to planning and decision support.  Tasks include review of the doctrinal planning process, a survey of Army C2 systems involved in planning and executing tactical operations, and a review of existing and emerging M&S applications focused on tactical force-on-force modeling for analysis and training.Analyze Interoperability Requirements. Using the results obtained during the problem domain survey, perform an analysis of the interoperability requirements by comparing the data representations in use by both domains and identify the commonalities, overlaps, and discontinuities that exist. The planning and decision support domain information studied will support this activity in terms of the kind of data required during planning.  Then, correlate the data elements from each domain and begin to identify alignment among the data items.Develop Object Model. Use an object-oriented analysis and design (OOAD) approach to gather and synthesize the required data into a C2 object model that will serve as a starting point for establishing a common representation for tactical planning/decision support information. Identify the high level objects associated with developing and implementing tactical operations and their associations.  Further classify these objects in terms of their attributes, behaviors, and relationships. Develop a Unified Modeling Language (UML) representation of the object model to ensure independence of a particular simulation interoperability architecture. Determine the feasibility of using the HLA as a means for implementation of the C2 Object Model by focusing on the ability of the HLA to effectively represent this kind of data accounting for the various aspects of the object model's characteristics, behaviors, and relationships.These activities were performed over a six-month period and resulted in a number of findings. Sections 3.1 through 3.3 provide the details of the tasks performed and the results obtained.Survey Problem DomainAs mentioned the goal here was to gain a better understanding of the domain area and issues associated with interoperability between C2 systems and M&S applications.  The tasks performed as part of this activity included a review of Army planning doctrine, a C2 systems survey, and an M&S applications survey.  The results of these tasks provided the starting point for identifying interoperability requirements between C2 systems and M&S applications with respect to planning and decision support. The following sub-paragraphs describe the effort associated with each of the tasks identified.Army Planning Doctrine ReviewACS conducted a careful review of various Army doctrinal references including FMs and Student Texts (STs) that are associated with planning, preparing for, and conducting tactical operations.  A number of these documents were reviewed including:FM 34-130 – Intelligence Preparation of the BattlefieldFM 100-5 – OperationsFM 100-6 – Information OperationsFM 101-5 – Staff Organization and OperationsFM 101-5-1 – Operational Terms and GraphicsST 100-3 – Battle BookST 101-5 – Command and Staff Decision ProcessThe key document used was FM 101-5, Staff Organizations and Operations [5]. This publication is the Army’s capstone manual for staff organization and operations of major tactical support commands at corps level and below. Staff officers use FM 101-5 to carry out their duties and responsibilities and to assist the commander in accomplishing his mission.  These references provided a clear understanding of the Army’s decision-making process, including the individual tasks, personnel involved, and doctrinal templates used [6, 7, 8].  They also provided insight into the complex and time-consuming nature of military planning as well as helped identify where simulation applications might be used to supplement and/or potentially improve the process [9, 10, 11].Based on the information reviewed, it was decided to focus on the information contained within the plan itself that is used to convey the units involved, their organization, missions, tasks, and temporal relationships.  FM 101-5 identifies the MDMP as the single, established, and proven analytical process for developing the Operation Plan (OPLAN) and Operations Order (OPORD). It is an adaptation of the Army's analytical approach to problem solving used by the commander and his staff to assist in developing estimates and the plan. While the formal problem-solving process starts with the receipt of a mission, and has as its goal the production of an order, the analytical aspects of the MDMP continue at all levels during operations.  Figure 3.1 shows a graphical representation of the MDMP. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 3.1 Military Decision Making ProcessThe planning process begins with receipt of the mission from higher headquarters.  This information is carefully analyzed as part of mission analysis to determine the intent and identify the specific tasks associated with it.  The next two steps constitute the most important and time consuming parts of the planning process and are known as COA Development (COAD) and COA Analysis (COAA).  Using the information from mission analysis, the planners begin to develop the actual lay down, organization, and tasking for the units involved.  The configuration of these units is known as a COA.  Generally, separate COAs are developed for the friendly and enemy units.  Once the missions and tasks are assigned, the planners walk through, or War-Game, potential outcomes of the friendly COAs against one or more enemy COAs as part of COAA.  During this activity, modifications can be made to the COAs and the updated COA re-evaluated through War-Gaming.  This iterative process continues until a friendly COA is defined that provides the desired outcome.  In practice, COA development and analysis are performed in a very tightly coupled fashion where COAA feeds back to COAD when changes are required.  The result is typically one to three friendly COAs that the planners feel will accomplish the mission with the least risk to their own forces.Step five in the MDMP is known as COA Comparison.  Here the possible COAs resulting from COAD/COAA are compared against one another based on a set of criteria prescribed by the commander to determine which one best accomplishes the mission.  The sixth step is where the COAs are presented to the Commander along with a recommendation of the best COA based on the COA comparison step.  At this point it is up to the commander to decide on the best COA.  He has the option of selecting one of the COAs presented, modifying one of those recommended, or choosing an entirely different one.  After the COA has been selected, the seventh step is to prepare the actual OPORD.  The OPORD describes the COA and fills many of the details that account for all supporting forces, activities, and instructions.The final two steps follow the actual production of the plan and involve preparing for and executing the operation.  Mission rehearsal is where the planning staff and subordinate units come together to rehearse the various parts of the operation to gain a better understanding of the plan and to visualize what the commander has in mind.  Execution and Assessment involves the staff continuously monitoring and evaluating the execution of the plan and alerting the Commander when the current situation is diverging from the original intent of the plan.  When it is determined that the current situation has diverged too far from the original intent, re-planning is required and the process is repeated starting with COAD.  The MDMP is defined as a series of discrete events, however in practice it is a continual process that feeds back on itself in several areas.  C2 Systems SurveyThe second task involved conducting a survey of the existing set of Army C2 systems used by the decision makers to support development of their plans and orders. The capabilities of these systems were identified in terms of their functionality, data requirements, role in the planning process, and degree of interoperability with other C2 systems. In addition, this activity examined how the C2 information is represented and in what form it is exchanged with other C2 systems (i.e., message passing, database updates, etc.).The C2 Survey focused on the Army Battle Command System (ABCS) and how the various components that constitute the overall system support the commander in the MDMP. Various technical, design, and architectural documents were used as resources for this task.  Ten C2 systems were identified as defining the ABCS, and were surveyed to determine which among them were used as part of the process of developing and executing the plan. The specific ABCS systems included in the survey were:Maneuver Control System (MCS)All Source Analysis System (ASAS)Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data System (AFATDS)Combat Service Support Control System (CSSCS)Air Missile Defense Workstation (AMDWS)Global Command and Control System - Army (GCCS-A)Force XXI Battle Command - Brigade and Below (FBCB2)Integrated Meteorological System (IMETS)Digital Topographic Support System (DTSS)Tactical Airspace Integration System (TAIS).As part of the survey, the data representations and information exchange capabilities of these C2 systems were carefully analyzed. In addition, ongoing DoD standardization efforts for C2 system interoperability were analyzed to determine their applicability to the proposed effort. In general the ABCS systems exchange planning information primarily through message passing, collaboration (whiteboard), and Microsoft Word templates with an ongoing effort to integrate the Joint Common Data Base (JCDB) as a data replication mechanism accessible by all the systems. Figure 3.2 shows a sampling of the most common messages that are exchanged among the ABCS systems. The messages are primarily represented as United States Message Template Format (USMTF) message numbers with the exception of several Joint Variable Message Format (JVMF) messages associated with FBCB2 information exchanged.M&S Applications SurveyIn conjunction with the C2 systems survey, a survey was also conducted involving the Army’s existing and emerging flagship M&S applications. The purpose of this task was to identify the current and planned capabilities of constructive simulations, and to identify their potential application to the problem of tactical planning and decision support.  The M&S applications survey was conducted in a manner similar to that of the C2 systems survey.  Numerous operational and technical documents were reviewed in order to determine the capabilities and features of these simulations as well as their role in supporting military type applications (e.g., testing and training).  In addition, for each simulation examined, their applicability to planning and decision support was identified along with data representations used and their external interface protocols available.   EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 3.2 ABCS Message ExchangeSeventeen simulation systems were surveyed, including a number that are currently under development within the DoD and expected to be operational within the next two to five years.  Among the seventeen systems reviewed, eight were selected as being the most applicable to the planning process.  These eight were reviewed in detail according to the criteria listed above.  Table 3.1 identifies the eight simulations selected for detailed reviews along with a brief description of each.  In addition to reviewing the identified simulation applications, time was also spent reviewing common data representations and information exchange protocols applicable to the M&S community.  In terms of M&S data representations, the Command and Control Simulation Interface Language (CCSIL) and Battle Management Language (BML) version 1 were reviewed according to their ability to represent tactical planning information.  CCSIL is a highly structured representation based on tactical messages including a message specifically designed to store an OPORD.  BML is more of a vocabulary of doctrinally based terms that attempts to address the area of planning for simulation applications.  Data interchange protocols reviewed included the Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) specification, the Aggregate Level Simulation Protocol (ALSP), and the HLA.  DIS targets real-time entity level distributed simulation and has successfully been applied to battalion and below exercises since the early 1990’s.  ALSP was used to address exchange of information among non real-time discrete event simulations for aggregate level operations (i.e., battalion and above).  It also came into being in the early 1990’s.  The HLA is currently the mandated data exchange protocol mechanism for all DoD distributed simulation applications and has since been identified to replace both DIS and ALSP for new simulation development. Table 3.1 Simulations Reviewed in DetailAcronymSimulation NameDescriptionAWARSArmy Warfare SimulationMerger of VIC and Eagle into a single simulation system – under development.EagleEagleCorps-level deterministic simulation used for analysis. Includes C2 processes.JanusJanusExercise driver, combat development, and analysis tool.  Interactive, near-real-time model that plays land, air, sea ops for battalion or brigade level.JTLSJoint Theater Level SimulationInteractive, multi-sided wargamer to model joint/coalition force including air, land, and naval warfare environment. DIS & HLA compatible.ModSAFModular Semi-automated ForcesEntity level simulation for component vehicle, weapon systems, and land forces. Deterministic movement and Stochastic detection/munitions DIS compatible.  OneSAFOneSAFComposable, next generation CGF to represent full range of operations, systems, and control process from individual to battalion.  Under development, to be HLA compliant.TACWARTactical WarfareAutomated, deterministic combat model for strategic and tactical forces.  For examination of COAsWARSIMWarfighter SimulationArmy maneuver simulation system for training from battalion –theater, including joint/combined, under development to be HLA.Analyze Interoperability RequirementsInteroperability between systems that are created for different purposes requires a common level of understanding to exist for the particular information to be exchanged. In this case, C2 systems have been designed to assist military personnel in the performance of their duties by providing information about the current situation (friendly and enemy) and tools for planning the next set of missions or operations. In addition, the C2 systems are interconnected by a complex infrastructure of networks implemented by radio frequency devices and local-area networks. M&S applications, on the other hand, are designed primarily to model certain activities and processes based on a level of fidelity required by the application. For combat simulations, their focus is on representing the behaviors and characteristics of the units involved in certain military operations and not necessarily on presenting the current situation or providing tools for planning. The purpose of this activity was to analyze the specific interoperability requirements between C2 systems and M&S applications as they relate to the exchange of planning and decision support information.  The results of the tasks associated with surveying the problem domain were used as the basis for this analysis.  One key finding was that the representations used by the C2 systems tend to specify the details of their plans and orders as unstructured free-form text strings.  The simulation systems on the other hand require highly structured representations, commonly using object-oriented models for their internal representations and external information exchange mechanisms.  This was not an unexpected result of this analysis.  What was surprising, however, was the fact that even though the tactical C2 systems are moving toward common relational databases for replication of situational information, the tables and fields within these databases dedicated to communicating planning information still include a significant amount of free text.  Examples of this were found in the plan view portion of the JCDB.  There is a Plan entity that has links to a number of other entities that have been designed to store the various parts of the OPORD information including Plan-Component, Plan-Annex, Task, Mission-Task, and Plan-Organization.  In several cases certain key data fields are defined as strings (allowing unstructured free text as the content).  These fields include the commander intent, task description, objective description, and plan-component description.  In this manner, the critical information regarding the specific tasks a unit is to perform and how is stored as free text.  Capturing this information in a form that can be understood by computer based systems would require some form of natural language processing, which is a very difficult problem that has not yet been generally solved by the software community.What is required here is a compromise by both communities.  The tactical C2 domain needs to better structure the specification of their plans and orders in such a way as to precisely convey the essence of the operations.  This structuring of the planning information would then be captured within their data models (i.e., the JCDB).  The M&S domain must then make the effort to align their object-oriented representations according to the doctrinal concepts and terminology associated with the tactical operations performed by the C2 community.  In this manner, the object representations used by the M&S applications would directly map to the relational database representations used by the C2 systems allowing a single common understanding of the information to be exchanged among the domains.Develop C2 Object ModelThe third activity performed within the scope of the Phase I effort was development of an object model to represent the interoperability concepts identified herein.  An object model describes an abstraction of a system developed to provide a better understanding of its operation. It reduces the complexity of the system by defining the objects of the problem space in terms of their attributes, operations, and relationships to other objects. Sets of objects with common properties (attributes), common behavior (operations), common relationships to other objects, and common semantics form the classes of the problem space. Initially, a set of key high-level objects was identified that defines the vocabulary of the problem domain.  These high-level objects identified are shown in Table 3.2. Table 3.2 C2 Object Model – High Level ObjectsObject NameDescriptionActivityRepresents the Who, What, When, Where, and Why of units mission or taskControl MeasureGraphical directives to assign responsibilities, coordinate fires and maneuver, and control combat operations.Concept of OperationHow the commander sees the actions of each unit fitting together to accomplish the mission.LocationRepresents a line, point, place or area that a unit must go to or report crossing/reaching.MissionBroad category of tactical activities, based on doctrinal tenets, representing the ‘What’.PlanRepresents the contents of the plan or orderScheme of ManeuverArray of forces required to accomplish the commander’s intent along with any control measures.TaskRepresents action or activity a unit is to accomplish (e.g., defeat, destroy, etc).Task OrganizationProcess of allocating available assets to subordinate commanders and (establishing) determining their command and support relationships.UnitMilitary element whose structure is prescribed by competent authority and is part of an organization.The results of the doctrinal review and interoperability analysis were used to identify the objects presented in Table 3.2. These objects are based primarily on the key data elements associated with the OPLAN/OPORD. The purpose of the Phase I effort was to identify the common data requirements for the exchange of information between the C2 systems and the simulation applications.  In the case of planning, the information to be exchanged was derived from specification of the plan.  Therefore, the focus of this effort was on the contents of the OPLAN/OPORD itself to identify the high-level objects.  Once the high level objects were identified, the next step was to further refine these definitions. In the process a number of new objects were identified filling in the gaps for the plan related information not accounted for by the initial set of high-level objects.  This step also involved specification of attributes describing the characteristics of the objects. Following this, the relationships among the objects were defined including hierarchical specialization, aggregation, and general association. The next step involved generation of a graphical representation of the object model using Rational Rose.  Rational Rose is an object-oriented modeling tool that provides mechanisms for representing objects, their attributes, behaviors, and relationships.  Rational Rose represents the object model using the UML. UML is a popular modeling language based on object-oriented methodologies used to depict the design of an application in terms of objects, their attributes and relationships [12].  Figure 3.3 shows the PlanObj class represented in UML. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 3.3 PlanObj Class RepresentationThe PlanObj class is the focus of the C2 Object Model. The class name is shown in the top portion of the box.  The center portion of the box is used to specify the attributes and their specific data types. The bottom portion of the box provides the area to define behaviors the object is capable of performing.  Included with the specification of the behaviors are any required parameters. For the initial version of the C2 Object Model developed during Phase I, no behaviors were identified. Follow-on work as part of a Phase II effort would provide the opportunity to demonstrate the C2 Object Model, thus requiring further specification of the model including defining behaviors.Figure 3.4 illustrates the high level view of the C2 Object Model using a UML representation.  This view is focused on the PlanObj and its associated objects. Each of the accompanying objects shown in the figure turn out to be the primary data types of the PlanObj attributes. The lines connecting the objects represent some kind of relationship between the objects.  In the diagram, all of the relationships are representative of associations between the objects.  There are no hierarchical relationships defined at this point in time.  It is anticipated that implementation of the C2 Object Model will provide the opportunity to abstract common characteristics into hierarchical relationships among objects.  The 1..n notation associated with the association between the PlanObj and the OverlayObj is used to indicate that one or more instances are contained within the connected object (i.e., the PlanObj contains a list of one or more OverlayObjs).Following specification of the object model, the feasibility of the HLA to represent the C2 Object Model was investigated.  Atlantic Consulting Services (ACS), Inc. has developed a capability allowing a HLA Federation Object Model (FOM) to be generated from a Rational Rose object model through specification of an HLA Framework [13]. This capability was used to generate an HLA Object Model Template (OMT) Data Interchange Format (DIF) file from C2 Object Model in order to facilitate examination. The OMT DIF file was used as input to the HLA Object Model Development Tool (OMDT) in order to view the FOM in the form of tables representing the various aspects of the FOM specification (i.e., class table, object table, interaction table, parameter table, etc).An analysis was then performed to determine if the FOM representation was adequate for actually implementing an HLA federation interfacing a C2 system with a constructive simulation.  The initial version of the C2 Object Model only represents standard objects.  There is no notion of messaging or interchange of data groupings at this point in time.  Therefore, translation to an HLA FOM involves object classes and attributes only.  No interaction classes have been specified at this time.  In order to effectively demonstrate the feasibility of this object model, some sort of mechanism will likely have to be added to exchange planning information in the form of one or more messages.  For the FOM representation, this will be represented through interaction class objects. Table 3.3 shows the HLA FOM Object Class table that was derived from the Rational Rose developed C2 Object Model. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 3.4 UML Representation of C2 Object Model RepresentationTable 3.3 C2 Object Model FOM ClassesClass1Class2DTGObj (PS)LocationObj (PS)PlanHeaderObj (PS)UnitObj (PS)UnitRelationObj (PS)TaskOrgObj (PS)MissionObj (PS)TaskObj (PS)PurposeObj (PS)ActivityObj (PS)EnemySituationObj (PS)FriendlySituationObj (PS)WeatherObj (PS)SituationObj (PS)MissionStatementObj (PS)MethodObj (PS)ExecutionObj (PS)ServiceSupportObj (PS)CommandAndSignalObj (PS)PlanObj (PS)ControlMeasuresObj (PS)BoundaryObj (PS)SchemeOfManeuverObj (PS)SchemeOfFires (PS)ReconConceptObj (PS)IntelConceptObj (PS)EngrConceptObj (PS)AirDefenseConceptObj (PS)InfoOpsConceptObj (PS)CoordInstrObj (PS)CooObj (PS)OverlayObj (PS)LogConceptObj (PS)SoiObj (PS)SecurityPlanObj (PS)ReconPlanObj (PS)Conclusions and RecommendationsAs the Army continues in its effort to digitize the force, there is a growing desire to develop capabilities to allow them to “train as they fight”. M&S has great potential to play a key role in this area by allowing soldiers to more easily play what if games, test out their plans, and rehearse the mission in less time with fewer available resources using their C2 systems. For this to happen, a higher level of interoperability between M&S applications and existing and future C2 systems is required. The simulations and C2 systems must be able to exchange a variety of information including situation data, environmental data, planning information, messages, and exercise control data.Based on the research performed during the Phase I SBIR effort, it is believed that the only way to achieve greater levels of interoperability given current DoD budgetary and scheduling constraints is to develop common interoperability standards that will be used by both the simulation and C2 systems communities at large. The SIMCI OIPT has been chartered by the Army to work this area of standards development for interoperability. The results of the Phase I work are a first step toward contributing to SIMCI objectives specifically in the area of planning and decision support. The C2 Object Model developed during Phase I provides a starting point for further research and experimentation for M&S to C2 systems interoperability. Continuation of this research is anticipated through a SBIR Phase II award. During Phase II, work would focus on demonstrating the feasibility of the C2 Object Model to address the interoperability issue for planning and decision support. Results from a follow-on effort could potentially feed projects sponsored by the SIMCI OIPT, such as development of a more robust and comprehensive BML based on doctrinal principles and established Army methodologies as part of a formal standardization process.References[1] SIMCI Executive Overview, 13 February 2001, http://www.simci.org/html/library.html[2] Joint Technical Architecture, Version 6.0, 8 May 2000[3] Defense Information Infrastructure (DII) Common Operating Environment (COE) Integration and Runtime Specification (I&RTS), Version 4.0, 25 October 1999.[4] High Level Architecture Interface Specification, Version 1.3, U.S. Department of Defense, 2 April 1998.[5] Army FM 101-5, Staff Organizations and Operations, May 1997[6] Army FM 100-5, Operations, June 1993[7] Army FM 101-5-1, Operational Terms and Graphics, September 1997[8] Army ST 101-5, Command and Staff Decision Process, February 1996[9] Army FM 34-130, Intelligence preparation of the Battlefield, July 1994[10] Army FM 100-6, Information Operations, August 1996[11] Army ST 100-3, Battle Book, July 2000[12] M. Fowler, UML Distilled, Applying the Standard Object Modeling Language, Addison-Wesley Longman, Inc., 1997.[13] V. Dobbs, J. Roberts, “Managing a Federation Object Model With Rational Rose: Bridging the Gap Between Specification and Implementation”, Fall 2000 Author BiographiesJOHN D. ROBERTS is a Project Manager for Atlantic Consulting Services (ACS), Inc.  Most recent work has been as technical lead for the aforementioned Phase I SBIR and implementation of a simulation/stimulation environment for a number of US Army CECOM C2 technology programs. In addition, he has been involved in supporting the transition of various CECOM simulation systems from DIS to the HLA.  Prior to this he spent six years as a Lead Developer with the MITRE Corporation working in the areas of distributed simulation and advanced C2 decision support for military planning.  Other technical experience includes work in the fields of Artificial Intelligence (AI), Expert System development, and customer service support.  Mr. Roberts holds a B.S. in Electrical Engineering (EE) from Widener University and a M.S. EE from Fairleigh Dickinson University. VERLYNDA S. DOBBS has a Ph.D. in computer science and over twenty years experience in object-oriented design and analysis, modeling and simulation, software architectures, software reuse processes and standards, and quality factors and metrics.  As a Senior Computer Scientist, extended an Object Oriented Analysis and Design (OOAD) tool (Rational Rose) to represent C4I federation object models FOMs and SOMs for transitioning to the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) HLA and developed an in-house process based on the extended tool to maintain FOMs.  She developed a FOM in support of the M&S of a system of systems integration and demonstration as a starting point for an RDEC FOM. She also planned and coordinated with DMSO to perform validation of Internet Attack Simulator SOM to obtain HLA compliance.  Other work included software architecture support to the Joint Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (JISR) Advanced Concept Technology Demonstration (ACTD) program. Actively participated in the IEEE Reuse Steering Committee Working Group that incorporated software reuse processes into the international software life cycle standards as defined in IEEE/EIA 12207.