Command and Control Simulation:  Looking for the Rosetta StoneMichael R. OakesBMH Associates, Inc.(757) 857-5670, ext 249 HYPERLINK "mailto:moakes@bmh.com" moakes@bmh.com Keywords:HLA, Distributed Mission Training, DIS, Modeling and Simulation, DMT, JSAF, Command and Control, C2, COPABSTRACT:	More is known about Egyptian Mathematics than about the mathematics of other ancient peoples.  This fact is not because they had more mathematics nor that they had more documents found.  The key to this knowledge is the discovery of the trilingual tablet at Rosetta, near Alexandria (the so-called Rosetta Stone) during the Napoleonic expedition to Egypt in 1799.  The Rosetta stone was recorded in Greek, Demotic, and Hieroglyphic.  Since Greek was a known living language, the code was cracked.  O.K. you ask, what does that have to do with Command and Control and more importantly, simulation?  Good question!  The simple answer lies................in discovery and the search for truth.  There are many approaches being taken to provide simulation in force-on-force exercises.  The Joint and Service communities are busy with experimentation and evaluating one hypothesis or another.  It is in the mix of all the sexy weapons fly outs, tanks, ships, and cosmic sensors lies a simple node passing and receiving information about all the battlespace actions.  Operational personnel occupying this central node, who most times are out of their element, are placed on center stage with minimal training.  In fact, much of the operational C2 training is gained through OJT.  Today, their training can now be expanded with simulation and much of it can be done networked from their home-station.  This paper describes the current as well as developmental efforts to enhance training at the unit and theater levels in the C2 Architecture.  Specifically, this paper discusses the recent gains for the C2 community in the USAF Distributed Mission Training (DMT) Program and Joint Synthetic Battlespace Initiatives to improve training with ties to simulation and increase decision support tools for both staff and commanders.  There is a definite synergy to “train like you will fight” and it is an integral part of the equation for continued military success.  The time for the C2 community in now with the ability to network with operational exercises and experiments using advanced simulation technologies.  Still a “stone” is needed to translate capabilities into reality.  Simulation applications for C2 are part of the discovery and the translation to increased combat capability.1.	IntroductionTeddy Roosevelt said “Speak softly and carry a big stick,” when he discussed using the military in international politics.  Of course a little more like Machevelli than Clausewitz, but the point to take away is the timing and context of when he made the statement.  President Roosevelt helped mold the U.S. initial world engagement and he did it with military presence.  For the most part, not much has changed since then.  The U.S. remains engaged worldwide in many ways including use of military forces in direct conflict, patrolling no-fly zones, enforcing peace agreements or humanitarian aid.  The military achieves these great measures through a wide communications network.  As technologies continue to develop, greater volumes of information becomes more available for identifying, targeting, and engaging threats.  The central processing point is the command and control network.  The Command and Control (C2) System is what directs that violence.  Command and Control is not a new concept to warfighters.  In fact, an easy argument would be that command and control has been the one constant since the wars of antiquity through present day combat.  What has changed in the C2 arena is the technology that supports C2 concepts.  In fact, it is this very technological explosion that is helping to drive today’s emphasis on C2.  For all intents and purposes, command and control goes beyond directing fielded forces, it includes the sensors and processing necessary to prosecute warfare.  C2 has evolved into a more widespread terminology of C2ISR and includes many disciplines: command and control, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance.  While all of these disciplines fall under the broad C2 umbrella, this paper will attempt to show where simulation is able to enhance training applications at the unit and theater levels to increase experience levels for individual combatants, staffs, and commanders as they employ this newest weapon system to its fullest potential.  The paper will describe the most recent examples of the simulation technologies being applied to C2 training in the USAF Distributed Mission Training C2 (DMT-C2) Program and the Joint Synthetic Battlespace (JSB) Ignition Event #3 (IE#3).  2.	Command and Control (C2) TrainingThe C2 weapon system covers an expansive sphere gathering and processing information to support decision-making during military operation execution.  The primary focus here is the interaction of Air Operations Centers (AOCs) with other combat units whether in ground support roles or in aircraft.  Recent military operations in Kosovo further highlighted needs for comprehensive training for AOC personnel and even the support Control Reporting Centers (CRCs) provide.  From the beginnings of warfare as communications improved (horseback and stirrups, telescope, semaphore flags, heliograph, telegraph, radios, etc.) a commander began to influence a battle based more on what he knew than just what he saw.  The advent of improved communications and sensors greatly expands the horizons for a commander and his forces.  Prosecuting time-sensitive targets (TSTs) requires horizontal integration between multiple process owners in intelligence and operations.  It is imperative for each major process to have a well-trained core of personnel integrated into key functions throughout the AOC and dedicated to minimizing the time between sensor and shooter.  Additionally, they must be capable of employing an intelligence systems architecture that provides time-sensitive intelligence via an effective command and control process.  In order to meet these broad-based objectives, personnel must be trained, and time-sensitive targeting processes must be frequently practiced.  During Operation ALLIED FORCE, there were deficiencies in the process that slowed the flow of intelligence from sensor-to-shooter.  These deficiencies resulted from a lack of process integration, personnel training, and familiarity with the TST process.  Complicating the matter, was virtually no institutionalized process for prosecuting TSTs at the onset of the conflict.  As the air campaign progressed, and it became apparent NATO would have to destroy TSTs to meet their objectives, a new process was established and refined over time.  There are clear examples from Kosovo where processes contained within the planning, executing and assessing cycle increased the sensor-to-shooter timeline but the primary limiting factor was the inability to move quickly from planning to execution due to a lack of horizontal integration between operations and intelligence.  As the war progressed, sensor-to-shooter timeliness significantly improved as AOC operators became more proficient in the employment of their weapon system—in essence they fine-tuned their processes through on-the-job-training.  Enhanced technology and improved integration between planning, execution, and assessment must combine to reduce the sensor-to-shooter timeline, and formalized training must be used to ensure all AOC operators can effectively employ their weapon system.  2.1	C2 Horizontal and Vertical IntegrationHorizontal integration is the seamless linkage of lateral elements, to optimize personnel, functional and support systems capabilities.  The AOC’s horizontally integrated functions funnel developed options vertically to the decision maker to flexibly respond to a dynamic battlespace environment.Vertical integration is the seamless linkage of superior and subordinate elements within the TACS, joint force, and external agencies to optimize personnel, functional, and support system capabilities.  Well-executed horizontal and vertical integration combine to increase joint task force operational effectiveness and efficiency.  Effective horizontal integration during execution improves the Air Operations Center’s (AOC) ability to support the operational “kill chain” allowing the Joint Force Air Component Commander (JFACC) to conduct integrated and sustained operations.  The “kill chain” consists of the following elements: find, fix, track, target, engage, and assess (F2T2EA.)  The F2T2EA methodology mechanizes the operational level “kill chain.”  Theater and national assets/resources detect objectives of potential significance (find).  These systems identify and determine the location of a target (fix).  From the location, tracking systems acquire and monitor the object (track).  Dynamic decision-making then directs resources (target), and applies capabilities (engage) in a timely and decisive manner.  To assure the desired effect, an assessment (assess) occurs during or after engagement to determine whether the target should be reattacked.  These sequential steps describe a critical path that must occur for each dynamic event.  Retasking forces requires personnel proficient in force packaging who can rapidly rearrange mission priorities – the essence of horizontal integration.  Retasking activities include changing orbits, engaging attacking forces with available assets, diverting air missions, assigning air-to-air refueling support, maintaining adequate defensive capability, accomplishing ISR Battle Management, and ensuring that higher priority, fleeting targets are neutralized.  The DMT-A strategy emphasizes areas that cannot be trained in daily flight operations.  Distributed training should employ the kill chain (F2T2FA) with a family of theater of weapons systems.  This should include as a minimum:Accurately find, fix, and track time critical targetsDynamic effects-based targeting, weapons pairing, and controlAutomated and timely effects-based assessment.Figure 1.	Horizontal and Vertical IntegrationToday's combat environment is extremely complex with the many sensors, communication links and multi-mode fire control systems to master in order to detect, identify, intercept and destroy targets on the ground and in the air.  Mastering one's weapon system is only one part of the equation for survival in battle.  Mastering the combat environment requires a great deal of attention and practice using all available training aids and visualization tools, whether virtual cockpits, constructive simulation or live flight events.3.	C2 Training OpportunitiesAggressive live flight training events and sophisticated trainers augment the combat aviator’s training.  In fact the USAF Distributed Mission Training (DMT) program represents a major departure from conventional training methods for unit-level “ground” training.  It may be an understatement to say that the DMT architecture has been somewhat one-sided during initial development.  The use of high-fidelity networked simulators with 360-degree visual displays, DMT provides the capability for unit pilots and crews to train as teams instead of the previous paradigm of procedural training in a single ship cockpit simulator and no visuals.  For the most part though, DMT initially focused on aircrew training with the F-15Cs and F-16Cs being the primary center of attention.  Now if total team training and mission level rehearsal is still the goal, the DMT network must work beyond aircrew training and link the command and control (C2) arena as well.DMT's wide applications for U.S. Armed Services and nationalities cover areas from unit to theater level mission team training.  All quarters will benefit from the added flexibility and realism DMT will provide.  It is the interaction among numerous participants that makes this an exciting training prospect for commercial aviation.  Networking manned cockpits with ground radar facilities can provide a greater realism for training aircrews and C2 personnel.  Successful operations are advanced through training, experience and education.  Education comes from a variety of areas including formalized training.  The formal training and day-to-day flying proficiency makes up the bulk of experience for aircrews as well as C2 personnel.  Certainly, each of these areas overlap, but it is easy to see that they cannot be mutually exclusive.  In fact they all drive the goal to provide multitudes of situational experiences to develop flight skills.  Experience develops maturity through constant testing and evaluation.  But how is experience gained?  With the advances in computer technology the answer should lead us to Modeling and Simulation (M&S) and its ability to provide multiple events in a given time period to reinforce skill training and added experience.  3.1	Today’s TrainingC2 is divided into a command function that is strategic and big picture.  The control is the relationship with the instruments of war, the weapons and their related platforms associated with the operational or tactical level.  To really practice the art of war in team training demands it connectivity to C2 and its related cousin, ISR.  C2ISR is all about a decision cycle.  If a commander can disrupt his enemies cycle and force him to react instead of act, then his C2 weapon is more capable.  Correctly processing and distributing information within the decision cycle fosters victory.  Stated more simply, whoever has the faster decision cycle and can implement changes first will have a more decisive advantage.  The ability to process and disseminate to improve where we left off in Kosovo begins with a robust and scalable training environment.  For the AOC, that training today is gained through real-world deployments and the occasional training exercise with all of the appropriate sensor platforms and shooters.  The CRC and Weapons Director (WD) training needed to support the AOC is formalized but lacks depth and the ability to scale up to theater levels.  CRC training is designed to focus on integration and interoperability with all TACS elements, joint services, and allied organizations. Effective training is achieved through formal Air Force schools (e.g., AETC AFSC award school and ACCs Field Training Unit [FTU]) and joint and combined live and simulated system training exercises. CRC training during exercises focuses on mobility and logistics, voice and data information exchange using tactical systems, and battlespace management. CRCs participate in Joint System Training Exercises (JSTE), Joint Battle Management Training Exercises and Joint System Integration/Interoperability Schools. CRC’s also deploy to the field when participating in joint, allied, and unilateral field training exercises.  But what is missing is the ability to train from a simple surveillance mode or a 1 versus 1 intercept through a theater-level mission rehearsal.  To properly train the AOC and CRC, the simulation environment must include all of the significant task areas.  3.1.1	Theater Air Defense (TAD)The CRC Battle Commander (BC) can be delegated responsibilities associated with functioning as a Regional Air Defense Commander (RADC), Sector Air Defense Commander (SADC), or with air defense responsibilities in an effect-based architecture. The CRC, in combination with other CRCs, AWACS, and other enabling ISR platforms, can effectively accomplish synergistic effects by employing in both time and space, functionally and geographically to accomplish TAD.3.1.2	Data Link ManagementThe CRC has an inherent capability to manage, consolidate, and disseminate an integrated air picture. This will contribute to the development of the Common Tactical Picture (CTP) for consumption at the JFACC level and of the Common Operational Picture (COP) for consumption at the JFC level. The CRC consolidates sensor and data link inputs into an integrated picture for distribution over the established TADIL network.3.1.3	SurveillanceCRC-specific functions for surveillance includes detection, identification and tracking of airborne objects. The CRC will also be able to track surface tracks based on non-organic feeds from adjacent C2 and ISR platforms. With the timely, initial detection comes the capability to provide early warning of enemy to all affected nodes. Additional surveillance capabilities include Electronic Protection (EP) and the recognition and reporting of Electronic Attack (EA). These functions may be performed in an assigned track production area (TPA), in a mutual-support TPA, or in a track-by-exception employment construct.3.1.4	Combat Identification (CID)CID procedures facilitate the engagement and destruction of enemy air and surface vehicles prior to and during tactical level engagements. The concept incorporates the dissemination of timely, accurate, and relevant information which facilitates enhanced situation awareness of weapon system operators ("shooters") allowing enemy targets to be successfully engaged.3.1.5	Air Battle ExecutionAir Battle Execution can be conducted by a single CRC or in combination with other tactical C2 elements. Air Battle Execution consists of direct support through voice and data link communications to aircraft and resources conducting the established USAF air and space power functions. Although not specified in doctrine, several tasks associated with direct support have emerged and are integral to CRC Air Battle Management Execution such as protection of High Value Air Asset (HVAA), force marshalling and recovery of assets.4.	DMT-C2 and JSAF IntegrationThe AN/TPS-75 Radar System ["Tipsy 75"] is a mobile, tactical radar system capable of providing radar azimuth, range, height, and Identification Friend or Foe (IFF) information for a 240-nautical-mile area.  It is the primary instrument for the CRC Weapons Director (WD).  This deployable/transportable radar system is capable of providing long range radar data to support operations and control of tactical aircraft. The TPS-75 today forms the backbone of the US Air Force Air Defense system. The AN/TPS-75 Radar system provides a "real-time" radar airspace picture and data in support of the battle commander and the Ground Theater Air Control System (GTACS) via radio, telephone, microwave relay, or satellite communications link.  Data from the AN/TPS-75 can be combined with information from other radar to form an integrated picture of the aerial battlefield for theater commanders. Recently Joint Semi-Automated Forces (JSAF) Simulation was modified to provide the software for the USAF DMT Program Command and Control (C2) Domain.  This effort was responsible for the development of the Mission Training and Rehearsal System (MTRS) prototype.  The MTRS Prototype was demonstrated to HQ Air Combat Command Battle Management Division (HQ ACC/DOY) and with an integrated design of the technologies to enhance Command and Control (C2) training.  DOY and the Air and Space Command and Control, Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance Center (AC2ISRC)/A3, are responsible for modernizing the Ground Theater Air Control System (GTACS) and training its personnel. They directed the focus of MTRS to support C2 training.  The MTRS end-state vision is to have all or most operators accessing the same mission rehearsal scenario from their desktop computer or equivalent mission interface to conduct combat processes, in real time, over a distributed network.  Complementing technologies in voice translation to simulation execution, artificial intelligence (AI) Tutors, simulation of forces and the environment, high-speed networks, and collaboration techniques, provide the bridges to realistic training.  BMH added to existing Joint Semi-Automated Force (JSAF) Capabilities with new C2 tools to include Modular Control Element (MCE) Control Reporting Center (CRC) TPS-75 Radar and Tactical Air Control Party (TACP) Ground Forward Air Controller (G-FAC) entity representation and object models integrated with out-the-window visuals, touch-screen monitor finger-on-glass (FOG) technology and human-Computer Interface Voice control with constructive simulation for WD and Close Air Support (CAS) missions.  The CRC Station was designed to support Weapons Director (WD) training through web-based courseware lessons, simulation-based practice and rehearsal sessions.  The WD interfaced with the system through COTS keyboard, mouse, touch-screen, microphone and a foot pedal microphone switch.  The simulation enabled a WD to use the TPS-75 Radar Operator Console Unit (OCU) emulated within the JSAF simulation for missions ranging from basic 1v1 intercept missions to theater-level interactions in team and inter-team training events.  A Common Operational Picture (COP) was provided to emulate a portion of the GCCS present at both the Aerospace Operations Center (AOC)/Air Support Operations Center (ASOC) Command and Control level.  JSAF has the ability to provide direct feeds to GCCS but this feature was not demonstrated due to non-availability of a GCCS terminal. The JSAF simulated picture contained representative red and blue forces in a Southwest Asia scenario.  A contractor role-played the AOC fighter duty officer and ASOC ALO during the team training 2v2 and CAS session.  To demonstrate AOC and ASOC coordination processes, the receipt of an immediate air request was simulated and scrubbed against available resources to support the request. CAS alert aircraft were launched in real time and the WD and ETAC were notified of the changes. This supported distributed training objectives for all participating elements.  Additional planned training for AOC and ASOC members included a selected web-based TBMCS complete DD Form 1972 lesson.  These efforts were discontinued due to funding limitations.The JSAF TACP development supported Enlisted Tactical Air Controller (ETAC) and G-FAC training objectives through a web-based lesson on completing the DD Form 1972 (Joint Tactical Airstrike Request), practicing radio transmission (RT) phraseology and conducting a 9-Line CAS mission during the team training event.  Controllers are now able to pass instructions to JSAF Soar Agents and control CAS missions with Human Voice control as well as monitor aircraft performance with out-the-window visuals with Pentium based 3-D capability to provide a photo realistic terrain to the operator.  Simultaneously, a UAV provided imagery from the JSAF simulation linked to the AOC or the ETAC was integrated for DMT-C2.  MTRS demonstrated the ability to network AOC and CRC WD functions in a common environment.  The impact of MTRS and the simulation capability allows Weapons Directors (WDs) the opportunity to both train directly with DMT pilots and aircrews as well as conduct their own individual in-house skills training using JSAF constructive simulation and voice interactions with the artificial intelligent agents.  This secondary capability relieves the burden for TACS units to “find” assets to train with in order to hone WD warfighter skills.  Existing Joint Semi-Automated Force (JSAF) Capabilities with improved with new C2 tools to include Modular Control Element (MCE) Control Reporting Center (CRC) TPS-75 Radar and Tactical Air Control Party (TACP) Ground Forward Air Controller (G-FAC) entity representation and object models integrated with out-the-window visuals, touch-screen monitor finger-on-glass (FOG) technology and human-Computer Interface Voice control with constructive simulation for WD and Close Air Support (CAS) missions.  5.	AOC and CTP/COP Integration5.1	DefinitionsThe term, "COP"(Common Operational Picture) is one of the most misused, abused and liberally used words in today's C2 vocabulary.  As a result, C2 warfighters and staff personnel face a great deal of confusion in trying to discuss the concept, employment, utility, and evolution of the COP.  Much of this confusion can be resolved through reference to CJCSI 3151.01, Global Command and Control System Common Operational Picture Reporting Requirements.   CJCSI 3151.01 defines COP as an information tool supporting the warfighting Commander In Chief (CINC).  It further defines the Common Tactical Picture (CTP) as an information tool supporting the Joint Task Force (JTF).  In general, CJCSI 3151.01, describes the COP/CTP as a tool that provides battlespace awareness through a variety of information domains including, "current, anticipated, or projected, and planned disposition of hostile, neutral, and friendly forces."  The COP/CTP may also depict logistics, readiness, planning, as well as other data to support CINC and JTF operations.   Although the instruction makes reference to Component participation in feeding/maintaining the COP/CTP environment, it does not define or describe how the Components will or should participate.  The common operating environment provides a familiar look, touch, sound, and feel to the commander, no matter where the commander is deployed.  Information presentation and command, control, communications, computers, and intelligence system interfaces are maintained consistently from platform to platform, enabling the commander to focus attention on the crisis at hand.  Finally, the Aerospace Component Picture (ACP), which is defined as the integrated battlespace picture derived from sources managed by the Aerospace Component of the J/CTF.  As a subset of the CTP and COP, it establishes the aerospace portion of the COP's battlespace infosphere.  The ACP data may contain real-time or near real-time battlespace information; aerospace component planning information; aerospace logistics and readiness information; as well as relevant information distributed down from the C/JTF CTP or horizontally from other component's pictures.  When properly managed, the ACP will provide dominant battlespace knowledge to synergize the command and control of the Aerospace Forces in support of Joint/Combined operations.5.2	JSAF and COP IntegrationIn November, JSAF provided the necessary stimulus for the 11th AF hosting of the USAF XOC’s Joint Synthetic Battlespace (JSB) Ignition Event #3 Experiment (21 and 22 Nov 00).  The IE#3 scenario was a CSAR event operating in the Alaska, Ft Richardson area (Malemute DZ 612118N1493901W).  Although, IE#3 is an experiment, not an exercise, participants and planners anticipate significant training value to players, war gamers, and controllers.  IE#3 is a Simulation over LIVE Combat Search and Rescue experiment sponsored by Air Force XOC.  The simulated portion of the event will be hosted locally utilizing Joint Semi-Automated Forces (JSAF).  Like IE#1 and IE#2, IE#3 was envisioned as a means to demonstrate the effectiveness of the Joint Synthetic Battlespace and if successful provide a leave-behind package for future exercises and training.  Specifically, IE#3 was intended to provide a means to simulate and demonstrate a specialized mission environment to support realistic training.  JSAF was networked JSAF with the Alaskan Air Command, PACAF and NORAD Command and Control (C2) with USGCCS COP/CTP.Central to the success of IE#3 was the population of the USGCCS COP with both Simulation and Live tracks using the JSAF C4I Gateway and hosted on a Pentium III 700 MHz machine.  The network established the JSAF link for origination of track messages by pushing OTH-Gold feed across 10Mb Ethernet TCP/IP network to US-GCCS TDBM Master.	a.  LIVE air tracks captured via ANR radars, and via a JTIDS network, both feeding ADSI on the RAOC floor.  Tracks will flow through the NORAD C2 Guard to the NORAD USGCCS COP server.  	b.  Simulation tracks (both air and ground) generated using the 11th AF JSAF tools to populate the same USGCCS COP.  BMH configured JSAF, established COP Interfacing and conducted JSAF training sessions for 11th AF.  The Command and Control Training and Innovation Group (C2TIG) will participate on their end with their local JQUAD and AWSim suites.  JQUAD is not connected to any other network and merely a STU-III passing of OTH tracks.  IE#3 Scenario play was real-time (one-to-one) SIM over LIVE.  Live players effected an extraction in a combat situation.	a.  Primary LIVE participants were:  		11 AF JAOC (focal point)		Alaska Rescue Coordination Center,		3 ASOS		210 RQS		962 AACS		90 FS	b.  The 611 ACF served as the white cell, simulation cell, controllers, and war gamers.  Air Force participants from Alaska, AF/XOC, Air Force Agency for Modeling and Simulation, PACAF DO, 19SOS, and others will use the combined COP picture for situational awareness and as a tool to guide the experiment.  ALCOM shadowed the Air Staff IE#3 Experiment to provide a leave behind capability to support Joint Training in Alaska and elsewhere within the USAF.6.	Conclusions or Quid Est Demonstratum?The AOC provides the control capability enabling the JFACC to decisively command aerospace forces.  The AOC, as the senior element of the TACS, is the JFACC’s weapon for commanding aerospace forces.    The AOC, manned by a dedicated cadre of professionals, enables the JFACC to exercise the art of command and science of control to make effects based decisions.  For the AOC to be flexible and responsive to the needs of the commander, it must organize and operate to enable aerospace command, in light of mission, situation, and command relationships.  Battlespace Awareness is essentially situational awareness at the operational level.  It provides an accurate picture of friendly and enemy operations within the area of interest and is the key enabler of the JFACC’s ability to command in real time.  It also provides capability to view and monitor emergent threats and potential targets giving the JFACC the ability to redirect assets during execution.  Key data and information links will be from, as a minimum, in-theater and national level sensors, tactical datalinks, and messaging at all levels to provide relevant information available for execution.  Battlespace Awareness, in a Common Operational Picture (COP) for example, combines information from air, surface, subsurface, ground, and space assets to provide a three-dimensional view of the battlespace.  Sensor and data fusion within this picture plays an important role in validating targets and eliminating ambiguous information.  The information provided under the umbrella of Battlespace Awareness is shared throughout the AOC.  The AOC and its subordinate units provide the control capability enabling the JFACC to decisively command aerospace forces.  The AOC, as the senior element of the TACS, is the JFACC’s weapon for commanding aerospace forces.    The AOC, manned by a dedicated cadre of professionals, enables the JFACC to exercise the art of command and science of control to make effects based decisions.  The foundation of an AOC is people, a carefully designed mix of cadre and augmentee personnel forged into interactive teams.  Trained augmentees are required for full AOC functionality.  All AOC personnel (including the JFACC) need regular training events to maintain proficiency in AOC processes.  What was demonstrated in both the DMT-C2 prototype system and the JSB IE#3 was how to use JSAF to populate a synthetic battlespace and construct a seamless environment with constructive, virtual and live players.  Deployed training and instruction that was once considered de rigueur can now be instituted, supplemented or replaced case-by-case with scalable simulation distributed to individual units without leaving home station.  Further developments are under way now to expand on the capabilities demonstrated during both of these events.  The QED becomes in combat capability improvements with distributed simulation in the DMT architecture.  ReferencesAlbert, David S., John J. Garstka, and Frederick P. Stein, (1999).  Network Centric Warfare, Developing and Leveraging Information Superiority.Coakley, Thomas P., Command and Control for War and Peace (1991).  HQ ACC/DOOS, Langley AFB (1998), Distributed Mission Training - Background Concepts (Draft).  Oakes, Michael R.  (1998), Augmenting Air and Space Dominance: The Future of Combat Training, 98F-SIW-128.Authors’ BiographyMICHAEL OAKES is a senior systems engineer with BMH Associates, Inc.  He holds a B.S. in Aeronautical Engineering, M.S. in Aeronautical Sciences, and an M.A. in National Security and Strategic Studies.  He was responsible for the evolution, bed-down, and deployment of high priority classified special access required programs.  He is a retired USAF fighter pilot with over 20 years of experience in the Pacific, European, and Southwest Asia theaters of operations and is a USAF F-15 Fighter Weapons School Graduate.  Mr. Oakes was the WISSARD Lab Test Director for the STOW-97 ACTD.  He maintains domain expertise as a commercial airline pilot and continues to provide modeling and military domain expertise for Air Synthetic Force development used in STOW and current JSAF simulation technologies.