Risk Reduction in the Simulation Development Process: JWARS V&V ExamplesMichael L. MetzInnovative Management Concepts, Inc.45625 Willow Pond PlazaSterling, Virginia 20164703-318-8044 ext 210e-mail:   HYPERLINK "mailto:mmetz@imcva.com" mmetz@imcva.comKeywords:    Military, Validation, Verification, JWARS, Conceptual Model, Design, Risk ReductionABSTRACT:  This paper describes the JWARS V&V effort as an example of how V&V can help reduce risk in a simulation development process. There is a short introduction to the Joint Warfare System (JWARS), the JWARS simulation development process, and the JWARS V&V effort that is tailored to the development process. The description of the JWARS V&V process, how it was developed (including the influence of the DoD VV&A Recommended Practices Guide or RPG), and how it is managed is provided in more detail. Also included is an explanation of the JWARS V&V Plan, how it was developed (also with an RPG basis), and how it is used. Most of the emphasis in the paper is on how the JWARS V&V effort reduces JWARS development risk. There is a detailed discussion of JWARS pre design artifact problems, the V&V Agent's recommendations, and changes made based on the V&V Agent's recommendations. The next section of the paper discusses the lack of a formal JWARS Conceptual Model, how the V&V Agent constructed a Conceptual Model from different pieces, and used the validation of the pieces to achieve Conceptual Model validation. Another pre design artifact that is described is the JWARS Conceptual Model of the Mission Space (CMMMS) the problems the V&V Agent found with the JWARS CMMS and how the V&V Agent helped identify these problems and arrive at an acceptable fix. Other pre design artifact discussions center of the Joint Application Design (JAD) packages (a form of derived requirements used as a basis for the Unified Modeling Language Designer Use Cases) due to lack of a standardized format/content and lack of a standardized Subject Matter Expert review/validation process. The next section relates to design artifacts, the design process and artifact problems, V&V Agent recommendations, and changes in the process based on the V&V Agent's recommendations. Finally, there is discussion of the issue of required analytic output and how the V&V effort helped refocus the JWARS developers on building the simulation to provide the ORD required analytic output. Paper Number: 01S-SIW-1161.  IntroductionThis paper discusses risk reduction benefits of simulation Verification and Validation (V&V) activities concurrent with simulation development.  It uses lessons learned and examples from the ongoing Joint Warfare System (JWARS) simulation development program and the associated  JWARS V&V effort.  One of the two primary reasons that the JWARS Office determined to conduct the current V&V program was to use V&V activities as a risk reduction tool.  The second, not addressed in this paper, was to create a body of evidence related to the V&V effort to support future user accreditation of JWARS for analytic use.  This “body of evidence” can also be related to reduction in that it reduces the risk of not obtaining user accreditation of the simulation after it is delivered. The V&V related risk reduction effort must be applied to all aspects of the simulation development (both artifacts and processes) including pre-design activities, design activities, and the development process that supports the output of the simulation.  A V&V based risk reduction process helps the developers keep their focus on the user requirements and build the simulation with the goal of producing the simulation output required by the future users.  This paper relates to simulation development risk reduction through the application of V&V techniques and is intended for simulation program managers, developers  and V&V practitioners to demonstrate how a concurrent V&V effort can help reduce simulation development risk.2.  The Joint Warfare System JWARS (JWARS, 2000) is the Department of Defense’s (DoD’s) latest and most comprehensive simulation of joint force theater level warfare for analysis.  The Director, Program Analysis & Evaluation (PA&E) was tasked by the Deputy Secretary of Defense in 1995 to establish the Joint Analytic Model Improvement Program (JAMIP).  Part of the JAMIP effort includes JWARS, a state-of-the-art, closed-form simulation of joint, campaign-level warfare that: represents uniquely joint functions and processes, and component warfare operations; is based on joint doctrine; is capable of representing future warfare; and, supports analysis.  In addition to these requirements, JWARS was directed to be perception based.  After development is compete, JWARS will be available for analytic use by the Joint Staff, the US military Services (Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marines), the US regional and functional combatant commands, The Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), Joint Task Forces, other DoD organizations, and industry.  The required JWARS applications that form the basis for the analytic user requirements include: force assessment; force planning and execution (both deliberate planning and crisis action planning); system effectiveness and trade off analysis; and, concept and doctrine development and assessment.Prototype development of JWARS began in 1995 and the current development program began in April 1997.  The concurrent V&V effort began in late September 1997.  In December 2001 JWARS Release 1.2 was completed and this paper addresses V&V activities conducted through January 2001.  The JWARS Office will complete the Release 1 series of JWARS with the declaration of Limited Initial Operating Capability (IOC) for study execution sometime in 2002. Detailed information about JWARS requirements can be obtained from the JWARS Operational Requirements Document (Joint Staff, J-8, 1998).  The JWARS software development process (SDP) related to specific warfare functionality is divided into warfare functionality Integrated Product Teams (IPTs) including Land, Maritime, Air & Space, Mobility & Logistics, and C4ISR. 3. The JWARS V&V Process and PlanThe V&V Agent believes that the development process for the JWARS V&V process and subsequent JWARS V&V Plan (JWARS, 1998) supports the development risk reduction effort.  Immediately after the V&V effort began the JWARS Office established the JWARS V&V Oversight Group as an informal IPT to guide the planning and the conduct of the JWARS V&V effort.  The first action of this group was to craft a V&V process specifically designed for the JWARS SDP.  This group developed the process that included pre-design artifact validation, pre-design process validation, design artifact verification, design process verification, and simulation output validation with a focus on reducing development program risk.  The emphasis was on early problem identification and, where possible, a recommendation from the V&V Agent of proposed solutions. The procedures for developing the V&V process were heavily influenced by the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office’s (DMSO’s) Department of Defense Verification, Validation and Accreditation Recommended Practices Guide (or RPG).  (DMSO, 1996) (DMSO, 2000). The RPG places emphasis on the use of VV&A as an available tool in the simulation risk reduction process.  The process developed by the Oversight Group based on the RPG provided both internal and external visibility of the JWARS SDP to simulation development experts, simulation V&V experts, operations research analysts, future JWARS users and other stakeholders in the JWARS process.  This visibility helped improve the SDP and the concurrent V&V process.  The JWARS V&V process and plan identifies the members of the JWARS User Subgroups (a group of warfare functional experts, operations researchers, and experts in each JWARS warfare functionality area) as the JWARS Validation Authority.  The V&V Agent is named the Verification Agent and Authority as well as responsible for Results Validation in accordance with the JWARS V&V Plan.4. Conduct of the JWARS V&V ProcessThe JWARS V&V process focuses on validation of pre-design artifacts, verification of design artifacts, and results validation.  In each of these processes traceability and linkage to other parts of the simulation are identified and documented.  One of the primary objectives of conducting the V&V effort concurrent with development was to identify problems as early in the process as possible in order to be able to make corrections at less cost and to increase the probability of future accreditation – reducing program risk.4.1 JWARS pre design artifact V&V ResultsJWARS pre-design artifacts include the Joint Application Design (JAD) packages, the JWARS Conceptual Model of the Mission Space (JCMMS), and algorithms.  The JWARS SDP has no formal deliverable identified as the JWARS Conceptual Model (JCM). The JAD packages provide the warfare descriptions that are validated and used to support the development of the initial use cases for object-oriented design.  The current JCMMS provides a high level view of the entire JWARS enterprise from a US Joint Task Force (JTF) perspective.  The JCM is put together from all pre-design artifacts including the JAD packages, the JCMMS, and the algorithm descriptions. 4.2 Construction and Validation of the JWARS Conceptual Model (JCM)Without a formal JCM, the V&V Agent had to piece together a constructed JCM.  The constructed JCM included the JAD packages, the JCMMS, and the JWARS algorithms.  These pieces were validated separately to accomplish CM validation.  This was a difficult process and the V&V Agent has recommended that a comprehensive JWARS User Manual be developed and adopted for use as the JCM.  This JCM will help JWARS with internal and external communications by showing how the JWARS simulation was developed to meet the user requirements expressed in the ORD and the basis for the design. This process was proposed by the V&V Agent as another risk reduction measure, reducing development risk by providing a clear description of how the JWARS Developers planned to build the simulation based on the user requirements.  More information about a conceptual model, the conceptual modeling process, and validation of a conceptual model are available from DMSO (DMSO, 1996) (DMSO, 2000) and the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization’s Simulation Interoperability Workshop  (SISO-SIW) papers (Pace 2000a) (Pace 2000b) (Metz 2000). 4.3 Validation of the JWARS Conceptual Model of the Mission Space (JCMMMS) The original JCMMS was an extensive document that was difficult for the validation authorities (the members of the JWARS User Subgroups) to review and did not receive sufficient validation comments to be considered effectively validated.  To counter this problem the V&V Agent, working with the JWARS Developers, proposed that the JWARS Enterprise Model (JWEM) be substituted for the original JCM document as the new JCM.  The JWEM contained a barebones CMMS but had sufficient entity, action, task, and interaction information to meet the requirements of a simulation CMMS as identified by DMSO’s Data Engineering effor (Sheehan, et al 1998) (DMSO, 1997).  The current JCMMS became part of the constructed JCM. Subsequently, the JWEM/JCMMS was reviewed by the JWARS Validation Authorities, suggested changes and corrections were made, and the validation process was completed and documented.4.4 Other Pre-design Artifact Validation During the validation of the JAD packages the V&V Agent determined that the format and content of the JAD packages provided by the different warfare functionality IPTs were inconsistent in content and format.  The V&V Agent advised the JWARS Office that these inconsistencies would hamper the validation effort and the design process that was based on the JAD packages.  Also, the JAD sessions conducted at JWARS with outside warfare functionality experts were not being conducted in or documented in the same way by the different IPTs. After discussions with the IPT leaders and the JWARS development managers the V&V Agent’s suggested format and review process was accepted and adopted by the JWARS Developers.  This new format and review provides a consistent description of the applicable warfare functionality and supports the development of initial use cases that are the basis for the JWARS High-Level Design process.  This also supported improved linkage and traceability between the pre-design artifacts and the design artifacts.4.5 Design Artifact VerificationThe JWARS design process includes an initial High Level Design (HLD) and a Detailed Design (DD).  The design process uses both IBM Visual Age and UML Designer tools for creation of Smalltalk code.  During the first attempt to verify the initial HLD products (at that time the JWEM described above was used as the HLD artifact) the V&V Agent determined that there was no traceable linkage from the JWEM/HLD into the IBM Visual Age/UML Designer process.  The V&V Agent recommended that the JWEM become the JCMMS and that the initial IBM Visual Age/UML Designer products be designated as the JWARS HLD.  As part of this process, the V&V Agent’s suggestion that the initial use cases be included as the last element in the JAD package process and the first element in the HLD process was accepted and is now part of the JWARS SDP process.Initial attempts to verify the JWARS DD products back to the verified JWARS HLD revealed similar linkage and traceability problems between the HLD and the DD.  The V&V Agent met with the JWARS Developers responsible for the object-oriented design process and identified design method, content, and format corrections that should be included in future HLD artifacts and DD artifacts to provide the required linkage and traceability for verification.  This recommendation was adopted and now provides an improved linkage between the HLD and the DD.4.6 Results Validation Issues Preparation for the JWARS Results Validation process also revealed potential issues with meeting the ORD requirements for analytic output to meet user analysis requirements.  The ORD referenced more than 700 specific analytic output requirements and the V&V Agent believed that actually coding the simulation to produce these outputs would be difficult and prohibitively expensive.  The V&V Agent identified these difficulties in explicitly coding the simulation to meet the specific output requirements to the JWARS Office and recommended that they aggregate the output requirements into a more manageable set of outputs.  During this process a JWARS Study Team (JST) was established by the JWARS proponent to help ensure that JWARS analytic output meet analyst’s needs.  The JST identified 177 specific critical analytic metrics and 27 preformatted reports that included these metrics that they, as experienced analysts, would like for JWARS to produce.  Although the JWARS Office did not officially recognize the JST metrics and the pre-formatted reports as a formal derived requirements set, they did begin to write code that would output the metrics where possible.  At the same time the V&V Agent determined that the 177 JST metrics mapped to more than 95% of the original ORD analytic output requirements and formed an acceptable set of JWARS outputs for analytic use.  Through this process and by adopting the JST work as a basis for future Results Validation, the V&V Agent was able to reduce the risk that the completed JWARS simulation would not meet the needs of future users. 5. SummaryThis paper has provided specific examples of how a V&V Agent can use a customized V&V process based on the  VV&A RPG to identify V&V activities that support risk reduction during simulation development.  By identifying potential problems with pre-design and design artifacts the V&V Agent can help the developer identify and correct problems early in the development process when they are less costly to correct.  Also, by helping the developers keep their focus on the required product of a simulation – in this case output to support analysis – the V&V Agent can help ensure that the simulation meets future user requirements and will not require timely, and costly, rework.6. ReferencesDMSO (1996) Department of Defense Verification, Validation, and Accreditation Recommended Practices Guide. November 1996.DMSO (2000) Department of Defense Verification, Validation, and Accreditation Recommended Practices Guide. Build 1 (and future completed editions) available at:   HYPERLINK "http://www.msiac.dmso.mil/vva/" http://www.msiac.dmso.mil/vva/.DMSO (1997) “Conceptual Models of the Mission Space Technical Framework,"  USD/A&T-DMSO-CMMS-0002, revision 0.2.1, February 13, 1997.Joint Staff J-8 (1998)  Joint Warfare System (JWARS) Operational Requirements Document (ORD), 27 August 1998.  Available at:  HYPERLINK "http://www.jointmodels.army.mil/jwars/library.html" http://www.jointmodels.army.mil/jwars/library.htmlJWARS (1998)  Joint Warfare System (JWARS) Verification and Validation Plan, Version 3.0, 13 August 1998.  JWARS (2000) Joint Warfare System (JWARS) Overview Briefing, July 20, 2000.  Available at  HYPERLINK "http://www.jointmodels.army.mil/jwars/library.html" http://www.jointmodels.army.mil/jwars/library.html.Metz, M. L. (2000) “Comparing the Joint Warfare System (JWARS) Conceptual Model to a Conceptual Model Standard," Paper 00F-SIW-129, Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Fall 2000.Might, R. J. (2000), “Developing Requirements for Analytical Models and Simulations," Paper 00F-SIW-130, Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Fall 2000.Pace, D.K. (2000)  “Development and Documentation of a Simulation Conceptual Model.”  Proceedings of the 2000 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop,  April 2000.Pace, D. (2000a) “Simulation Conceptual Model Development," Paper 00S-SIW-033,  Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Spring 2000.Pace, D. (2000b) “Simulation Conceptual Model Issues," Proceedings of the Summer Computer Simulation Conference, July 2000.Sheehan, J. et al (1998) “Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS):  Basic Concepts, Advanced Techniques, and Pragmatic Examples," Paper 98S-SIW-127, Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Spring 1998Author BiographyMICHAEL METZ, Technical Director of the Joint Warfare System (JWARS) Verification and Validation Program at Innovative Management Concepts, Inc., is a specialist in the design, development, verification, validation, and accreditation of simulations.  He is a member of the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office’s Verification, Validation and Accreditation (VV&A) Technical Working Group and the VV&A Technical Support Team.  .PAGE  PAGE  2