The Case for Establishing System Engineering Guidelines that Address Entity Observables EnhancersRobert A. McDonaldBooz·Allen & Hamilton8283 Greensboro Drive.McLean, VA 22102703-902-4095 HYPERLINK mailto:mcdonald_robert@bah.com mcdonald_robert@bah.com,Keywords:Sensor Modeling, C4I, Training, Observables Enhancer ABSTRACT: The paper describes the importance of establishing System Engineering guidelines for the analysis of the fitness of a simulation for an intended use (e.g. Mission Rehearsal). The stimulus for the guidelines is the consideration of coupling real C4I systems with simulated sensor and weapons systems. Sensor system simulations must augment the data provided by entity level simulations in order to provide sensor stimulus ‘observables’ and meet the information content requirements of the C4I systems. The use of the ‘enhancers’ can introduce inconsistencies and inefficiencies that make a simulation suite unsuitable for an intended training use. 1. BackgroundThis discussion applies to a distributed system of systems simulation where sensor models and entity state models are federated to provide training and mission planning functions. The central phenomenon is a sensor model's performance of collection tasks using the entity state information provided by entity state models.This paper is inspired by the author's work on of the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS), but the principles are applicable to the broader problem set of federated simulations where entity states are enhanced. JSIMS is US Department of Defense sponsored training simulation composed of a federation of combat models from the Air Force (NASM), Army (WARSIM), and Navy (Maritime), and Intelligence models (NATSIM, JSIGSIM, WIM, JOISIM, & DOMINO). JSIMS has multiple training requirements that include Joint Staff Training and Joint Mission Planning. In JSIMS the combat models generate the truth states of both friendly and foreign combat forces. Entity state models such as WARSIM were designed to primarily implement the maneuvers of US combat forces at the small unit level. This focus has resulted in the neglect of development of detailed foreign force entity state information. The intelligence models simulate the National and Tactical collection capabilities that provide entity state information in the form of reports to the C4I system.The subject of the paper is important because of the increased sophistication of sensor and C4I systems in modern warfare. The efficiency and success of warfare as exemplified by the Gulf War (1991) and Kosovo (1999) is dependent on the exploitation of environmental observables. Sensors linked to C4I systems provide the stimulus for efficient management and prosecution of war plans against foreign forces. Future US engagements are likely to increase the importance of the Sensor to C4I mechanism as more systems become networked and military information systems evolve. The role of federated simulations in military training and operations is in its early stages. The US military is likely to become more dependent on these 'system of system' simulations to train and plan operations.The JSIMS system of interoperable models is composed of service combat entity models and intelligence models that supply reports to the C4I system (Figure.1). The service combat entity models provide simulation of combat level entities. The intelligence models simulate intelligence sensors collection of requirement sets. A typical collection requirement would specify the collection of observables in some portion of the electromagnetic spectrum regarding Surface to Air Missiles (SAM) in a specified geographic region. The observables collection requirement is driven by the information content requirements of the C4I system.2. The ProblemThe Federation Object Model (FOM) includes those objects that must be understood in more than one simulation model[2]. When it is the case that the entity's attribute information provided to the FOM is insufficient to provide entity observables for the sensors to collect it may be necessary to enhance the FOM entity state information with enhanced observables. An example of an observable that might need to be enhanced is an optical or radio frequency signature. In JSIMS the enhancement takes place as a function of the individual Intelligence models. The enhanced entity observable information is provided to the sensor model (Figure 2) The sensor collections are exploited, processed, and finally disseminated in the form of reports to the C4I system. While the enhancement of entity data allows the collection process to take place it introduces several issues that can have negative results. The issues are: 'causal delinking' of the observables from the simulated entity, multiple entity truth states, and the scattering of the system initialization process. 2.1 Causal Delinking of Observables from Entity StateObservables are a function of the operating mode of the entity. The operating mode can vary with time. A divergence of virtual reality takes place when the entity has a state internal to its entity model different from the enhanced truth state in the Intel model. The consequences of the causal delinking depends on the functional requirements that the system is expected to fulfill. The consequences are potentially dangerous when the system is expected to fulfill mission planning and rehearsal. The danger is that the training exercise system could erroneously show that a particular strategy is an effective mission plan only to be discovered by the loss of US or ally lives in the implemented combat operation.2.1.1 Example An enhancer of an SA-10 SAM entity assigns the observable modes of the SAM radar according to a statistically based time history. The enhanced observable modes generated by the enhancer are shown in Figure 3. The enhancer would give the observables for mode A 'search' 40% of the time mode B 'track' 10 % and mode C 'off' 50% of the time. The enhancement mode is independent of the events acting on the entity in the combat simulation. During a mission rehearsal exercise for an invasion a flight of US aircraft are routed through a zone containing SA-10's. As the aircraft approach the zone, the enhancer has randomly picked the observables as being in mode A and the sensors of the Intel model detects the threat and the information is reported to the C4I system. The flight is alerted and the appropriate mitigation steps are taken to prevent the SA-10's engagement of the US aircraft. The commander's are trained that the Intel sensors provide detection of the SAM's in that zone during the upcoming mission. The commanders learn that the timeline associated with the SAM detection is sufficient to avert engagement of US aircraft by the SAMs. This conclusion would be based on the random state of the enhancer! It is entirely possible that the combat model would have an internal representation of the SAM's search and track of a US aircraft by the SA-10 site that would show that observables would not be present in time to avert engagement of the aircraft by the SAM. During the real mission A flight of US aircraft could fly into the engagement zone of the SA-10 and be actively tracked by the radar and successfully engaged by the SA-10 missile before the C4I system could be alerted (Ala Scott O'Grady). Thus the mission planning/rehearsal would have been flawed and contributed to the death or imprisonment of US or allied service personnel. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3 Inconsistencies of Entity Truth States2.2 Multiple Truth StatesIn the case that more than one enhancer is present in a system it is possible to have multiple enhanced truth states of an entity each conflicting with the other. Note that this is different than having multiple perceptions of the same truth phenomena. In the case of multiple sensor perceptions there is one truth state and multiple perceptions of that state. In the case of multiple truth states there is no single truth state. There are parallel virtual realities concerning the entities truth state. This can lead to parallel threads of events each a response to a unique enhanced truth state. The inconsistent description of the entity in the system can cause the dysfunction of the sensor cueing and C4I data fusion systems. 2.2.1 ExampleTwo Intel models each independently enhance the observables associated with a Surface to Air Missile (SAM) site. Sensor model A enhances the SAM's entity state by attaching periodic signals to the SAM sight that indicate the mode of operation of the SAM. Sensor model B attaches a different set of periodic signals to the SAM site. The reports of the SAM site that are sent to the C4I system are not automatically correlated by the C4I system due to their divergent characteristics. Thus the C4I system would show multiple SAM sites where only one exists. In some C4I systems this would cause the entities not to be passed on to the Common Operating Picture (COP). The coupling of the simulation system employing multiple uncoordinated enhancers with the C4I system can cause the dysfunction of the C4I system.2.3 Scattering of the System Initialization ProcessThe use of enhancers forces the initialization of entities to be scattered instead of centralized. JSIMS initializes the public attributes of the FOM via the Common Component Workstation (CCW).  The enhanced observables are initialized at the enhancers.  This de-coupling of the initialization process adds opportunity for mismatches between the entity model states and the observables applied to them. The mitigation of the mismatches of entity states requires a significant dedication of additional level of effort.2.3.1 ExampleAssume that that there are 8 simulation models (3 combat models; 5 intelligence models) and one C4I system. Three of the Intelligence models have observables enhancers.  Also assume it is the responsibility of the specialist assigned to a given Intelligence model to ensure that its enhancer data is initialized to: I. Match the FOM entities and strategies to be used in the exercise (1 contact for each combat model) and II. Not contradict the other enhancers of the entities state (1 coordination for each of the other 2 enhancers) and III. Match the C4I system's initialization of the foreign forces entities in the environment. The number of initialization coordination efforts to take place is then (3 enhancers * 3 combat models) + (3 enhancer * 2 other enhancer) + (3 enhancer * 1 C4I) + (1 instantiated FOM * 1 C4I)  = 17 initialization coordination events! Compare this to the case where all the observables are initialized in the FOM and therefore no enhancers are required. There would be only 2 initialization coordination events. One instantiation of the FOM and one coordination of the FOM entities with the C4I initial entities.3. System Engineering Guidelines 3.1. In the design stages of the simulation software:3.1.1 In the development stage the generation of entity state observables should be designed into the entity truth state simulation and made available to the FOM.  Rationale: This negates the need for enhancers.3.1.2 The design of the initialization system for the overall simulation should account for the need to coordinate the initial data with the C4I systems that interoperate with the simulation system. Rationale: This single source of initialization information ensures a consistent entity state information content basis and improves the efficiency of the initialization process.3.2 In the operational stages of the simulation:3.2.1 System engineers should perform Pre-Exercise 'system of systems' analysis of the exercise's functional requirements to discern the impact of observables enhancement.. Rationale: Identify the problems of 2.1-3. and determine the  system's suitability to perform stated training requirements.3.2.2 Sensor model documentation should provide full disclosure of enhanced observables and the assumptions used. The documentation should be created at the appropriate security level. Rationale: This will assist the system engineering process of 3.2.1.4. SummaryThe Joint Commander's use of automated C4I systems that exploit the observations of Tactical and National intelligence sensors is a cornerstone of modern warfare. A training system composed of federated simulation models interfaced to a real C4I system is essential to the training of US Joint Commanders for Joint Task Force training and mission planning/rehearsal. A system that employs a FOM that does not supply the C4I system's data requirements regarding foreign force entity observables must employ observables enhancers to augment the information provided by the combat models regarding entity states. While the enhancement of entity data allows the sensor model to supply the required information vector to the C4I system it can introduce inconsistencies and inefficiency issues. The issues include: 'causal delinking' of the observables from the simulated entity, multiple entity truth states, and the scattering of the system initialization process. The effects of the enhancers should be understood fully before the system is deemed suitable for mission planning and rehearsal. The system engineering guidelines given in Section 3 are a starting place in the training community's addressing of the issues associated with entity observable enhancers. 5. References[1]	NATSIM Systems Engineering: “JSIMS Alliance Ground Truth Shortfalls', May 1999, Raytheon Corporation.[2]	Distributed Technology Inc, “Introduction to the High Level Architecture”, 5th edition, DSTI, 1997,p.8-13. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1. Ground Truth Problem Space  [1]Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2 Ehancement of Entity State Observables EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  