SimClinic 2001 CPT Scott T. CrinoMAJ Mark TannerTRAC-Monterey.P.O. Box 8692Monterey, CA 93943831-656-4062crinos@trac.nps.navy.mil, tannerm@trac.nps.navy.mil Dr. John HilesNaval Postgraduate SchoolMonterey, CA 93943831-656-2988jhiles@mindspring.comKeywords:Medical Facility, Human Behaviors, Training Simulation. ABSTRACT: SimClinic is a training tool to assist to the military medical community in training clinic staffs.  This project will accomplish the initial research and preliminary design of an interactive training simulator for use by mid-level leaders as they prepare to manage a military medical clinic.  Training will focus on the decisions and actions of four leadership roles in the clinic: medical director, nurse executive, group practice manager (business manager), and NCOIC.  The simulation must give users the experience of implementing a newly engineered medical practice process, while successfully providing medical services to thousands of active duty and retired military personnel and their families.  This training tool will be used both in formal training settings and through distance learning at military clinics.  Staff members may also use the tool at their own pace on their own personal computers.  SimClinic must provide its users (both as individuals and as leadership teams) with the experience of making decisions and trade-offs that allow their simulated clinic to achieve multiple medical, service, and business practice objectives.1.  IntroductionThe Headquarters, Air Education and Training Command (HQ, AETC) is reviewing current means and methods for teaching and instructing medical personnel within the Air Force Medical Services (AFMS).  They are interested in utilizing modern technology to improve current teaching methods within the primary care team training cycle.  Specifically, they would like to develop a hospital simulation, called SimClinic 2001, that exercises the primary care team in the decision making process within a virtual hospital environment.The US Army TRADOC Analysis Center (TRAC) in Monterey, California (TRAC-Monterey) will lead the SimClinic design effort for the Air Force medical community. This project will provide a training tool for clinic administrators and leaders to train manning, patient flow and administrative decisions.This report presents a preliminary look at SimClinic 2001, a training oriented, interactive software simulation of an Air Force Medical Clinic operation.2.  ScopeThis project will build an interactive training simulator for use by mid-level leaders as they prepare to manage an Air Force primary care medical clinic.  SimClinic will run on contemporary Windows-Intel personal computers.  Training will focus on the decisions and actions of four leadership roles in the clinic: medical director, nurse executive, group practice manager (business manager), and Non-commissioned Officer in Charge (NCOIC).  The simulation must give learners the experience of implementing a newly engineered medical practice process, while at the same time successfully providing medical services to thousands of active duty and retired military personnel and their families.  This training tool will be used both in formal training settings and through distance learning at military clinics.  Staff members may also use the tool at their own pace on their own personal computers.  SimClinic must provide its users (both as individuals and as leadership teams) with the experience of making decisions and trade-offs that allow their simulated clinic to achieve multiple medical, service, and business practice objectives.SimClinic can be built by a project team of, approximately, six to eight personnel  (1 producer/ designer, 3-4 software engineers, 2-3 artists and media specialists).  With a team of this size and makeup, the product could be built in approximately 18 months.  A limited pilot release would be available after approximately 12 months from the start of the project.  This release would support classroom use of the simulator to collect suggestions and feedback on the realism of model behavior and assumptions.  This feedback could be incorporated in a full production release of the product that would be finished about six months later.  At this same time, the project team would release a Beta test version of SimClinic for multi-player support.  A section of this report describes subsequent phases of SimClinic.  Although these subsequent phases lie outside the scope of release one, the initial design will take them into consideration so that projects could add these capabilities to the initial product.Sections 6 and 7 of this report explain SimClinic’s model (the general characteristics of how the product works inside) and human interface (what the product will look like and how users will operate it). 3. Content of SimClinicThe person or team using SimClinic will make decisions and take actions to run their own virtual primary care clinic.  They can run the clinic however they choose, but SimClinic will respond to each and every decision to act or take no action.  Poor choices will lead to calamity and chaos in the virtual clinic (in this regard SimClinic will be similar to a flight simulator being flown with poor pilot decisions).  While there is no single Right Way to run the virtual clinic under all circumstances, clinic leaders who apply Best Practices, pay attention to the feedback provided by SimClinic, and correctly read the demographic makeup of their patient population and community will create an environment where their clinic will operate effectively.The individual (or group) using SimClinic does not directly control the performance of their virtual clinic or the outcome of a training session.  A user could not simply force all patient interviews to take place in less than 15 minutes, for instance.   Instead, users control a simulated set of staff members, processes, equipment, and facilities.  Users must manage all of these pieces and coordinate their actions in order to run an effective clinic.  Equipment and facilities may break or deteriorate.  Staff members may not understand what to do or they may misbehave (and require redirection).  Processes may be ambiguous or may even conflict with each other.  And any of these elements (staff, equipment, processes) may be inappropriate or inadequate for the demand placed on this clinic by the patient community.  In practical, concrete terms, each SimClinic session must re-answer the question, “How do you run a Primary Care Clinic under THESE conditions.”Based on a first set of visits, interviews, and observations at real Air Force clinics, SimClinic will support at least the following set of Best Practices, methods, and procedures:Scheduling Providers – consistent and long-lead time attention to Provider coverage is critically important to insuring that the right mixes of staff are available for predictable peak operating periods in the clinic.Reading clinic population demographics – another key way to predict the volume and type of demand for a given clinic.  Without attention to demographics, a reassigned clinic population could swamp the clinic with treatment requirements for which there would be no quick response except to refer patients to outside resources.Training based on feedback and use-statistics – service demands change and the skills of staff members must keep up with demand.Working with the Community – communicating prevention messages out to the clinic population can add a powerful resource to patient care.Triage and other processes within the clinic – users are responsible for making balanced use of the diagnostic and treatment skills of their entire staff.  SimClinic users must establish and revise the Clinic procedures that route patients for diagnosis and treatment.Criteria for outside referrals – Referrals to outside medical resources influence the economics of clinic operation.  Tri-Care reports (and clinic reports, if the medical director chooses to produce them) provide feedback on the types of referrals that might be pulled back into the clinic, given changes in staffing or training.  Equipment and facilities may also affect the rate and types of referrals.Managing the clinic – a set of general management and crisis management skills will be called for to deal with staff members who get in trouble, patients with a complaint, breakdowns, staff rotation, emergency changes in staff levels, and a host of other problems selected from the real world of clinic operation.4. SimClinic PlanThe following recommendations on staffing, schedule, and budget for SimClinic are based on previous experience in building similar simulation-game training tools.4.1 Project StaffInteractive simulation products (i.e. SimCity) require about an even mixture of multi-media and programming talent in their development projects.  The best course for developing SimClinic would be to use one development team evenly balanced between programmers and artists (meaning, people with a mix of multi-media skills).  This team would be guided by the conceptual design sketched below in the last two sections of this report.Here is the make-up of the development teamLeader/Designer: an experienced software developer who has managed game product development, led balanced art-programming teams, and designed SimCity-like products for training and education.Programmers (3 to 4, depending on experience and skill level): an assumption for scheduling and budgeting SimClinic is that one of the programmers would serve as project leader.  His or her experience would include deep familiarity with the development tools in use for this project (programming language, web tools, use of art, ambient sound, and music), game-building experience, and at least some familiarity with agent-based software technology.  An ideal mix of programmers would be one person with 10 to 15 years in game, web, and event-driven software product development; one person with medium level experience in Java and C++, knowledge or experience with XML (a web-oriented tool for building client-server applications); and one or two programmers with two to four years of product building experience.Artists (2 to 3):  SimClinic’s art team will work with digital images (both still and video), ambient sound, and recorded speaker’s voices.  They would need to collect, enhance, and edit these digital images and sound tracks.  In some cases they would need to produce original sound and image files.  An ideal mix of experience in the art group would include one art person with experience in computer game art, project management, and integration of multi-media elements into software products.4.2 ScheduleThe following schedule estimates are based on an assumption that the project team detailed above is in place for the project.  Phase 1 refers to the Primary Care Clinic version of SimClinic (see section on Subsequent Phases for details on downstream projects that are outside the scope of this project but that could be incorporated into the Phase 1 design and architecture).  Phase 1.1 – Design: collects expert knowledge, events, calamity descriptions, Murphy’s Law input, and both original and off-the-shelf data, analytical, and multimedia materials.  Refines the existing Preliminary Design and produces detailed guidelines for programmers and artists.Phase 1.2 – Iterative, parallel development of Phase 1 models, human interface, data bases and tables, classes, and software product platform.  Phase 1.3 – End of limited Beta test and ready for limited distribution pilot use.  Phase 1.4 – General release of SimClinic 1.0 (Primary Care Clinic), single player version.  Beta release of SimClinic 1.1 (Multi-player version of SimClinic 1.0).Subsequent PhasesThe Project Plan presented above applies to the first phase of SimClinic.  The following phases have been identified as possible extensions of the phase 1 system.  Although beyond the current plan’s scope, the phase 1 design and architecture have been shaped to support these future steps, should the customer decide to take them.Schedules and budgets for these subsequent steps should not be extrapolated from the phase 1 work.  It is likely that the phase 1 game system and simulation engine will create cost savings for these subsequent steps, however, it would be guesswork to speculate by how much those costs would be lowered.  Experience with similar computer game and interactive training simulator projects do support the expectation of future economies.Here are the future steps that would be possible:Phase 2.   Multiple clinics (Primary-care, Pediatrics, and Flight Medicine)Phase 3.   Hospital with In-patient and Out-patient sectionsPhase 4.   Add in Emergency Room and Intensive Care UnitPhase 5.   Multiple facilities dealing with region-wide medical problemsIn addition to these steps, it would be possible for modifications to SimClinic to provide other service branches with a training tool analogous to the Air Forces’.6.  Model Structure – How It Would Work InsideThe key to understanding the inside model of SimClinic involves the concept of software agents.  The customer wants a simulation that can adapt to the decisions, both wise and unwise, of people learning how to run a clinic.  They don’t want a rigid tool that returns predictable answers once users make the right or wrong decisions.  The simulated clinic needs to present rich behavior that is closely related to the actual sequence of decisions made by a player or group of players.  The question is, how do you get a simulation or model to adapt, in a rich way, to decisions made by users?  SimClinic will achieve adaptive behavior through the use a wide variety of software agents.Each of these agents will be pieces of software that choose how to behave based on their individual goals, their internal condition, and what is going on around them.  In fact, as soon as any given agent takes an action, surrounding agents will begin to act in response to that action, and so on.  This flexibility and sensitivity could not be achieved with traditional software means.  Pages of preconceived logic would either be too simplistic and rigid to produce rich adaptive behavior or too expensive and difficult to debug.Actually, SimClinic will have three internal models.  The following diagram explains their individual nature and how they will interact. EMBED Visio.Drawing.6  6.1 Demand ModelBased on Demographic data and distributions already analyzed by the Air Force, the Demand Model will create Patient Agents.  Each such agent will be “equipped” with attributes for diagnosis and treatment.  These attributes determine what sorts of skills are required to properly diagnose and treat that patient.  They determine whether the patient calls for an appointment or walks in with a problem that demands immediate attention.  The attributes also have time requirements, which cause deterioration (i.e. additional attributes) of the patient in the case that treatment is too slow or inadequate in some other way.This model includes an accounting system that measures waiting times, quality of diagnosis and treatment, impact of prevention, and other consequences of decisions made in the middle model.  TriCare record keeping and accounting will also take place within this model.6.2  Leadership ModelDecisions made by users (operating in the role of Medical Director, Nurse Executive, NCOIC, and Group Practice Manager) fall into two broad categories.  The first influence patient referral, preventive programs directed at the community, and patient processing inside the clinic – in terms of the diagram, these decisions are directed upward.  The second group of decisions influences the resources that make up the Infrastructure Model.  These decisions are directed downward in the diagram.  The two categories are very much interconnected.  For example, a decision to treat rather than refer a particular condition might also require the acquisition of equipment, transfer of a Provider with suitable skills, or upgrade of skills in staff members already present.Medical Directors have a special set of decisions: they must allocate authority and responsibility to the other members of the clinic’s management team.  For example, the Medical Director might decide to share the design of the clinic’s triage process with the Nurse Executive.Feedback can tell these managers how well their clinic is doing.  That information can arrive from many directions.   Formal status meetings, TriCare reports, one-on-one meetings, informal conversations held while walking around, or calls from the base commander will all deliver feedback in different circumstances.  The management team will also have means of improving feedback information.Special tools within this model will allow players to “paint” their processes.  For example to set up a particular triage process.  Simplified versions of real-world information technology (IT) support will also be present in SimClinic: for instance, AFMAM-like help will be available from computers in the clinic, if the users know how to use them.  AFMAM is the Air force Medical Applications Model that includes a reference library, and can be used for long-range planning and execution of future medical practices, or as self-paced tutorial for all level positions.6.3 Clinic Infrastructure ModelMore agents are housed in the Infrastructure Model.  These agents produce the behavior and operation of staff, equipment, facilities, and processes.  Facility and equipment agents deteriorate, require maintenance,  and come and go according to procurement decisions.  Process, and Staff agents are much more interesting.  Decisions on how to handle contact between Providers and Patients during diagnosis and treatment will be deposited in processes within the Infrastructure Model.  These processes route and schedule each patient as the patient agent interacts with staff agents.Several different patient agents might possess a diagnosis attribute, for instance, required by a particular patient.  Does that patient see a doctor, nurse, or PA?  The triage process determines the answer.  The result, in turn, will influence availability of staff, queue time for patients, and expense entries for the economic system of the clinic.Just as in real life, Staff Members are the most complex agents.  They will respond to their work load and schedule; they will have attitudes and personal problems;  some of them will get into trouble.  Their collective performance will depend on the type of leadership brought into the simulation by the SimClinic user.The interaction of these three models, behind the curtain of the human interface, will provide users with the opportunity to learn from unwise decisions and to amplify the payoffs of good decisions.  As more is learned by the Air Force about TriCare influence on clinic operations, that information can be incorporated into SimClinic.7.  Human Interface – What It Looks Like on the OutsideThis section describes the outside of SimClinic.  A Play Narrative describes – in words – how users would interact with SimClinic.   7.1  Set UpEither an instructor or a user can set up SimClinic for a session.  Control tools inside SimClinic (called editors) make it possible to adjust a wide variety of conditions:Clinic size and complexity Patient population demographicsCondition of facility and equipment at outset of playStaff size, skills, and compositionTime and complexity of playWorld type: the clinic session can take place in any one of three types of “World.”  A Benign world presents the clinic leaders with very few challenges and no surprises.  Whereas a Realistic world delivers surprises.  Bad things do happen in that kind of world, unexpectedly and at varying degrees of intensity.  The final choice of World goes much further into surprises and challenges.  In a Murphy’s Law world, just the wrong things happen at just the worst time (and sometimes they happen in combination).  SimClinic set to a Murphy’s Law world produces events and conditions that exploit mistakes made by the leaders.  If some Best Practice is misapplied or not used at all, SimClinic will make the leaders (and their clinic) pay a price.7.2   Leaders ArriveSimClinic opens its curtain as the clinic leaders arrive.  Patients are flowing through the doors with or without appointments.  Staff members are cooperating or fighting with each other and with the patients.  Outside referrals and incoming triage are taking place.  The clinic is waiting for leadership.Whether the leaders take action or avoid it, the staff, patients, and community all begin to change in response.  Out of hundreds or thousands of interactions, the clinic’s response emerges.The waiting room might fill up (maybe with dozens of what one nurse referred to as “vomiters”). Perhaps treatment rooms are filling with patients and staff members waiting for a Provider with suitable skills to proceed.  Or, a crucial piece of equipment might be broken, slowing things down considerably.  When leaders make one-on-one contact with patients, they may find confusion or hostility.Leaders always have the choice of what to do and where to go in the clinic.  They can call a staff meeting or meet with an individual staff member.  They can walk through the waiting room or sit down in the break room and listen to what people have to say.  Of course they may decide to retreat into their office and look at reports or take phone calls.  Throughout the clinic, they will find decision levers of various shapes and types that allow them to make decisions about patients, processes, and infrastructure.Leaders might get conflicting messages from their formal staff meeting and a trip to the break room, where they receive informal feedback.  Experienced staff might respond to more responsibility and delegation.  Junior staff may be suffering from a lack of direction.  Leaders may not be aware of how to get basic feedback from their staff and IT reports.  Or they may discover how to use staff resources to greatly improve the frequency and quality of  feedback through reports brought to their office.A Medical Director making a last minute schedule for the following week may find that the week is going to be grossly understaffed and that it is too late to do anything about it.  (And if the World setting is pointing at Murphy’s Law World, SimClinic may schedule a flu outbreak over the weekend.)7.3   Reading the ReturnsSimClinic will make it clear how well the clinic is running.  Inside a leader’s office, charts and reports will paint the walls and fill the inbox.  Staff Meetings will eventually spell out what is happening, even though there might be an initial reluctance to deliver bad news.  But SimClinic will use other messengers that won’t hesitate to point out problems.  Phone calls form superior officers and perhaps on extremely bad days, a few words from the base district’s congressman may add to the distress of leading a clinic in trouble.7.4  HelpThe learning goals of SimClinic are to give prospective leaders a chance to learn from experience, from doing, and occasionally from failure.  To support these goals, SimClinic can provide suggestions either during play or after.  Advisors can weigh in with suggestions based on the actions or omissions of leaders during the session (unless an instructor switches advisors off during setup).Afterwards, the leaders can review a log of their decisions and clinic responses.  The log will be annotated with suggestions on what to try next time.8.  Project Resources and DependenciesBoth the customer and the development team would like to end up with everything from routine techniques to deep insight and even wisdom carefully packed away in SimClinic, ready to create learning experiences.  But the fact of the matter is that no form of insight will make it into SimClinic, unless it passes through the project design team.  Their original state is one of relative ignorance about medical clinics, compared to the Medical Corps.  It is essential that the clinic experts and the design team make maximum use all of the following:Design meetingsInterviewsVisitsTraining MaterialsOff-the-shelf images or multi-mediaData, analysis, and IT systems designed for the clinic leadershipTriCare materials and contractsNear the end of the first project, the pilot program will give a last opportunity to pack SimClinic with valuable insight.  SummarySimClinic can be an excellent training tool when applied in the proper setting.  Though there is currently no formal simulation training for medical clinic personnel, medical directors, nurse executives, group practice managers, and NCOICs can all benefit from just a few days of structured training. SimClinic is designed to be the first phase of a five-phase simulation training effort.  The end-state of this training effort is to effectively build a simulated regional medical complex. Modifications to SimClinic may also provide other service branches with a training tool analogous to the Air Forces’ with the benefactors ultimately being the service member and his/her family.  Author BiographiesSCOTT CRINO is an Operations Research Analyst at the TRADOC Analysis Center, Monterey, CA.  He has worked on a number of projects but most recently has centered his efforts on the modeling and simulation of Military Operations in Urbanized Terrain.MARK TANNER is a Modeling and Simulations Analyst for the Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Intelligence.  His work as a student at the Naval Postgraduate School resulted in the development of this project.JOHN HILES is a Research Professor at the Naval Postgraduate School in the Modeling Virtual Environments and Simulations (MOVES) curriculum.  His work in extending and refining the use of adaptive, agent-based methods and computer game human interfaces in commercial products and resulted in the development of simulations such as SimCity, SimHealth, TeleSim and Project challenge.