A Persistent Federation for Human Behavior Representation ModelsLaura E. FeinermanDavid L. Prochnow The MITRE Corporation1820 Dolley Madison Blvd.McLean, VA 22102703-883-7488, 703-883-6167 HYPERLINK mailto:feiner@mitre.org feiner@mitre.org,  HYPERLINK mailto:prochnow@mitre.org prochnow@mitre.orgKevin A. GluckAir Force Research LaboratoryWarfighter Training Research Division 6030 S. Kent St.Mesa, AZ 85212480-988-6561 HYPERLINK mailto:kevin.gluck@williams.af.mil kevin.gluck@williams.af.milRuth P. WillisU.S. Naval Research LaboratoryAdvanced Information Technology4555 Overlook Ave., SWWashington, DC 20375202-404-7346 HYPERLINK mailto:willis@ait.nrl.navy.mil willis@ait.nrl.navy.milKeywords:FEDEP, Human Behavior Representation, testbed, persistent federation. ABSTRACT: The Icarus federation is a testbed for human behavior representation models of air traffic controllers responding to an en route air traffic scene. Prior experiments with these models used several different interfaces including Java Remote Method Invocation and CORBA interfaces. This paper describes the introduction and application of the High Level Architecture to the arena of human behavior representation models in general, and specifically to this group of models. The Federation Development and Execution Process is applied in the context of an existing group of models with the goal of creating a testbed for new or alternate human behavior representation models to "plug in". The Federation Development and Execution Process will also be used to capture the federation objectives and the agreements among the current participants, as well as capture the federation "lore" for future participants.1. IntroductionThis paper describes the transition of a previously existing human behavior representation (HBR) testbed to a High Level Architecture (HLA) infrastructure from the previous implementation. Using the HLA and its associated products and processes, allows the creation of a persistent federation for exploring the strengths and weaknesses of different HBR models in the same task environment context. This paper discusses the approach taken by the group as it investigated the use of HLA. Federate developers relied on the guidance provided by the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO), the information available from the DMSO web site and associated links, and in one instance, in-house HLA expertise. At the time of this writing, the Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) has been presented to the participants and the group is in the midst of Step 4, Federation Development, and Step 5, Integration and Test. The paper reviews steps taken prior to this point and the plans for accomplishment and completion of the FEDEP steps. The paper also identifies the areas of the FEDEP that presented challenges and how they were resolved, and as well as areas of the FEDEP that went comparatively smoothly and suggests reasons why that was so.1.1 BackgroundThe Air Force Research Laboratory’s Human Effectiveness directorate is funding a cognitive process modeling (CPM) and human behavior representation (HBR) initiative called the Agent-based Modeling and Behavior Representation (AMBR) Model Comparison Project. In the first AMBR comparison, which focused on the representation of multi-tasking skill, HBR models developed in four modeling architectures (ACT-R, D-COG, EPIC-Soar, and COGNET/iGENTM) performed the tasks required in a simplified en route air traffic control (ATC) task represented in the Distributed Operator Model Architecture (D-OMAR) [1]. The performance of these models was compared against the performance of humans given the same information and performing the same task [2]. Development, testing, and comparison of models in the Icarus federation is the second AMBR comparison, and builds directly on the models developed for the first comparison. Representatives of the same model architectures are participating, and they are extending their models from the first comparison to accommodate the new requirement that they communicate over the HLA’s Run-Time Infrastructure (RTI).1.2 The Icarus FederationIcarus differs from other federation efforts with which the first author has worked in that the Icarus federation began with a group of existing models, a well-defined interface, and technical experts that had prior experience working together. For the HBR model comparison effort, two models exchanged data using the appropriate interface. One model represented the air traffic control scene: aircraft in flight, air traffic sector boundaries, adjacent air traffic controllers, and the air traffic controller workstation. The second model represented the central air traffic controller using the controller workstation, responding to the prompts and information available on the workstation. The challenge was to design a federation that would provide flexibility as a testbed. To meet testbed objectives, the federation should create the air traffic controller scene and operate with a human in the loop (the air traffic controller) or with an HBR model of the air traffic controller. The testbed should allow the assessment and comparison of different HBR models The allocation of functionality to federates is depicted in Figure 1. The air traffic controller can either be a human or an HBR model. EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure 1  Icarus Federation - FunctionallyThe Icarus federation will have three federates with different simulation roles: air traffic simulation,air traffic controller workstation, and air traffic controller HBR model.2. The FEDEP Applied to IcarusThe FEDEP is a systems engineering process intended to guide the user through the design, development, implementation, and execution of a federation to meet the user's objectives. A document describing the FEDEP is available for download from DMSO's web page [3]. In a nutshell, the FEDEP outlines 6 steps. These are shown in Figure 2. 2.1 Define Icarus ObjectivesThe federation objectives for Icarus went through several iterations. Thinking through the objectives in terms of near term and long term goals as well as considering the realm of what is achievable in the time period available led to the current federation objectives:  EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure 2.  The Six Step FEDEPInvestigate HLA framework for composable HBR testbed activitiesGain HLA experience in HBR domain and capture lessons learned. Apply Lessons Learned toImprove DMSO products Augment the abilities of M&S organizations, processes, and technologies in the HBR domain. The first objective focuses on identifying the composable aspects of a testbed. As long as the task environment remains constant, any federate can be replaced by an alternate representation. For example, new or modified HBR models could participate in the testbed, or a different air traffic simulation could replace the existing model, possibly increasing the controller workload. Alternatively, multiple HBR models could participate representing adjacent air traffic controllers previously simulated.The second objective focuses on the use of DMSO products in the HBR domain. To date, use of the HLA in the HBR domain has been limited. By sponsoring this proof-of-concept, DMSO seeks to identify how its products might be improved. 2.2 Develop the Icarus Conceptual Model Developing the conceptual model involves several steps including developing the scenario, performing conceptual analysis, and developing federation requirements. When developing the scenario it is important to identify the critical or key events that are important to meeting the federation objectives. Developing the Icarus scenario was straightforward. The use of the scenario from the AMBR model comparison allowed participants to explore the HLA while imposing minimal perturbations to the scenario (and the models). The participants were already well-versed in the scenario events. Performing the conceptual analysis (identification of events, objects and actions) was a little less straightforward (see Figure 3).  EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure 3  Icarus Conceptual ModelIdentifying the objects and actions that occur at the ATC workstation was not difficult. However, the focus of the interactions was not only between the displayed objects (aircraft and adjacent sector air traffic controllers) but also between the displayed objects and the controller (human or representation thereof) at the ATC workstation. The AMBR ATC task focuses on the actions of an air traffic controller. The controller is responsible for monitoring the assigned sector. The environment includes aircraft approaching, departing, and flying through the assigned sector. The controller communicates with aircraft pilots as they enter the sector and leave the sector, and when they request changes in speed. The controller also communicates with the adjacent air traffic controllers to accept controller responsibilities for incoming aircraft or conversely, to request that an adjacent controller accept responsibility for an aircraft that will be leaving the sector shortly.Given the human behavior representation perspective of the federation, three distinct paths of communication are required. These include communication between an aircraft and a simulated adjacent air traffic controller, between an aircraft and the air traffic controller (human or representation thereof), and between the simulated adjacent air traffic controllers and the air traffic controller (human or representation thereof) at the workstation.The task of identifying federation requirements usually centers around tools, levels of security classification, project timelines, integration and test strategies (for example, integration at a single site or distributed), and federation execution and analysis location. For the Icarus federation, the identification of federation requirements was more a matter of codifying the methods that the model developers had used for the previous model comparison and scheduling that method against the Icarus timetable and objectives. 2.3 Federation Design During the normal course of federation development, the completion of the conceptual model analysis would lead to the identification of candidate federates that could support some or all of the conceptual model. For the Icarus federation, the federates were identified by their participation in the first AMBR comparison effort. Each HBR model would be a federate in the federation and the model of the air traffic and air traffic controller workstation (previously a single D-OMAR model) would be separated functionally into two individual federates. Figure 4 shows the Icarus federation. EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure 4  The Icarus FederationThe Icarus federation will consist of the two D-OMAR federates (air traffic and workstation simulations), plus either one of the HBR models that will "plug" into the federation or a human that will operate the D-OMAR workstation. Each HBR model will re-use the Icarus federation interface. Icarus federation results of the HBR models will be compared to data collected from federation runs with a human operating the air traffic controller workstation. Federation participants include the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office and the Air Force Research Laboratory, Human Effectiveness Directorate as federation sponsors, and the MITRE Corporation as federation manager. Federate developers include:DeveloperFederateBBN TechnologiesD-OMAR federatesACT-R Research GroupCarnegie Mellon UniversityACT-RAir Force Research LaboratorySustainment and Logistics DivisionD-COGCHI Systems, Inc.COGNET / iGENTMSoar Technology, Inc.EPIC-Soar2.4 Federation DevelopmentWith the identification of federates and the allocation of functionality to federates as in the first AMBR comparison effort, development began. As stated earlier, changes to the models were held to a minimum, with the introduction of HLA interfaces being the bulk of the coding required for the proof-of-concept effort. As none of the participant developers had previous experience implementing an HLA interface, this presented some initial challenges. Developers used three different approaches to become familiar with RTI requirements. Some attended the HLA hands-on-training class, some purchased the HLA Book [4] and all availed themselves of information available on-line from DMSO's HLA web site. When available developers also made use of in-house expertise.As part of federation development, the Icarus team met to review HLA concepts; of particular importance were the interface as a Federation Object Model (FOM), time management, and data collection. Discussions on these topics continued after the initial meetings over email and telephone. 2.4.1 Federation Object Model Development of the FOM occurred along two parallel paths. Identification of objects and actions was performed as part of the conceptual model analysis. In addition the existing interface, used in the first AMBR comparison, was examined to develop the FOM. Reviewing the FOM developed from the conceptual analysis led to the identification of the differences between an HBR-focused FOM and a FOM focused on the interactions between objects in the federates. In an HBR-focused FOM, the human and its relationship to the simulated objects must be explicitly specified. For purposes of collecting and comparing data to assess HBR model performance, the FOM must include the three communication pathways between the controller (human or HBR) and the aircraft; the controller (human or HBR) and the simulated adjacent sector controllers; and the aircraft and the simulated adjacent sector controllers information presented to the air traffic controller and the actions taken by the air traffic controller. The workstation display includes a graphical depiction of the current positions of aircraft and text messages containing the status of actions initiated by the ATC, the aircraft pilots, or the adjacent air traffic controllers. The air traffic controller initiates actions at the workstation using the mouse. The Icarus FOM contains expected items such as aircraft position and status updates. In addition the FOM contains HBR-focused elements such as identification of workstation buttons pressed, prompts displayed as a result of buttons pressed, and messages displayed. Some of the messages are a result of controller directed action, some are responses to queries that transfer aircraft sector control responsibilities. 2.4.2 Time ManagementThe Icarus federation requires two different time evolution mechanisms (though not at the same time). When a human is operating the D-OMAR workstation, the federation must execute in real-time with minimal latencies. When an HBR model is a member of the Icarus federation, all calculations are based on simulation time. When operating in this latter mode, latency is not an issue, and executions should be faster than real time. When an HBR model responds to a workstation stimulus, the model determines the human response time and schedules an event for the appropriate simulation time. This enables the HBR model to ignore computer processing time and network latency. It was desirable for the application of time management services to be similar to the schema used for the model comparison effort. This was accomplished using the Next Event Request (NER) mechanism. The NER allows federates to advance time in variable increments suitable to the evolution of the air traffic control environment. Some changes in state occur along a predictable path such as aircraft flying across an air traffic control sector. Regular updates of the aircraft position are provided. However, when the controller (human or HBR) takes an action, it may have an immediate effect on the workstation display. The amount of time required to update the display vs. the amount of time until the next scheduled aircraft update (or the time until the display would have been updated given no controller action) creates a situation where the federates need to vary the size of the increase in simulation time. The NER mechanism allows this to occur.2.4.3 Data CollectionData are collected during each federation execution by both the workstation federate and the HBR federate. The federate developers then analyze the data. To stay focused on the initial exploration of HLA, it was decided to leave the data collection mechanism unchanged. 2.5 Federation Integration and TestSteps 5 and 6 of the FEDEP are Integration and Test, and Execution and Analysis, respectively. At the time of this writing, integration is well underway, although not complete. Federate testing of some of the Icarus federates has been accomplished. Two approaches to integration are being pursued. The first approach allows integration at each of the HBR federate developer home-sites, while the second approach will bring the entire federation to a single location. 2.5.1 Home-Site IntegrationAs each execution of the federation has only one HBR federate, integration of the non-HBR federates with an individual HBR model is occurring at the home site of each HBR federate developer. The developer of the air traffic and workstation simulation federates (BBN Technologies) has provided software releases to the HBR federate developers in successively robust deliveries. The deliveries strive to maintain maximum stability at the workstation federate, with which the HBRs interface. This integration strategy allows HBR federate developers to code, integrate and test in a federation environment; while the developer of the non-HBR federates can simultaneously evolve the two federates (air traffic and workstation simulations) from the single D-OMAR model. In addition, integration and testing at the HBR developer sites provides testing of the non HBR federates. Performance Issues: Initial federation executions had less than stellar performance. This issue has been addressed by implementing a change to the federate HLA interfaces and by editing the RTI Initialization Data (RID) file. Depending on the composition of the federation (that is, which HBR federate is joined) the entire federation may be hosted on a single Windows NT machine. In this configuration, the federates were competing for the same computing resources. Some federates always consumed as much CPU as possible. Logic was added to force each federate to sleep just long enough to release resources for the other applications. The RID file associated with RTI-NG was modified to turn OFF all advisories. As the Icarus federates are not designed to respond to RTI advisories, having them ON only produced additional, unnecessary processing.Although more testing is scheduled, the federates that have been tested have demonstrated acceptable performance with the above changes.2.5.2 Single-Site Integration and ExecutionWhen development and integration of each HBR federate is completed, final integration and test will be performed by BBN. On completion, BBN will execute the federation, and collect the data produced by the federates.2.5.3 Home-Site AnalysisUpon completion of the federation executions with each HBR federate, the results will be distributed to the respective HBR federate developer for analysis. These activities have not been completed as of this writing, but as it is the integration, test, execution and analysis method used by these participants for the HBR comparison effort, confidence is high that this method will succeed again. 3. SummaryThe development of the Icarus Federation marks an important milestone in the evolution of the HLA. The importance of advancing the state of the art in HBR technology is now widely recognized in the DoD modeling and simulation community. The Icarus Federation, as an HLA-based HBR testbed, will be an accessible, well-documented asset for facilitating advancements in human modeling.. Areas that initially presented challenges (the FOM, time management, and data collection) have been addressed. The FOM evolved from an object update and interaction basis to a FOM that facilitated the communication paths between the controller (human or HBR) and the aircraft objects and simulated adjacent sector controllers. Time management challenges were solved by implementing the NER time evolution mechanism. Data collection was held constant between the HBR comparison effort and the HLA federation effort. Areas of the FEDEP that (so far) have proven remarkably easy in comparison to other efforts include; partitioning of functionality to federates and the approach to development, integration, and test. (It is too soon to say that execution and analysis have gone smoothly as they have not yet occurred.) The early delivery of the workstation federate has allowed the bulk of development to occur in parallel. This development has also occurred in parallel with integration activities and initial federate testing.The Icarus Federation schedule calls for the completion of federation execution and analysis in the second quarter of FY01. Federation documentation is in various states of preparation. The documentation will support interoperability by : providing a record of assumptions and agreements the federation team has put in place, accommodating changes that occur in every organization, and opening the door for new organizations to participate in the testbed. All of the above are needed to capture the federation "lore," the federation specific information that participants have agreed to and implemented to accomplish the federation objectives. Next Steps: There are several future avenues that the federation may pursue upon completion of the immediate goals. These range from (but are not limited to): introducing HBR models that have not participated in the current effort, to using HBR models to simulate the adjacent sector controllers, to using the federation to model theater-level air traffic control. 4. AcronymsACT-RAdaptive Control of Thought-RationalAMBRAgent-based Modeling and Behavior RepresentationATCAir Traffic ControllerCOGNETCognitive Network of TasksCPMCognitive Process ModelingD-COGDistributed CognitionD-OMARDistributed Operator Model ArchitectureDMSODefense Modeling and Simulation OfficeEPIC-SoarExecutive Process, Interactive Control-SoarFEDEPFederation Development and Execution ProcessFOMFederation Object ModelHBRHuman Behavior RepresentationHLAHigh Level ArchitectureNERNext Event RequestOMAROperator Model ArchitectureRIDRTI Initialization DataRTIRun Time InfrastructureRTI NGRTI Next Generation5. References[1]	Steve Deutsch, Michael Cramer, George Keith, Bobbi Freeman, The Distributed Operator Model Architecture, Final Report. Wright-Patterson AFB, OH: Air Force Research Lab, Deployment and Sustainment Division, 1999.[2]	Richard Pew, Yvette Tenney, Stephen Deutsch, Sandra Spector, Brett Benyo, Agent-based Modeling and Behavior Representation (AMBR) Evaluation of Human Performance Models: Round 1 – Overview, Task Simulation, Human Data, and Results, BBN Technologies, 2000.[3]	“High Level Architecture, The Federation Development and Execution Process, Version 1.5”, December 8, 1999.[4]	Frederick Kuhl, Richard Weatherly, Judith Dahmann, Anita Jones,: Creating Computer Simulation Systems: An Introduction to the High Level Architecture, Prentice Hall, October 1999. Author BiographiesLAURA FEINERMAN is a lead Modeling and Simulation Systems Engineer in the Information Systems and Technology Division at the MITRE Corporation. She is currently working on Icarus for DMSO. She brings to the Icarus federation experience gained through the development of the Joint Warfighting Program Trailblazer federation which was subsequently expanded to become the Pegasus federation used for experimentation by the Joint Forces Command. She is currently working on federation issues of JSIMS. She has previously led and participated in subcommittees of the Interface Working Groups for the Joint Training Confederation. Ms. Feinerman has a B.A. in Economics and an M.S. in Applied Mathematics from the State University of New York at Stony Brook.DAVID L. PROCHNOW is a lead software engineer in the Information Systems and Technology Division at the MITRE Corporation. Currently, he is the technical lead on several HLA programs. He has also chaired the SIW Logistics Forum since 1996. At MITRE, Mr. Prochnow previously contributed to the ALSP project and to logistics simulation efforts. While at BDM International and Control Data Systems, Mr. Prochnow developed software for various corps-level and theater-level wargames. He received a B.S. in Computer Science from the University of Virginia in 1983. Kevin A. Gluck is a research psychologist at the Air Force Research Laboratory’s Warfighter Training Research Division in Mesa, AZ. He is the program manager for AFRL’s AMBR Model Comparison Project, and AFRL’s POC for development and testing of the Icarus Federation. Dr. Gluck earned a B.A. in Psychology from Trinity University in 1993, an M.S. in Cognitive Psychology from Carnegie Mellon University in 1997, and a Ph.D. in Cognitive Psychology from Carnegie Mellon University in 1999. Ruth P. willis is currently a research engineering psychologist in the Advanced Information Technology Branch at the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, DC. In her previous position as Program Manager for the Human Behavior Representation Program at the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, she initiated the HBR Federation project in conjunction with the Air Force Research Laboratory. Dr. Willis earned a B.A. and M.A. in Psychology from East Carolina University, and a Ph.D. in Industrial/Organizational Psychology from the University of South Florida. Visit the DMSO web page at  HYPERLINK http://www.DMSO.mil www.dmso.mil, then click on Enterprise, then High Level Architecture, then Helpful Hints. 