The Fighter Simulation using SAF and XMLNoriaki KitaharaTomomi HiguchiToshiya KinoshitaMichinari OnoTOSHIBA Corporation,Information and Industrial System & Service Company,Komukai Operations1, Komukai-toshiba-cho, Saiwai-ku,Kawasaki-shi, Kanagawa, 212-8581, JAPAN+81-44-548-5094, +81-44-548-5844+81-44-548-5094, +81-44-548-5093kitahara@gm.komukai.toshiba.co.jp, higuti1f@606d.komukai.toshiba.co.jpkinosita@gm.komukai.toshiba.co.jp, ono@gm.komukai.toshiba.co.jpKeywords:Air Defense Simulation (Federation), Fighter Simulation (Federation), SAF(Semi-Automated Forces), XML(eXtensible Markup Language), HLA(High Level Architecture), RTI-NGABSTRACT: When a simulation is used for estimating the capability of the air defense system, the modeling of an airplane as threat becomes a part of important factors. We can say that there are those factors as deception action, the form in the case of forming the battle formation, the flight course, and etc. in addition to the armament like a missile, a bomb and etc.. On this paper, we developed the airplane model with consideration of these factors, and applied this model to the fighter simulation. The main features of this simulation are two points as follows.Firstly, by applying SAF to a part of the judgment of the pilot and a part of the function of a battle formation flight, we realized the flexible flight scenario with autonomy which was not the fixed flight scenario like before. In addition, the modeling of a deception, an armament, and etc. made it possible to create the fighter simulation which has more touch of reality than before.Secondly, we used XML as a description language of SAF scenario which specifies the flight scenario of an airplane, the judgement logic of a pilot, and the functional conditions of a battle formation flight. By using XML, we realized that XML is so useful that we can create the detailed scenario easily and that we can examine the system of various conditions efficiently. Moreover, since the XML can communalize a scenario among other simulations, we can utilize a scenario effectively, and we can also expect the reducing cost of development and operation related to this simulation. The fighter simulation described on this paper are consisted of the airplane federate of a blue force (friend) and a red force (enemy), and we realized a distributed simulation of fighter using RTI-NG of DMSO. This paper describes the developing contents of the airplane model, and argues about a problem and a future subject.1. Introduction When a simulation is used for estimating the capability of the air defense system, the modeling of each system becomes a part of important factors. When we consider the simulation of the air defense system, this simulation model can roughly be divided into two groups. One is the threat model and another is the air defense system model. The model of the air defense system is the radar institution, SAM system and etc. for defending an important area and a important institution from a threat. We are developing a detailed model about the whole air defense system in current year. There are an airplane, a missile and etc. as a threat. On this paper, we have developed the model of a threat airplane with paying attention to the airplane.1.1 Background When we examine the air defense system until now, we have examined this system using one stand-alone type computer. However, since the simulation form has been diversified in recent years, we have studied Modeling & Simulation (M&S) about a distributed simulation from 1997. There is various basic technology such as Software Technology, Modeling Technology, Network Technology, Graphical User Interface / Computer Graphics (GUI/CG) Technology and etc. in M&S. We have developed the model of the air defense system investigating High Level Architecture (HLA) Technology, paying attention to HLA Technology (The Run-Time Infrastructure (RTI) Technology) which has rapidly been developed in the United States of America (U.S.A.) on M&S.1.2 System The air defense system described on this paper is the system which defends aviation bases, important institutions and etc. from threatening attacks. In case of U.S.A. or the Gulf War, for example, the air defense system is SAM system such as Patriot system that defends important areas or important institutions which are attacked by a threat airplane or a ballistic missile. On this paper, we developed the fighter simulation which can be used for the air defense simulation which is due to be developed from now on, paying attention to this threat airplane. We chose the distributed network simulation as a simulation in consideration of the extendibility of a future model. We used RTI which can be got easily and is distributed gratuitously by Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO), as a communication protocol. At the beginning, RTI Ver.1.0.3 were used for the simulation of the air defense system which we developed. However, we developed the model using The Run-Time Infrastructure Next Generation (RTI-NG) 1.3v3.1 on this paper. The fighter simulation described on this paper are consisted of the airplane federate of a blue force (friend) and a red force (enemy), and we realized a distributed network simulation of fighter using RTI-NG of DMSO. The composition of simulation on this paper is shown in figure 1.Figure 1  Composition of The Fighter Simulation We need to develop the model, taking the reuse of the airplane of a blue force as a fighter interceptor (FI) federate and of the airplane of a red force as a threat airplane federate into consideration enough about the simulation (federation) of the air defense system which is developed from now on.2. Modeling Since the airplane model which is described on this paper, has both sides of an offensive function and an defensive function, this model is so flexible that we can use it for the simulation of the air defense system to be developed from now on. We developed the airplane model using the object-oriented-analysis design technique according to Unified Modeling Language (UML). The purpose of using the object-oriented-analysis design technique is the following two points. One is the improvement of our development technology in order to prepare for the product development of future. The latest system is developed repeating a design, a evaluation and a repair. The other is that we correspond to developing a new federate or changing an existing federate for a short period of time developing the reuse parts of software. For these reasons, we needed to take reusability and extendibility into consideration enough for being able to reuse this model to the model of the air defense system to be developed next time.2.1 Basic Design of Model [2] We considered the whole image of airplane model to be the theoretical composition which is shown in Figure 2.Figure 2.  Package Composition Moreover, the role of each layer is shown in Table 1.Table 1.  Role of Each Layer When we carried out this basic design, we took the following two points into consideration.(1) The design in which the reusability is considered We consider that it is important that we clarifying the scope to reuse before beginning development and analyze in consideration of it for raising the reusability of a software. On this paper, we considered the air defense simulation the scope to reuse and built the layer structure which is shown in Figure 2 extracting what is used in federates other than airplane from the inside of an airplane federate. The main features is that reuse parts are completely separated from parts peculiar to an application. The layer of highest rank has class groups peculiar to an airplane federate and three layers of low rank have software parts for reused in the air defense simulation among four layers.(2) The pliability to change of a composition When we consider various usage of the air defense simulation, it is desirable that the model structure adapt to the actual organization. Originally, the airplane making a battle formation flight is a part of organization of a layer structure and has the authority and the command system obeyed the role of an organization. For corresponding to this layer structure, we prepared the package corresponded to each class.2.2 Function of Airplane Model [1] The main function of an airplane model are shown as below :- Users can choose a battle formation flight of twelve patterns. This battle formation flight includes several pattern about a solo flight, a fighter and a fighter bomber and also has a part of pattern made flight at air-show.  - Users can choose a battle formation flight of a level flight and a free flight. A free flight is the flight pattern which users can set up freely.- Users can set up Reader Cross Section (RCS) and the body radiation temperature of an airplane. By this setting items, an airplane model is caught by the reader and receive the attack by the missile.- Every airplane usually has Identification Friend or Foe (IFF). The airplane model on this paper can also distinguish a friend or an enemy by IFF.- The airplane model has the searching / tracking radar. A pilot on this model searches for a target by this radar and takes actions required for a duty.- A pilot on this model recognizes a danger by the caution sensor, and takes an avoidance action for not hit.- By the flare, an airplane model takes a deception action and can escape an attack of a missile and etc..- An airplane model can carry Air to Air Missile (AAM) and Air to Surface Missile (ASM), and users can set up the performance needed for a missile in a scenario.- An airplane model can carry Bomb. This is an armament which is not necessary for the aerial dogfight of airplanes, however we will be used for an attack of ground institutions if we will extend our simulation this item.- An airplane model can take the aerial dogfight of airplanes by GUN.- An airplane model can be simulated casualties by the damage rate and the survival rate- Users can set up freely the condition of the pilot judgment and the battle formation flight duty. (SAF Function)- An application software can read the scenario (the scenario of SAF is also included) which an airplane model needs as a XML scenario. (XML Function)3. SAF We think that Semi-Automated Forces (SAF) is a simulation model which makes a judgment automatically according to the change of a situation (a state of the war) or an environment on the basis of  a tactical manual of real unit and a knowledge and experience of real commander or soldier. For this reason, SAF is a function needed for attaining the purpose of an offense, a defense, and etc. more nearly actually than now under the situation that many elements (a unit, arms, the war situation, a geographical feature, a weather and etc.) are intricately related in a simulation. When we usually simulate the model of an airplane, vehicles and etc., users usually set up the flight (movement) course (route) of a model, and the model moving faithfully on a route is simulated. For example, on the fighter simulation, when users set up the flight course (route) making to cross a flight course of friend with a flight course of enemy, the airplane model battles at the crossing point in many cases, in case of a usual simulation. But in case of a simulation incorporating SAF, when a airplane model caught an enemy by the radar, this airplane will start a battle. On the fighter simulation of this paper, when the airplane model catches the enemy by the radar, this airplane will start a battle to the enemy seceding from the flight course which users set up. Moreover, if this airplane model ends a battle, this will return to the flight course quickly which users set up. By applying SAF, we can build the database of the knowledge and etc. in the simulation and can get the strategic advancement and the reliability of evaluation. These are the knowledge by a tactical manual of real unit, a strategy knowledge on the base of a past experience, the knowledge by the characteristic of the equipment and the knowledge on the base of the weather, the geographical feature, etc.. By taking these knowledge in our simulation, we can build the simulation more realistic than present.3.1 Function [1] The main SAF function of the airplane model are shown as below :- When a pilot model recognizes the enemy, an airplane model shifts to an attack action. (Formation)- When an attack action of an airplane model is completed, an this airplane returns to a usual duty. (Formation)- When an airplane model is attacked, this airplane acts a evasion. (Formation)- A pilot model fires AAM by the condition which users set up. (Pilot)- A pilot model fires GUN by the condition which users set up. (Pilot)- When an airplane model is attacked by the missile and etc., pilot model drops the flare. (Pilot) It is possible that the condition contents to the action contents which is shown above are changed freely by users, and we can simulate reflecting immediately a tactical manual of real unit and a knowledge and experience of a pilot3.2 Effectiveness of Applying SAF The fighter simulation on this paper is added and is repaired to phase from now on, and will turn into a part of the air defense simulation. For this reason, it is desirable that the condition and action for realizing the SAF function as a pilot and a unit are general-purpose, high reusability and flexible. The effect at the time of applying SAF to the simulation on this paper as a part of the judgement logic of a pilot and the function conditions of a battle formation flight of a airplane is shown as below :- Users can realize the flexible flight scenario with autonomy which was not the fixed flight scenario like before.- By applying the SAF model to the air defense simulation, users can operate the simulation which has more touch of reality than before, and can get the simulation result with a touch of reality.- By comparing the simulation result in the case of applying SAF with the simulation result in case of not applying SAF, users can use for the evaluation of a model logic and an algorithm.- For the table form which users can set up freely and quickly to the condition and the action for realizing the SAF function, users can rearrange the logic of the SAF function.- By diverting SAF of the airplane model, we can apply to the air defense model which is due to be developed from now on.3.3 Example for Applying SAF Technique We applied SAF to a part of the judgement of the pilot and a part of the function of a battle formation flight as SAF function on the fighter simulation of this paper. By applying this SAF, we can realized the flexible flight simulation (the motion of model) with autonomy which was not the fixed flight simulation (the motion of model) like before. An example of the simulation of an airplane model applied SAF is shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4.Figure 3.  Fighter Simulation Using SAF(Secession from Flight Course)Figure 4.  Fighter Simulation Using SAF(Return to Flight Course) 4. XML Although we had used scenario files such as text form for describing a simulation scenario in the simulation used until now, we applied the XML technology for describing it in the simulation of this paper.4.1 Reason for The use of XML [2] XML is a markup language which was able to define a tag freely, and the role is giving the description system of the standard data for exchanging a data electronically. The reasons for applying XML to the simulation on this paper are the following three points.(1) Markup Language XML is a kind of the data description form called a markup language with Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML) and Hyper Text Markup Language (HTML) developed before. The feature of a markup language is the point that the “tag” which shows each contents to a data as an expression form is attached. The data is expressed by the completely different form in a markup language (XML), a Comma Separated Value (CSV) form and a binary data. When it is going to use these for exchanging data, such a difference of expression form bring about the difference of a remarkable effect. This difference originates in the independency of a data greatly in each expression form. That is to say, since the meaning and the structure are defined to a data in itself in XML, a data has high independency and does not depend on an application. For this reason, we can use XML general-purpose and constantly to a many application.(2) Extensible The tag is fixation in HTML and the most of it is a tag for the layout description of a Web page. Although the needs of a treating data of various kinds on Web become high with the spread of Web, since there are such restrictions, the realization using HTML is difficult. On the one hand, XML can be defined freely the tag for expressing the meaning and the structure of a data as the need arises. Furthermore, since XML has a structure definition form called Document Type Definition (DTD), we can verify the structure of a data received as the need arises.(3) Correspondence to Internet XML has the background developed for the purpose of using SGML on Web from the first. The problems in case of using SGML on Web are the slow processing and the lack of Web correspondence function. These problems that SGML has are solved in XML. Two improving point are shown as below :- Processing Reduction  Although SGML is a highly efficient, since it has a complicated grammar and has always DTD for the interpretation, the processing  performance of it will become down. For this reason, SGML is not suitable for use of a Web browser which get a data frequently from the network and processes it. In order to solve such a problem, the grammar of SGML is slimmed and the grammar which can be interpreted without DTD is adopted in XML. Concretely, the abbreviation of a tag is allowed and DTD needs to be referred to each time for the processing of checking an abbreviation tag and making up a tag in SGML. The abbreviation function of such a tag is eliminated and the processing which interprets a sentence is mitigated.- Correspondence Function of Web Since a data is specified as a worldwide in Web, the method of Uniform Resource locator (URL) is standardized. Since a data which is related to a document is specified, it is possible to use this URL. For this reason, since we use URL for the specification of a DTD file, another document, a data link and etc., we can control a worldwide data using Web.4.2 Effectiveness of Applying XML [2] The fighter simulation on this paper is added and is repaired to phase from now on, and will turn into a part of the air defense simulation. For this reason, since the contents and the form of the data are also general-purpose, it is desirable that we use the standard technology of high reusability. The effect at the time of adopting XML as the description language of a simulation scenario in the simulation of this paper is shown as below :- Since this is the standard technology which the standardization organization (World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)) determined, we can correspond also to the long-term use from now on.- Since the data form is not dependent on an execution program, we can suppress the influence to an execution program with a change and an addition of a scenario item- We can communalize a scenario also between different simulations by unifying the semantic attachment and the structure of a data. For this reason, since we can do the effective use of a scenario, we can cut down the use cost.- By using the same scenario in more than one simulation, we can use for the comparatively evaluation of the strategy described by a scenario, and for the algorithm evaluation of the model logic and the model processing.4.3 Example for Applying XML The fighter simulation on this paper has the scenario editor apart from the simulation execution program. By making the armament scenario, the flight scenario and the SAF scenario of an airplane which are created by the scenario editor read into an execution program, we can simulate this model. An example of the XML scenario created by the scenario editor is shown in figure 5.Figure 5.  Scenario of XML Form5. Conclusion We were able to develop the airplane model which has armament of a missile, a bomb and etc. using the object-oriented-analysis design technique according to UML. We can simulated the independent flight of one set or the battle formation flight of six sets using  this airplane model. Moreover, by applying SAF to a part of the judgement of the pilot and a part of the function of a battle formation flight, we realized the flexible flight scenario with autonomy which was not the fixed flight scenario like before. We thinking that the example which is applied SAF even to a part of the function of a battle formation flight is the first time in JAPAN. Furthermore, we adopted XML as a description language of a armament scenario of an airplane, a flight scenario of an airplane and a SAF scenario which is specified the judgement logic of a pilot and the functional condition of a battle formation flight. By using this XML, we realized that XML is so useful that we can create the detailed scenario easily and we can simulate the flight model efficiently using the flight scenario of various conditions. The fighter simulation described on this paper are consisted of the airplane federate of a blue force (friend) and a red force (enemy), we realized a distributed network simulation of fighter using RTI-NG of DMSO.6. Future Plans We want to realize the fighter simulation which has more touch of reality than before from now on, adding the tactical model of the electronic warfare to the airplane model developed on this paper. Moreover, by reusing the airplane model (class diagram) developed by the object-oriented-analysis design technique on this paper, we will build the model of the air defense system. Therefore, we need to build Federation Object Model (FOM) of the air defense system, and think that this design is a future subject. The air defense simulation (federation) which we are developing now is shown in Figure 6.Figure 6.  Air Defense Simulation under Development Moreover, we want to build a knowledge base more realistic than the present model, reflecting a tactical manual of real unit and a knowledge and experience of real commander or soldier in SAF included in the airplane model. And we will build the air defense simulation with a reality, applying SAF to other air defense simulation models too. Furthermore, we want to communalize the XML scenario adopted to our simulation among other simulations. Although we defined the data structure of a scenario on this XML scenario, we did not create DTD of XML. Since there are many similar items in the scenario of each model on the air defense simulation, we consider that it is possible to define a common structure as DTD. For these reasons, by defining DTD from now on, we consider that the reusability of a scenario becomes still good than the reusability of a present scenario. We want to develop our simulation corresponding the latest RTI released from DMSO to it.7. References [1]	Noriaki Kitahara, Toru Yonezawa, Toshiya Kinoshita: “M&S The HLA Basic Air Defense Model 2 -Detailed design 1-”  TOSHIBA Co. Design Report, No. A-O-99-0019, July 1999. [2]	Tomomi Kurata, Rei Yano, Noriaki Kitahara, Tomomi Higuchi: “The Object-Oriented Development of Air Defense Simulation –The Design for the Re-Use of Software-”  TOSHIBA Co. Technical Report, TRW-00224, November 2000.Author BiographiesNORIAKI KITAHARA is a missile system engineer of TOSHIBA Corporation. He joined TOSHIBA Corporation at System Engineering Group of Missile Systems Engineering Department since graduating from NIHON University in 1990 with a MS in Mechanical Engineering. At the beginning, he was engaged in the work about the system of warhead and fuse with missile at TOSHIBA Co. Komukai Works. In 1991 he studied the new work (The steel rolling mill system which is the civilian industry) at TOSHIBA Co. Fuchuu Works for two years. Since 1993 he has been concerned with Systems Engineering in present group (System Engineering Group of Missile Systems Engineering Department). Firstly, he is engaged in the work about a air defense short range SAM system, and is engaged in the work about a simulation (M&S - Modeling and Simulation) of air defense since 1997.TOMOMI HIGUCHI is a system engineer at TOSHIBA Corporation. She completed an MS in Aerospace Engineering from Osaka Prefecture University in 1997. She is engaged in work of the Modeling & Simulation (M&S) from 1999 and is developing the Air Defense model.TOSHIYA KINOSHITA is a manager of systems engineering group, missile systems engineering department for TOSHIBA Corporation. He is currently leading a project on the Modeling & Simulation (M&S).MICHINARI ONO is a senior manager of missile system engineering department for TOSHIBA Corporation. He is currently leading a project on development of missile systems.