NAVAIR Process and Information Modeling for Shipboard SystemsJoseph LaceteraMonmouth University/Monmouth Science and Technology, Inc. HYPERLINK mailto:lacetera@msti-b.com lacetera@msti-b.com(443) 253-9060Joseph StancoSupport Systems Associates Inc. HYPERLINK mailto:jstanco@ssaicorp.com jstanco@ssaicorp.com(732) 657-2300Michael Malesich Naval Air Systems TEAM, Lakehurst, NJ HYPERLINK mailto:MalesichMA@navair.navy.mil MalesichMA@navair.navy.mil(732) 323-4877Keywords:  Aircraft Launch and Recovery Equipment (ALRE), Constructive-Virtual-Live (CVL), Federation Object Model (FOM), High Level Architecture (HLA), Information Management (IM), Integrated Definition (IDEF), Joint Semi-Automated Forces (JSAF), Joint Synthetic Battlespace (JSB), Naval Air Systems Command (NAVAIR), NAVAIR FOM, Nuclear Carrier Vessel (CVN), Time Critical Strike (TCS), Time Critical Target (TCT), Warfighting Concepts to Future Weapon System Design (WARCON)Abstract:This paper describes the current development of NAVAIR Lakehurst, New Jersey, Nuclear Carrier Vessel (CVN) process and Information Management (IM) models interoperable with other CVN-element models, and Joint Semi-Automated Forces (JSAF) in the Warfighting Concepts to Future Weapon System Design (WARCON) Joint Synthetic Battlespace (JSB).  The models are developed in a Commercial-off-the-Shelf (COTS) IDEF0/IDEF1X tool environment and represent current and future processes and information management systems for CVNs.  The mission space is that of a CVN and higher levels of command, and scenarios of the Time Critical Strike (TCS) type, in which a higher level of command may issue a Time-to-Launch (TTL) query for a Time Critical Target (TCT).  Model development and predictions of TTL for TCTs are described, as is cross-platform model interoperability in a synthetic battlespace involving an HLA environment including both Windows and Linux platforms.Relevance to SISO involves  interfacing COTS-tool-developed models with the RTI;  and HLA/RTI as an enabler in distributed simulations.1.  Introduction/Background1.1  OverviewThis paper describes the current development at NAVAIR, Lakehurst, New Jersey, of process and Information Management (IM) models of Nuclear Carrier Vessel (CVN) systems and operations involving aircraft launch and recovery, aviation weapons handling and loading, and flight deck operations. These systems are supported by a shipboard network that facilitates data flow within and among the CVN work centers, and provides communication with other Command, Control, Communication, Computer and Intelligence (C41) systems.The models described herein, support both internal and external Modeling and Simulation (M&S) requirements, and are supported by a NAVAIR Federation Object Model (FOM) [1], which has been extended to support interoperability with elements of the Warfighting Concepts to Future Weapon System Design (WARCON) [2] Joint Synthetic Battlespace (JSB).  The WARCON JSB provides representations of other fleet elements including higher levels of command, such as the Joint Force Air Component Commander (JFACC)/Joint Force Commander (JFC), via the Joint SemiAutomated Forces (JSAF) federation, supported by the JSAF FOM.The mission space is that of a CVN and higher levels of command, involving Time Critical Strike (TCS) scenarios, in which the JFACC/JFC, may issue a Time-to-Launch (TTL) query for a Time Critical Target (TCT).  Such a TTL-Query would be in addition to the current Air Tasking Order (ATO), which is the daily, JFACC/JFC published order directing air missions (Air Force, Navy, Marine, and Army aviation), and matches specific targets with the capabilities/forces available to the JFACC for the given ATO day.  The simulation space includes both Windows platforms, supporting the NAVAIR models, and Linux platforms supporting the WARCON JSB.The relevance of this paper to SISO involves:    cross-platform model interoperability in a synthetic battlespace involving a Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) High Level Architecture (HLA) [3] environment including both Windows and Linux platforms;  complications associated with interfacing COTS-tool developed models with the Run-Time Infrastructure (RTI); and HLA/RTI as an enabler in distributed simulations.1.2  WARCONThe WARCON/JSB environment supports the integration of high resolution, engineering design models with lower resolution performance models, of warfighting platforms such as naval assets, armored vehicles, and aircraft, in a constructive/warfighter-in-the-loop (workstations, etc.) environment. As such, it provides a simulation-based mechanism for assessing relative capability of various system configurations to meet current and postulated operational requirements in a collaborative environment involving warfighters and platform designers.The WARCON product is intended to be linked to other M&S applications to enhance Fleet Battle Experiments (FBEs).  FBEs are conducted twice a year and involve a wide array of M&S programs, naval personnel, and naval assets (ships and aircraft) to develop Navy doctorine, especially related to novel warfighting concepts and integration of Naval assets in Joint operations.  The intent of the WARCON program is to provide detailed modeling and simulation of CVNs, and eventually, other air-capable ships to determine how changes to warfighting concepts impact CVN design and operations.  Further, WARCON provides links to all phases of acqusition to allow for cost/benefit and feasibility analyses of proposed modifications to the CVNs.  1.3  NAVAIR M&S RequirementsNAVAIR Lakehurst mission requirements include modeling and simulation of CVN Aircraft Launch and Recovery Equipment (ALRE) processes and IM systems related to avionics operations aboard CVNs.  The NAVAIR internal M&S environment currently consists of a constructive model federation, including ALRE and IM process and product models for shipboard systems.  It will eventually include virtual elements to allow Command and Control (C2), leading ultimately to a full Constructive, Virtual, Live (CVL) environment.  For example, NAVAIR has developed a man-in-the-loop virtual control panel for the Catapult Officer’s Console (COC), which will eventually be a part of the CVL environment. External M&S efforts include integration of NAVAIR M&S into the WARCON JSB, other Joint programs, and with Carrier Weapon Handling Systems (CWHS) and Flight Deck Operations (FDO) models in development at Newport News Shipyard (NNS). The NAVAIR Lakehurst M&S team is leveraging its existing efforts related to CVN M&S to support the WARCON Program.  Since all efforts performed by the team follow the same methodology, and align to the goals established, it was a natural progression to have NAVAIR Lakehurst models interact with the WARCON environment, which is of much greater scope since it includes entities, relationships, and issues beyond those of the CVN. Weapons handling operations related to a TCS scenario are being focused on for the WARCON program for several purposes including the improvement of weapons handling, and analysis of the dependency on information across multiple workcenters and the critical role of weapons in achieving mission goals. The focus for this particular effort is based on the objectives of the WARCON Program.  However, the approach is also being used at NAVAIR Lakehurst for analysis of various aspects of CVN operations.  The overall approach is predicated on a “total ship” model that comprises a collection of sub-models representing individual carrier core processes integrated into a holistic CVN model.NAVAIR is also supporting the definition of an Integrated Acquisition Environment to provide for complete analysis of design, development, cost, training, and impact to carrier operations.  1.4  NAVAIR M&S ApproachThe NAVAIR M&S program supports the evolution from platform-centric to network-centric program operations and initiatives by concurrent modeling and simulation of both “as-is” and “to-be” systems representing current and future processes and information management systems for CVNs. Concomitantly, a standard modeling methodology and architecture has been developed to support the NAVAIR M&S objectives.  This methodology is based on an iterative, holistic approach that establishes the functional behavior of the whole system based on the interdependencies of its parts.  Therefore, the impact of changes in one area on other areas may be determined and quantified.  The assessment of these effects determines the feasibility of proposed solutions and identifies where future optimization and system improvement opportunities exist. This process allows many operational scenarios and deployed situations to be predicted and evaluated through M&S.The NAVAIR model of the current, or “as-is”, information management system, is referred to here as the IM system, whereas the future, or “to-be”, model, is representative of the proposed Aviation Weapons Information Management System (AWIMS), and is referred to here as the Improved Information Management (I2M) system.Through the shipboard network, the I2M will be able to: receive data such as the Air Plan and its revisions essential to developing the Load Plan and responding to situation changes; provide information to key decision makers and other ship departments; make weapons data available when and where it is needed;  support the Weapons Department information requirements by enhancing their ability to enter, store, retrieve, report and communicate aviation weapons data in a high tempo, real time operational environment;  provide information management, control, and communications for the Weapons Department;  and provide improved planning, tracking, control and monitoring of aviation weapons aboard the ship.  These improvements will permit the rapid response to situation changes, provide real-time data to decision makers and reduce the workload associated with these functions. Functions to be performed by the AWIMS/I2M include:  Weapons Movement TrackingAutomated Load PlanningAutomated aids supporting on-loads and underway replenishmentsMagazine arrangement functionsWeapons Build Status tracking and reporting2.0  NAVAIR Model Development2.1  IDEF Modeling ApproachNAVAIR process and information models are developed using a Commercial-off-the-Shelf (COTS) Integrated Definition (IDEF) tool, Meta Software [4], which provides an IDEF0/IDEF1X [5,6] modeling environment.  MetaSoftware contains a simulation engine which allows automatic generation of a simulation executable from IDEF0 models that are enhanced with simulation-specific data.  The IDEF0 model forms the basis for creating an IDEF1 (relational, data and information model) that graphically depicts entities and their relationships to other entities. The tool also allows straightforward transfer of information from the process model to the data model. Further, due to the fact that IDEF1X incorporates relational database design, it can be interfaced with existing and future relational databases used in the Navy. The IDEF model provides a standard architecture and set of definitions that capture the required knowledge of subject matter experts, and provides a reusable framework for product development as well as for testing various scenarios to determine the effectiveness of the identified opportunities for improvement. IDEF consists of a simple graphical syntax, which allows models to be easily developed and understood.In IDEF0, schematics are developed wherein boxes represent activities or processes that relate to other processes by arrows.  These arrows and boxes are called ICOMs.  The arrows enter and leave boxes by the following convention:Inputs to a process enter the left side of boxControls (plans, procedures, directives, etc.) enter the topMechanisms, used to conduct the process, enter the bottomOutputs leave from the rightThis syntax is displayed in Figure 1, where the activity, as shown, is a process that transforms inputs into outputs. EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure 1. Basic IDEF SyntaxThe hierarchical structure of IFEF allows user control over the desired level of detail and over the breadth/depth of functional components that represent specific functions. Model decomposition is built to the desired level of detail.  As activities are decomposed for more detailed functional description and analysis of processes, the operations on the inputs and the resulting outputs occur within the activity at the appropriate level of detail.  They are acted upon and bounded by the controls and constraints, and they are accomplished by the mechanisms. Further decomposition may be performed at a future time if more detail becomes necessary.Mechanisms are human or equipment assets/resources.  As the activities are decomposed to greater levels of detailed, the mechanisms are also decomposed to a corresponding level of detail and are translated to a specific person or piece of equipment performing a specific function.Controls include governing documents and references and, through decomposition, show how specific elements of the references control the actual tasks.  Controls that originate from mechanisms are also modeled.  As the model is built in greater detail to the lower levels, the controls can be inputs/outputs of activities and, as such, become inputs for simulation.As the models are decomposed and functional detail is added, a hierarchical tree of activities (known as a node tree) and ICOMs are generated.  The ICOMs form the basis for the information model as related to the process model.  The information model, coupled with the process model glossary and data relationship definitions, are used to generate the schemas and information definitions required for a network data repository.  An output from an activity can be used as an input, control, or mechanism for any other activity except itself.  It can also be used as an input to activities that provide input to itself in a feedback loop.  For example, the output, Jet_Blast_Deflector_Lowered is feedback to Prepare_for_Catapult_Hookup. This means an aircraft cannot hook up to a catapult until the Jet Blast Deflector (JBD) is lowered.  Feedback is an important consideration and can contribute significantly to cost and performance.  The IDEF model captures these loops and, because of its hierarchical composition, all loops and imbedded loops can be effectively analyzed.The Meta Software tool set was selected for several reasons, including fidelity to the IDEF methodology, ease of use, and wide application in DoD and industry. The two primary Meta Software tools that are being utilized are the WorkFlow Modeler, which builds the IDEF models, and the WorkFlow Analyzer, which simulates the IDEF model. WorkFlow Modeler has several characteristics that allow for large-scale modeling of processes by a team of individuals.   These characteristics include the fact that there is no built-in constraint on the size of a model, and a model may be divided into pieces to be worked on by different teams and later merged through a compatible interface.  The tool includes the capability for validating model integrity, ensuring that all entities are properly connected, that all ICOMs are labeled, and that there are no inconsistencies between various portions of the model.  The tool also contains a glossary feature which provides an excellent means for documenting model structure, requirements, assumptions, and constraints in a textual format as well as for tracking data and information required to execute model logic and to perform simulations. The data template and fields can be accessed from an activity box or ICOM arrows, and are tied to individual activities or ICOMs automatically.  This feature allows the user to quickly view all of the user-defined data while traversing the model.  As the data fields are populated, the entries become linked to the model via activities and mechanisms and, to a lesser degree, via inputs and outputs. In addition to the model produced, the process modeler outputs include databases, reports, and interfaces used for subsequent analysis, processing, and application.  After the modeling is complete, the linkage proceeds to the process model analyzer tool, which utilizes various aircraft arrival and activity duration files to simulate the desired operational scenarios.  Simulation results include reports associated with human and equipment utilization, system performance, and sub-process completion times.   Results analysis can then be fed back to the original process model to influence updates, modifications, and improvements, or it can proceed to the product model via simulation links to generate animations and visualizations.  Finally, with three-dimensional product modeling, analysis of spatial relationships, compatibilities and their impact on operations as defined in the process model may be performed.  As a result, information can be fed back to the process model in order to further enhance and optimize it.  In this way, the system design can be developed and optimized without actually building and testing a costly hardware prototype.The ProModel IDEF0/IDEF1X modeling environment allows very efficient and rapid prototype development; however it has some drawbacks:  the models are discrete event models whose only external interface is via a subroutine to external code that has been compiled into a Dynamically Linked Library (DLL).  This allows the passing of an arbitrary number of arguments and the receiving of values generated by external federates.   To facilitate this data transfer in an HLA environment, a ProModel Interface (PMI) [7], has been developed by the BMH corporation to provide a run-time interface to the RTI.  The PMI permits the ProModel discrete-event simulations to participate in HLA federations, and supports a subset of the DMSO HLA capability:1.  Joining and leaving an HLA federation;2.  Object publication and subscription;3.  Object reflection;4.  Interaction publication and subscription;5.  Time management (as a time constrained and/or time regulating federate);6.  Recognition of federation synchronization points.2.2  I2M DevelopmentNAVAIR Lakehurst first developed process models related to weapons management to show how weapons management operations are currently handled, and how they might be improved if an I2M system were implemented aboard CVNs. The process models were then used to develop the I2M models (the Inputs and Outputs of the IDEF0 Process Model forming the basis of the IDEF1X Information Model).The system to be modeled includes the following elements:Operational processes and functionsInformation and communication processesHuman operators and workstationsHardware and equipment systemsData and information requirementsThe approach involves process and information modeling  of carrier operations, and related product modeling.  The process models provide graphical representations of the structure of a system, and can represent processes and operational scenarios from the highest mission level through the multilevel operational tasks to the unit-level execution activities. These models represent system behaviors, and establish the information requirements for the information interfaces between processes.  The information models represent the interfaces and interactions between systems and depict all of the data and information required to simulate the processes.  The product models support analysis of how the processes will execute with real-world physical designs and constraints.In the first step, the IDEF0 tool is used to develop a process model of the “as-is” IM system based on the objectives and originating requirements as specified in the operational requirements.  The IM process model includes accurate representations of elements and functions, and is composed in a hierarchical process structure. The model is decomposed to the level required for simulation and meaningful analysis. The IM operation is then simulated to establish and validate a system baseline against which subsequent studies are compared. The second step is to develop a set of information models and interfaces to support the data flow between the various portions of the system model development.  The information interface is based on the process model inputs, controls, outputs, and mechanisms, user-defined data fields, glossary entries, and information requirements.The finished tool set is then used to synthesize the (I2M) model which will be optimized by performing the following tasks:Simulate the “to-be” modelCompare the results to the baselineIteratively modify the “to-be” until maximum benefits are achieved or required results are obtainedIDEF0 representations were developed of the processes as they exist today and how they would exist if a real I2M system was implemented to maintain databases on ship aircraft and munitions status.  This involves the modeling and simulation of activities and processes, such as storage and access to munitions, and the movement and loading of munitions onto aircraft to satisfy mission needs, and the flight deck operations that support the launching of aircraft.  Further, the processes involved in obtaining a TCS request, and determining whether the CVN can handle the request, as well as the time to launch aircraft, were modeled.3.0  Support for WARCONTo support WARCON, interfaces were developed between the NAVAIR IM and I2M models and the NNS FDO and CWHS models, and with JSAF, by which the NAVAIR models could receive real-time “ground truth” information related to weapons handling and flight deck operations being simulated by NNS, and TTL queries from JSAF. The November 2000 I/ITSEC conference was then used to demonstrate a proof of concept that illustrates the ability to connect engineering models to concept development simulations.The simulation environment for the demonstration was supported by both Windows and Linux-based computers using RTI-NGv3.  In this environment, the NNS CWHS and FDO models, and the NAVAIR IM/I2M models ran on Windows platforms, while the RTI and JSAF ran on a Red Hat Linux 6.2. platform.  As seen in Figure 2, the NNS and NAVAIR models utilized the PMI to access the RTI; while JSAF used the RTI  directly. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  The approach, for the demonstration, was to limit the interfaces between the NAVAIR and the NNS models to a small subset of aircraft and munitions, of the total complement of the carrier vessel, that could allow the demonstration of the TTL response.  These included two aircraft (F14A and F18C) and two types of munitions (MK-82 and MK-83), the ground-truth status of which were provided by the NNS models. The initial condition was that the NAVAIR IM/I2M model was waiting for TTL query from JSAF while receiving inventories/status of weapons and aircraft from the NNS models. The aircraft data provided included tail number, current location, munition load status, and fuel status.  The munition data included quantity, build status, and location. The IM/I2M upon receiving a TCT query, simulated, in faster than real-time, the process of loading appropriate munitions and fuel onto appropriate aircraft for the mission, and provided a TTL estimate to JSAF based on the weapons and aircraft status at the time of the request.Time synchronization for the ProModel federates was provided by a Time Synchronization Oscillator (TSO) [8].   Through the PMI, a time advance request is made to the RTI to advance time to the value of the updated CURRENT_TIME, and the ProModel simulation is halted until the time advance request is granted.  The discrete event simulation is thus forced into time synchronization with the other HLA federates.The basic goal, at I/ITSEC was to demonstrate the ability to receive a TCS/TCT Query from the JFACC and to respond with an I2M generated TTL. The simulation focus was on ensuring that the disparate models could be linked via an RTI, as opposed to trying to providing a precise analysis of the I2M in weapons management.  As such, the demonstration was based on high-level models, which will be further decomposed for Navy Fleet Battle Experiments (FBE).  However, while the initial version of the I2M is at a relatively high level for an engineering model, the use of the IDEF methodology allows for evolving the models to greater levels of detail as our program progresses. While the mechanisms for linking the models, and the use of the virtual environment (workstations, etc.) will remain the same, NAVAIR will continue to enhance the linkage to JSAF, particularly in terms of the amount of data that can be passed between the models. The expanded linkage will allow simulated TCS information to be available to the virtual weapons-related workcenters. Further, when bombs are loaded onto aircraft, the I2M will send information back to the JSB that the aircraft are ready to carry out their missions.  NAVAIR will have a complete demonstration, with precise models, in April 2001 as part of the next FBE (FBE-Julia) and is developing a capability to support the extension of FBEs to carrier design.4.0  SummaryThis paper described the current development at NAVAIR, Lakehurst, New Jersey, of CVN weapons handling, process models, and IM models in a mission space involving TCS scenarios. The models are IDEF0/IDEF1X, discrete event models that were developed in a COTS modeling environment that allows efficient and rapid prototype development, however whose only external interface is via a subroutine to a DLL.  This complication was overcome by the development of the PMI by the BMH corporation.The weapons handling operations related to a TCS scenario are being focused on for the WARCON program for several purposes including the improvement of weapons handling, and analysis of the dependency on information across multiple workcenters and the critical role of weapons in achieving mission goals. This effort involves integration among several different organizations  including NNS, NAVAIR, BMH, and Lockheed Martin.  While the focus for this particular effort is based on the objectives of the WARCON Program the same modeling and simulation approach is also being used at NAVAIR Lakehurst for analysis of various aspects of CVN operations.  The approach is predicated on a “total ship” model which will be used to enhance other NAVAIR  M&S activities.5.0  ConclusionsThe NAVAIR-JSAF linkage in the November 2000 I/ITSEC involved a ProModel discrete event simulation running on a Windows platform interfaced to the RTI via a specially designed interface, and linked to an aggregate model on a Linux platform. To facilitate interoperability between the ProModel federate and other federates in the HLA environment, the IM/I2M (ProModel) simulation includes an internal time synchronization model, and the run-time interface to the RTI supports time-dependent data transfer between the ProModel federate and other  federates without latency issues. While, the efforts on the part of the PMI developers and the NAVAIR modelers effected the required linkage, the success of this linkage demonstrated the strength of HLA/RTI as an enabler in distributed simulations.6.0  References[1]   Joskowski, A., Nimas, J., and Lacetera, J.,	The Naval Air Systems Command (NAVAIR) Aircraft Carrier FOM:  A Federation Object Model for Carrier Vessel Aircraft Launch and Recovery and Information Management Systems, Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Paper 01S-SIW-072[2]  Harvey, E.,  Kollmorgen, G.,  Riley, B., Schmorrow, D., Warfighting Concepts to Future Weapon Systems Design (WARCON),  Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Paper 00F-SIW-108[3] DMSO website	 HYPERLINK http://www.dmso.mil http://www.dmso.mil[4]  Meta Software WorkFlow ModelerTM and WorkFlow AnalyzerTM, PROMODEL Corporation,  HYPERLINK http://www.promodel.com www.promodel.com[5] FIPS PUB 183, Integration Definition for Function Modeling (IDEFO), December 1993.[6]  FIPS PUB 184, Integration Definition For Information Modeling (IDEFIX), Dec. 1993.[7] ProModel HLA Interface, Programmer's Reference Manual, BMH Associates, Inc. HYPERLINK http://www.bmh.com www.bmh.com[8]  Roberts, E. B.,  Newton, R. R.,WARCON JSB Test Bed: A Case Study For Interoperability Of Disparate Simulation Architectures, Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Paper 00F SIW-075Author Biographies (in alphabetical order)Joe Lacetera has been involved in modeling and simulation for over 40 years.  He is a member of the SISO EXCOM, was the SISO C4ISR Track Manager in 1999 and 2000, and has been involved in distributed simulations, including SIMNET, DIS, and the MRCI program, since 1989.   He has a B. S. in Mathematics and an M. A. in Physics from The Johns Hopkins University and worked 32 years for the U. S. Army, developing mathematics and physics models.  During 1992-1998, he worked for The MITRE Corporation in support of distributed simulations where he was involved in development of an HLA Communications Effects Federate.  He has been employed by Monmouth Science and Technology, Incorporated since 1998 supporting Army, Navy, and joint programs.Mike Malesich has 15 years experience in Naval aviation applications, particularly in the fields of Automated Testing, Modeling and Simulation, and Information Management Systems.  His accomplishments include development, enhancement, and testing of software systems involving test equipment capability, production management, maintenance operations, and instrument control.  He has also participated in the IEEE SCC20 committee in its definition of standards to support the automated test community.  Mike is currently the Competency Manager of the Modeling and Simulation Branch of the Naval Air Systems TEAM in Lakehurst, NJ, and the Chair of the DOD Automatic Test System R&D Integrated Program Team (ARI).   Mike has a BS in Computer Science from Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pa. and a MS in Software Engineering from Monmouth University, West Long Branch, NJ.Joseph J. Stanco has over 30 years professional-level experience in research, design, and management of DoD/Industry standards, applications, and products associated with system design and advanced test and evaluation.  His major emphasis has been in setting the standards in testing concepts for both DoD and industry in the software and systems engineering areas. In performance of these efforts, he has developed and utilized advance architicual, modeling and simulation concepts to achieve these goals.   His current responsibilities and accomplishments at Support Systems Associates, Inc. include developing plans, studies, standards, models and methods, and systems that will transition today’s products into the next phase of advanced integrated product development through DoD/Industry initiatives.  Joe is a member of the standards association and active on many IEEE committees.  He is also an active member of the American Society of Naval Engineers (ASNE).  Joe has a BEE from the Polytechnic University of New York and completed graduate studies in advanced RF and digital systems and operational research analysis.