The Value of Virtual Excursions in Battle Lab Experiments: Lessons Learned from the Unmanned Air Vehicle CEPSamuel T. SweattMax LorenzoJae ChaCECOM Night Vision and Electronic Sensors Directorate10221 Burbeck RoadFort Belvoir, VA 22060703-704-1851703-704-3185, 703-704-3477 HYPERLINK mailto:sam.sweatt@nvl.army.mil sam.sweatt@nvl.army.mil HYPERLINK mailto:sam.sweatt@nvl.army.mil max.lorenzo@nvl.army.mil,  HYPERLINK mailto:jae.cha@nvl.army.mil jae.cha@nvl.army.milDan DeterScience Applications International CorporationNight Vision Liaison OfficerUnited States Army Armor CenterFort Knox, KY502-624-5957 HYPERLINK mailto:deterd@ftknox5-emh3.army.mil dan.deter@knox.army.milBill RiggsNick RheeScience Applications International Corporation4001 N. Fairfax Drive, Arlington VA 22203703-704-1715, 703-704-2748 HYPERLINK mailto:briggs@nvl.army.mil william.riggs@nvl.army.mil,  HYPERLINK mailto:nick.rhee@nvl.army.mil nick.rhee@nvl.army.milMajor Michael J. TiceUnmanned Systems Team ChiefDirectorate of Force DevelopmentUnited States Army Armor CenterFort Knox, KY502-624-8743 HYPERLINK mailto:michael.tice@knox.army.mil michael.tice@knox.army.milKeywords:Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Simulation, Requirements Definition, Paint the Night, Uncooled IR Sensors, Battle Labs ABSTRACT: The CECOM NVESD participated in a US Army Armor Center (Directorate of Force Development (DFD) and Mounted Maneuver Battle Lab (MMBL)) sponsored Concept Experimentation Program (CEP) “excursion” using the Paint the Night (PTN) sensor simulation in conjunction with a ModSAF model of a Mini-UAV (Unmanned Aerial Vehicle) in October 2000. This effort included the first PTN representation of uncooled infrared (IR) sensors, such as would be mounted on a small tactical UAV airframe. The virtual excursion allowed combat developers to examine such design parameters as airspeed, operational altitude, and sensor field of view in a credible reconnaissance and operational context, based on 8-12 micron broadband signatures of detailed terrain and target models. The experiment scenario was correlated with constructive analyses conducted in BEWSS IDEEAS, and a comparison of virtual versus constructive simulation results was done to assist DFD staff in refining the Operational Requirements Document for Small UAV systems.Introduction – Refining Design Requirements in the Development of a SystemThe CECOM Night Vision and Electronic Sensors Directorate (NVESD) supported the US Army Armor Center, Directorate of Force Development (DFD) and the Mounted Maneuver Battle Lab’s (MMBL) efforts in refining design parameters for the Operational Requirements Document (ORD) for a lightweight Small Unit Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (SUAV) system. The SUAV will be used by ground scouts for remote controlled reconnaissance over areas beyond direct view range. The SUAV is to be fitted with a small, single Field of View (FOV), fixed mount, uncooled infrared (IR) sensor. In developing the ORD, DFD must specify key design parameters of the SUAV/IR sensor system that will provide maximum mission effectiveness. The three primary parameters addressed in this analysis were:Velocity of the SUAV (in miles/hour)Altitude of the SUAV (in feet from ground level)Field-of-view (FOV) of the IR sensorThese three parameters in conjunction with other key performance requirements will be used to describe system capabilities that optimize the scout’s ability to cover extended battle spaces more rapidly than is currently possible.Prior to NVESD’s support effort, “constructive simulations” were used to help refine these parameters. The constructive simulations were run on desktop computers using the Battlefield Environment Weapon Simulation System (BEWSS). BEWSS is designed as an interactive tool for performing “what if” analyses in assessing weapon and sensor system effectiveness in a tactical battlefield environment. Accurate models for the targets, SUAV, and human perception were designed into the constructive simulations. Various scenarios were then used to iterate the UAV parameters of interest. The three parameters (velocity, altitude, and sensor FOV) were examined for two lightweight, uncooled IR sensors.In the constructive simulation analysis, the sensor that yielded better performance in the constructive model was chosen for use in the virtual simulation.Although the experiment was designed for constructive simulation, the DFD action officer wanted to also run experiments using soldier-in-the-loop trials in a “virtual excursion”. The results of the constructive and virtual trials together would provide valuable insights into refining the design parameters for the SUAV system and how it might operate in a real operational environment. The virtual experiment was attractive because it would allow the soldiers to help refine what capabilities or tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs) could improve the mission effectiveness of the SUAV or mitigate weaknesses. It would also provide the combat developers an experience base that would enable them to interact more knowledgeably with materiel developers during the early phases of the program.Additionally, the virtual trials would address limitations inherent in the constructive simulator. Constructive simulations always perform consistently in each scenario based on the Minimum Resolvable Temperature (MRT) and Minimum Resolvable Contrast (MRC) curves of the sensor. The MRT and MRC curves are used to determine the smallest temperature or contrast difference that a given sensor is able to distinguish. The fatigue and randomness of an actual soldier-in-the-loop are not accurately represented in these models. Thus, the virtual simulation environment would add more real-world insights into how effectively soldiers could use the SUAV system.To support the virtual excursion experimentation, NVESD employed their thermal scene generation simulation called “Paint the Night” (PTN) [1,2].  PTN has been used successfully in virtual simulations of IR sensors for the US Army community. PTN is a high resolution, real-time model with simulated terrain, tree, and vehicle entities that creates a realistic, state-of-the-art thermal imagery environment. It provides the capability to incorporate real-time sensor effects, atmospheric effects, and other special effects while generating a high-resolution synthetic thermal scene for ground-to-ground and air-to-ground applications.The version of Paint the Night used in the virtual SUAV excursions is fully High Level Architecture (HLA) compliant [2,3] based on a modular design. By using the Defense Research and Engineering Network (DREN), a high bandwidth/low latency network, imagery can be exported and controlled by users from a remote site. This allows for the PTN thermal simulation to be run from one location while controlled at another without the need for heavy, costly computer equipment at the remote site. This remote setup was proven during the MBBL’s Battle Command Reengineering Experiment (BCR) IV in April 2000 [4] and was the basis for the SUAV virtual experimentation design.Test Structure and DesignOne of the important features of PTN is the ability to simulate a sensor of interest and allow the operator to realistically control the sensor.To accomplish the sensor emulation, NVESD used the PTN model based on the IR wavelength of 8-12 microns and degraded the imagery consistent with the engineering model for the IR camera. This degradation is generated as an overlay to the original imagery and is known as a “sensor effect”. Additional sensor effects include noise, sampling, automatic gain control (AGC), and specific display symbology of a given system.For the UAV, only the effects of sensor blur, noise, and AGC were modeled. The sensor simulated was a mini-bolometer with a 50mm lens. Based on the nominal values for the relevant sensor parameters, a blur kernel and a set of noise frames were constructed using procedures outlined in references [5] and [6]. The blur and noise were then applied in real time using a Datacube MAX VGA image processing workstation. In addition, the camera manufacturer’s proprietary AGC algorithm was implemented on the Datacube. The AGC adjusted the image contrast in a non-linear manner in order to provide maximum detail to the viewer. While the actual detector array has a resolution of 320x240, the display resolution used in the experiment was a 640x480-pixel NTSC signal.The simulation was run on Onyx 2 Silicon Graphics computers at Fort Belvoir, VA with the imagery routed to Fort Knox, KY through a fiber optic link to the DREN. The Ft. Knox site was connected to the DREN with an Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) OC-3 link providing 155 mbits/sec of bandwidth and was remotely controlled with a high-speed video transfer and HLA simulator control federate [3]. Because the camera would be mounted on a UAV in a fixed, 15-degree downward look angle, no sensor control was needed. However, the ability to change other test parameters necessary for the simulation were provided to the test controllers at Ft. Knox.The test design started with the ModSAF program that would allow the targets and UAV starting points to be determined on the map. The map area used in the constructive simulator was a portion of Tuzla that was not yet available in PTN’s terrain model. The decision was made to use an existing area of Hunter-Liggett that had some of the same geographical features. The threat locations and movements were based on the constructive simulation scenarios.Two versions of ModSAF were loaded on separate computers. One ModSAF screen allowed the placement of the targets and provided updates to their current locations as well as displaying the UAV’s proximity to the targets. This screen was hidden from the test subjects’ view to ensure they detected the targets using only the scenario’s sensor configuration. Figure 1 shows a sample ModSAF scenario map. The map features the terrain contour lines along with road features. The red rectangles around the center of the image show the target entity locations. The blue “T” entity in the lower left of the image is the SUAV starting point. The heavy black spiral-shaped line is the test subjects’ determined flight path of the SUAV. The second ModSAF screen, which was monitored by the test subjects, showed only the UAV’s current location on the terrain and allowed them to plot a course over the mission area and track its progress.The original test matrix was designed with scenario test blocks that kept all parameters constant except for one that would be varied to give the operators a feel for how different design changes affected the mission. For the first block, the UAV velocity and sensor FOV were kept constant, while the flight altitude was varied for different consecutive scenarios. The second block was designed to concentrate on velocity variances and the third block on FOV variances. Scenarios were run in a defensive mission context (with moving enemy targets) and in an offensive movement to engage (MTE) mission context (with stationary enemy targets).At the start of each scenario, the test subjects were given a tactical situational awareness report that notified them of general areas where named areas of interest (NAIs) and avenues of approach were located. They then were allowed to plot a flight path following typical UAV mission guidelines to adequately cover the area of interest. The scenario was initiated with the activation of the UAV entity on the ModSAF map. The PTN sensor viewpoint was set in ModSAF as mounted to the undercarriage of the UAV entity at a 15-degree downward look angle. The test subjects were able to monitor the sensor imagery as the SUAV flew over the terrain. They were able to estimate the map grid location of any detected target from the ModSAF screen. The scenario ended when the flight path was completed.The object of the test was to detect targets, try to recognize the type of vehicle (tank, truck, artillery, etc.), and identify it, if possible. The scout recorded enemy targets detected along the flight path of the SUAV entity. The test was scored for accuracy on the number of targets detected as well as the test subjects’ reactions to the parameter combinations. The test subjects also subjectively judged which design parameters and combinations yielded the most beneficial results.  Modifications and Test AdministrationThe target set was composed of multiple light to heavy tracked and wheeled vehicles and mobile artillery models available in PTN. These were placed on the ModSAF terrain. The test subjects were given the situation update report and plotted the path for the SUAV entity. Once the UAV had been launched, any targets that were to be moving (with pre-scenario determined paths) were started. After each scenario, the target array could be modified; targets could be added, deleted, or moved to new locations.The experiment set up permitted rapid changes in the test design, even while testing was in progress. In addition to the altitude design parameters planned, the SUAV trials were also run at additional altitudes.  Velocity was varied to explore a full range of possible speeds. The test design was flexible enough to allow for these modifications as the test coordinator requested them.  UAV routes were changed as required by the test subject before each mission. It was also determined early in the experiment that the UAV entity modeled in ModSAF when “flown” at speeds lower than 25 miles per hour would stall and crash in flight. Lessons such as this were learned from each scenario and changes were accommodated for in subsequent trials.Twenty-seven runs total were completed over two days in mid-October 2000. Each run took about 10-15 minutes. The first 14 scenarios were with stationary targets; the remainder were with moving targets.LimitationsThere were certain limitations seen in the experiment that are worth noting. One was the fact that the same terrain was not used in both the constructive and virtual scenarios, permitting an exact comparison of both simulation results. The threat array composition was also slightly different in the virtual scenario, as it was based on models already existing in PTN. Efforts were made to match targets for the virtual phase to those in the constructive phase within the limits of the target library. The UAV flight paths were also not of equal duration. The constructive simulation ran scenarios at a hyper speed, virtual scenarios eliminated the “approach” portion of the flight paths (starting the UAV near the point of initial detection and its loiter pattern) to shorten the time for each trial.Up to this point in the development of PTN, ground sensors have been the focus of the modeling experiments. Therefore the UAV model did not support the accurate flight dynamics necessary for a real mission such as wind turbulence and jitter effects normally seen in an aerial vehicle mounted sensor. However, adjustments to maintain a realistic above ground altitude (one of the design parameters) and flight path modifications (such as banking and direction corrections) were accurately handled by ModSAF and the PTN simulation during the experiment.Because ModSAF strictly controlled the UAV entity, there was no dynamic control of the UAV by the test subjects as may be available in a fielded system. The flight path had to be plotted in advance of the start of the scenario and it was not possible to leave the path to check out areas of sudden interest, or to get a better look at targets that crossed the FOV during the scenario. Because of the limited time available to NVESD to prepare for MMBL’s virtual excursion experiment, UAV control during flight could not be included in the simulation.The sensor as simulated by PTN may have been slightly better than what will be available in the field. A comment was made that the sensor effects needed to be degraded more (though these were based on the actual sensor model). It is important to note, however, that atmospheric effects (clouds, fog, and haze) were not used in this experiment. Also, it was discussed that, during a real mission, the ground operator would experience periodic signal loss with the UAV sensor imagery. NVESD is currently planning to integrate Paint the Night with both environmental and communications effects models, passing transmission, path radiance, quality of communication service, and signal loss information as HLA objects over the HLA RTI. The CECOM Communications Effects Server (CES) is now being upgraded to accommodate HLA, and NVESD is moving to integrate the SEAMLESS  model (Simulation and Evaluation of Adaptive Mobile Large Scale Networks) with CES to provide a more robust representation of multi-path communications, including transfer of video and sensor data over tactical communications networks. Due to the quick response time to get the experiment up and running, these features could not be included at the time.In the experiment, only a small but representative portion of the possible scenarios was run. All the parameter combinations were run at the same time of day in the simulation (early morning). Had time constraints not been a factor, the scenarios could have been run over a 24-hour diurnal cycle to demonstrate how changing time of day affects the appearance of targets through the sensor. PTN has this capability but it was not utilized because of the limited time.Test ResultsThe test results from the virtual experiment were to be used to help determine the design parameters needed for the ORD for the SUAV system. The virtual results were compared to the constructive simulation results and found to be a good comparison though other insights were noted in the differences.The virtual experiment test results revealed, through soldier-in-the-loop subjective determination, the best airspeed for the system in detecting targets. Airspeeds at the upper end of the range would allow for head wind conditions and still maintain reasonable mission times. Lower airspeeds would account for tail winds or a desire to have more time to examine an area while maintaining good flight control. It would be ideal to have the UAV vary between these speeds.For flight altitude from ground level scenarios: at lower altitudes, the sensor field of regard was too small and did not provide good coverage of the target area. At some point, the sensor was found to be too high even when coupled with a small FOV and did not do well in acquiring targets. The scouts settled on an altitude between the two extremes that provided a good balance in coverage area.Similarly, the FOV that was settled on was judged better at providing good coverage and enough detail to recognize or identify targets.An analysis of the test subjects’ probability of detecting targets was never fully completed as there was no ability in the data collection process to determine if a target was reported more than once. The scout would acquire some of the same targets on the outbound and inbound legs of the loiter pattern. This probably accurately reflects the situation a scout would encounter with the SUAV in actual conditions.RecommendationsThe PTN simulation has proven to be a beneficial tool in proving out potential designs for future systems of sensors. This capability can be expanded to simulate upcoming sensor functionality provided changes and modifications are made on the existing technology to evolve the simulation.Sensor effects for specific sensors need to be fully modeled in order to achieve a realistic representation. This is an ongoing effort by NVESD whose need is underscored by this virtual simulation of the SUAV.Realistic vehicle dynamics need to be modeled. This includes the flight dynamics required to bring a life-like realism to the mounted UAV sensor; for instance, the pitch, roll, and yaw effects, the rotational velocity and acceleration effects, and sensor jitter as experienced on a small flying platform.A good library of representative terrain databases needs to be developed and shared by all simulation environments.  It is not possible to continue to develop databases for each new experiment.  Having common bases permits correlations between results in different experimental environments such as was intended here.Finally, the datalink needs to be modeled. To accurately represent the display of imagery from a sensor mounted on a remote SUAV, the path of conversion of the digital image collected by the sensor into an RF broadcast from the UAV, then sent to ground control as an analog signal, and back to a digital image on the display needs to be modeled. Further development in this area could help the simulation achieve greater realism and assist the war fighting community in making more accurate judgments on future systems.ConclusionsThe purpose of the experiment was to allow soldiers who might use these systems in the field and the people responsible for refining the design parameters for the SUAV ORD to experience, through a virtual simulation, the impacts of modifications in design parameters.In addition to the parameter determination, the test operators discovered that the simulated environment could be effectively used to explore such issues as how to orient the flight path or loiter pattern when looking for targets; should roads be covered by flying parallel to the road axis or perpendicular, etc.? There is a great deal of work to be done in developing guidance for scouts on how to employ SUAVs to improve their ability to acquire and accurately report enemy activity.Some of the soldiers involved with the experiment felt that they had gained significant insights into how the SUAV could and would be used and what values of the initial parameters would be justifiable in the performance requirement section of the ORD. They also felt that the ability to come back on future endeavors as the ORD is rewritten and explore “what if” scenarios would be of considerable value. The bottom line is they felt that the addition of the virtual trials would contribute significantly to their ability to write a better ORD for the SUAV. References[1]	M. Lorenzo, et. al.: “Advancements in ‘Paint the Night’ Real-Time Synthetic IR Scene Simulation”, 2nd NATO-IRIS Joint Symposium, London, England, June 1996.[2]	D. Florek, et. al.: “Using HLA/RTI in an Engineering-Level Federation to Support Reconfigurable Simulation”, Submission to Fall 1999 SIW.[3]	A. Stoudenmire, et. al.: “The Remotely Locating of Simulator Display and Controls through High Speed Video Transfer”,  Submission to Fall 1999 SIW.[4]	M. Lorenzo, et. al.: “Integration of Engineering Level Sensor Federation into a Brigade Level C4ISR Experiment Using RTI V1.7”,  Submission to Fall 2000 SIW.[5]	E. Jacobs and T. Edwards: “Sampling Criteria for Sensor Simulation”, Optical Engineering, May 1999.[6]	E. Jacobs, R. Driggers, et. al.: “Virtual MRTD Experiments”,  Proceedings of SPIE, April 1999.Author BiographiesSAMUEL T. SWEATT is currently the Project Lead for the design of the Multi-Function Staring Sensor Suite (MFS3) Simulation for the Night Vision and Electronic Sensors Directorate. He holds a BS in Electrical Engineering from the University of Central Florida and an MS in Industrial Engineering from Texas A&M University.JAE CHA is an electrical engineer at the CECOM Night Vision and Electronic Sensors Directorate Modeling. He is currently pursuing a doctoral degree at the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Virginia.DAN DETER is currently a senior engineer for SAIC and serves as the liaison officer at Fort Knox for NVESD.  In that capacity he helps NVESD to support and work with one of their most significant customers, the United States Army Armor Center.  He is a retired  Armor Colonel  and holds a MS in Systems Management from Kansas State University.MAX LORENZO is the Chief of the CECOM Night Vision and Electronic Sensors Directorate for Virtual Prototyping Systems. He has a B.S. in Geology from The College of William and Mary.NICK RHEE is currently a Senior Engineer employed by SAIC working in the field of real-time image processing programming of thermal sensor simulations. He has a M.S in Physics from University of Maryland. BILL RIGGS is the SAIC Team Lead for the development team supporting the NVESD Paint the Night Program. Mr. Riggs has eleven years experience in developing computer generated forces and virtual terrain databases. He has a M.S.F.S. degree from the Walsh School of Foreign Service, Georgetown University.MAJOR MICHAEL TICE is currently the Team Chief for Unmanned Systems at Fort Knox, KY.  Major Tice serves as the user representative and requirements developer for both air and ground unmanned systems for the Armored Force.  Major Tice is the project leader for the SUAV at Fort Knox, and has extensive military experience in mounted force reconnaissance at the platoon and company level.  He holds an AAS in Manufacturing Technology, a BS in Industrial Technology from the University of Rio Grande, Ohio, and is currently pursuing an MBA from Embry Riddle Aeronautical University.Figure 1: The ModSAF Map EMBED Word.Picture.8  