Experiences from Building a Naval Combat System Simulation Environment with HLASally A WhiteUK Defence and Evaluation Research AgencyLand Based Test SitePortsmouthHampshire UK+44 (0) 23 92 312748 HYPERLINK mailto:sawhite@dera.gov.uk sawhite@dera.gov.ukKeywords: C4I systems, combat system, integration, interoperability, RTI 1.3NG, federation management, scenario distribution, time synchronisationABSTRACT:  The Combat System Integration (CSI) research programme is an UK Ministry of Defence funded programme, involving UK Industry, tasked with investigating integration and interoperability issues associated with future maritime combat systems.  The programme includes development of a test bed, which provides a representative future combat system environment, within which potential future C4I applications can be evaluated.The test bed comprises a significant number of legacy simulations, which have been integrated using the US High Level Architecture (HLA) standard.  This test bed has been in development for two years and this paper describes the experience and practical lessons learnt from using the HLA standard and supporting tools and infrastructure.  Development issues include the challenges of federation management, scenario distribution and time synchronisation across heterogeneous DIS, HLA and CORBA networks and incorporation of legacy non real time simulations in a real time federation.  Also covered is an assessment of the effects of upgrading to version 1.3NG of the RTI and the broader issues faced during development and integration of the federation, including use of third party software and phased development with continually evolving objectives.1. Introduction 1.1. OverviewThis paper discusses the experience gained during the production of a simulation/stimulation environment for the CSI TestBed, which is designed to exercise combat system elements for both experimentation and demonstration purposes.  The paper provides:An overview of the overall programme requirements as they impact the CSI TestBed, specifically the development of an HLA federation, which provides the simulation/stimulation environment.A discussion of the infrastructure and management aspects of the HLA federation.Observations to date covering lessons learned from the design, development, test and integration activities, process and programmatic issues, and the use of third party hardware and software.An insight into proposed future work.1.2. Programme OverviewThe Combat System Integration (CSI) programme is a United Kingdom (UK) Ministry of Defence (MoD) research programme.  The programme is led by the Defence and Evaluation Research Agency (DERA) as an integrated research team with UK industry. CSI focuses on the distributed pan-platform Combat System, in line with the Network Centric Warfare and Global Information Grid concepts for supporting the future operations in which the Royal Navy will participate.  The CSI programme is concerned with the de-risking of future (distributed) combat systems through the early integration and testing of combat system elements, their integration with legacy systems, and the integration of COTS elements and technology.  The scope includes surface and subsurface platforms and maritime air.  The driver for this de-risking is the need for effective information management, assurance and exploitation across the above and under water battlespace, and with our Allies.The CSI TestBed comprises a conceptual combat system highway with representative combat system applications, interfaced using the Common Object Request Broker Architecture (CORBA) standard and a simulation environment developed as a High Level Architecture (HLA) federation.  In this context the combat system includes command and control, weapons, sensors, navigation processes, aircraft and HELOs (while under the control of the combat system) and the communications to support the exchange of tactical information (control and data).  The CSI TestBed is expected to support the investigation of interactions within the platform’s combat system but most particularly its operation within a force or joint force environment.  EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure 1 - CSI TestBed ArchitectureFurther information on the CSI programme can be found on the CSI Web page at http://www.csi.dera.gov.uk/.1.3 CSI TestBed Architecture The architecture of the CSI TestBed is shown in Figure 1.  This shows the C4I application environment with some of the applications under test and the supporting HLA federation.  HLA was chosen for the CSI TestBed since it provides more flexibility than DIS, specifically in the modelling of perceived data in addition to ground truth information.  HLA also supports the requirement to incorporate simulations designed to run in real time with those which normally operate with no time constraint i.e. using as much time as is required.  In the future it may also be necessary to transfer control of object attributes dynamically to the most appropriate simulation in the federation. The HLA federation developed for the CSI TestBed provides the infrastructure to incorporate both HLA and DIS federates.  Various support and management tools are also included.  The C4I applications communicate using the Common Object Request Broker Architecture (CORBA) and the HLA federation is linked to the C4I environment by a CORBA to HLA interface function.  The aim of this approach is to minimise change on individual federates caused by the possibility of implementing different network standards instead of CORBA. Point to point connections between individual federates and real applications can be included where necessary, as shown between the UAV C2 application and its simulation environment.Unlike a training exercise, or a specific platform’s combat system development, the programme is challenged with investigating risk issues, as yet unspecified, for a minimum of 4 different platforms whose in service dates are between 6 and 12 years away, which will be in service for up to 30 years.  Therefore determining objectives or scenarios for the federation has proved a challenge, for this is an expanding federation with evolving requirements.  3. Infrastructure & Management3.1 IntroductionThis section describes the CSI TestBed with its underlying infrastructure as of March 2001.  Also described are some of the management aspects of the HLA federation in terms of:Federation synchronisation and scenario distribution.Converter federates associated with DIS to HLA operation i.e.:Co-ordinate conversionTrack data conversion.3.2 InfrastructureFigure 2 shows the latest developed stage of the CSI TestBed with the underlying infrastructure. A relocation of the CSI TestBed and development team necessitated a move from ATM to Ethernet. There were no problems in moving from ATM to Ethernet it merely required changing a configuration file on each of the machines.  The CSI TestBed can therefore now be regarded as being 'network agile'.  There is currently only one Ethernet LAN carrying all HLA and CORBA traffic. Consideration will be given in the future to carrying HLA (and DIS) traffic on the Ethernet LAN and CORBA traffic on ATM. The physical implementation is truly heterogeneous and includes multiple languages (Java (used within the tools), C, C++, Ada95, LISP, FORTRAN) together with C++ wrapped interfaces for Allegro Common Lisp and Fortran, on a variety of platforms including SUN, NT and Compaq Alphas.  The C4I applications currently incorporated in the CSI TestBed are:Automated data fusion and picture compilation for both single platform and force wide usage.Softkill weapon system command and control.Hardkill weapon system command and control.Weapon system co-ordination.Interactive planning.The HLA federation incorporates the following federates:Scenario manager and general-purpose simulator, which is also responsible for scenario distribution described below.Radar simulation, which provides track and plot output from a multi function radar simulation that has been adapted from a non-real time operational analysis model.EW modelling framework which provides ECM, ESM and EW C2 simulations.AAW missile simulation of a hardkill flyout missile.Infra red search and track simulation.DIS-HLA gateway.CORBA to HLA interface which converts HLA output to CORBA IDL and CORBA C2 commands to HLA.Data logger in the form of HLAresults.Federation synchroniser which is described below.Visualisation in the form of a commercial 3D viewer.Co-ordinate converter described below.Track converter described below.In addition there are a number of support tools used during integration and to monitor the operation of the federation. These tools are described below.The CSI TestBed also incorporates links to external testbeds via encryption devices currently operating under the DIS protocols.  These are to:the US Naval Underwater Center (NUWC).a UK Industry site. a DERA aircraft (Merlin) simulation.Each link is operated via a separate and different encryption device according to the link owner.  The scenario manager and general-purpose simulation federate, the heart of our HLA federation, is currently hosted on a Compaq Alpha platform.  However due to the lack of RTI 1.3 NG support for this platform the scenario manager is to be ported to SUN Solaris. EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure 2 CSI TestBed Implementation as of March 20013.3 Federation Synchronisation & Scenario DistributionThe federation synchroniser co-ordinates the federation start up and shutdown procedures.  The synchroniser makes use of HLA synchronisation points to co-ordinate federates at each step as shown in figure 3.  The synchroniser issues a synchronisation point labelled with a text message to a selection of federates.  Each federate responds to the synchronisation point by performing the functions required at this point in the start up, and transmitting a ‘synch point achieved’ message.  Once all the federates have responded, the RTI sends a ‘Federation Synchronised’ message to the selected federates and the synchroniser.  At this point the synchroniser is free to proceed to the next synchronisation point.Third party tools may not respond to synchronisation points, therefore synchronisation points are only announced to selected federates.  The synchronisation points also need to be issued to the Synchroniser as well as the other selected federates in order to received the ‘Federation Synchronised’ message.  To avoid possible user error, the Synchroniser has been designed to automatically include itself in the list of synchroniser federates.Upon receipt of a synchronisation point, each federate will perform the action required by the synchronisation point before acknowledging.  Once all federates have joined the federation and published their capabilities, the scenario manager distributes the scenario, which tells each federate what it is responsible for modelling.  As the scenario is distributed, federates which may be modelling a system on a particular platform (e.g. ship) in the scenario will receive details about that platform. Objects which are required to be modelled in the scenario but cannot be provided by the federates incorporated in the federation, are modelled by the scenario manager simulation suite. This is performed automatically, as the scenario manager listens to the object creations during synchronisation point 4, and after a suitable time period (30 seconds) will step in and create the outstanding entities.  Once the scenario has been distributed and corresponding objects created, synchronisation point 4 is achieved and time advances to a paused state. At step 6 the federation is started (i.e. time runs regulating and constrained) and the applications are started. EMBED Word.Picture.8   Figure 3 Synchronisation steps 3.4 Co-ordinate ConversionThe integration, within the CSI federation, of federates using different co-ordinate systems means that a mechanism needs to be provided to allow federates to interpret the position of objects in a scenario in their own co-ordinate frame of reference as shown in figure 4.  This is particularly necessary with the inclusion of DIS federates accessed via the DIS-HLA Gateway.   EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure 4 Co-ordinate Conversion Federate The converter federate is responsible for ensuring the consistency of co-ordinates within the CSI federation. The job of the converter federate is to provide the illusion to individual federates that the federation is operating using their native co-ordinate system.  For this to be possible the converter federate subscribes to objects containing position related attributes.  It observes which co-ordinate system a federate uses to publish data and then publishes the equivalent translated position in the co-ordinate system designated for the CSI TestBed.In operation, the converter federate needs to publish the matching complementary position and must first acquire ownership of the attributes it requires from the originating ‘owning’ entity using the attribute ownership transfer mechanism.  There is an implicit assumption that there is a single converter federate in the federation.  Therefore no additional checks are necessary to prevent competition for attribute ownership.3.5 Track ConverterSimilar to the co-ordinate converter, the track converter federate converts the track data in DIS Set Data PDUs output from the DIS gateway into the track structure used in the CSI HLA FOM. Set Data PDUs were selected to transmit track (i.e. perceived) data from a DIS compliant helicopter simulation.  The CSI HLA FOM is described in a separate paper entitled ‘Development of a FOM to Support a Combat System Integration Research TestBed’ 01S-SIW-034.Other projects have taken the step of modifying the DIS Gateway to perform any necessary functionality to convert from DIS PDUs to their HLA FOM.  However one of the drivers for the CSI programme is to use commercial systems unchanged, to facilitate upgrade.  Modification of a commercial product to include bespoke software is therefore strictly against the ethos of the programme.3.6 Support ToolsA number of support tools are used to monitor the operation of the federation during test and integration.  The DMSO Federation Management tool (FMT)  - This tool is used in the CSI TestBed to display what each federate is publishing and subscribing to, and each federate model time.  This tool can also be used to remotely control other federates HLA services (for example to remotely change a federate’s subscriptions). The DMSO Federation Verification Tool (FVT) - The FVT provides information on which federate is publishing and subscribing to which data.  Its main use to date has been as a monitoring tool to aid integration or fault finding.  HLA Control Federate - The control federate monitors the hardware performance of individual federates and the overall performance of the RTI network.  Its main use to date has been as a monitoring tool to aid integration or fault finding.  DMSO Test Federate - The test federate was used to test the basic federation infrastructure connectivity and proves a simple interface to all the HLA services.  A observation when using multiple federation tools is that they operate using the MOM in addition to the federation specific FOM, which requires individual federates to output more data.  This can cause problems when operating in real time for federates with a high processing load since these federates may not cope with the extra activity required to support these tools.  One way to reduce this problem is to limit the number of tools implemented in a particular federation.  Therefore from CSI experience to date:The data logger (in the form of HLA Results) is used all the time.The federation verification tool is only used when there are problems with the operation of the federation (i.e. who publishes and subscribes to what).The federation management tool is used when there are problems with time.HLA control is used when it is necessary to monitor the hardware performance of individual federates or the RTI network.4. Observations to Date4.1 FEDEP and Programmatic IssuesThe development of the CSI TestBed HLA federation has been based on the methodology within the FEDEP model where timing and funding constraints permit, and to meet the requirements of the DERA Business Management System.  It should be noted that the programme has chosen to use HLA for the facilities offered, it is not required to achieve HLA compliance.  The FEDEP model was found to be good particularly in the early stages since it forced requirement issues pertinent to the design to be considered up front by all participants.  However, problems have been encountered specifically involving evolving requirements and lack of SOMs, two crucial inputs in the FEDEP.  In addition, the collaborative nature of federation and specifically FOM development, favoured by the FEDEP, has proven too time consuming for a large federation.  FOM issues are detailed in a separate paper entitled ‘Development of a FOM to Support a Combat System Integration Research TestBed’ 01S-SIW-034.The programme found that there is not enough emphasis on the generation and monitoring of a plan. In addition, the programme plan needs to allow for problems encountered with modification of legacy systems and use of third party products. One aspect found to be lacking is the need for documentation at a federation level.  User guides may be available for individual federates operating as stand alone entities but it was quickly found that operating procedures are required for both federates operating within the federation and the federation as a whole.  For a federation such as CSI, which is required to provide demonstrations to visitors on a regular basis, it is not acceptable to require a member from each federate’s development team in order to run the scenario.There is a clear need for implementation meetings to discuss the scenarios, who will do what and how the federation will work, which is not explicitly covered in the FEDEP. Discussion regarding the dynamics of messages and not just their format is also essential. Coupled with this is the need to establish where the allocation of functionality lies between different systems (i.e. who is responsible for what).  Even if this is apportioned at the outset it should still be a topic for a discussion during the development phase prior to integration.There is a need for cross fertilisation of ideas and experiences, both in use of standards such as HLA and in the use of commercial tools.  A central repository for UK real time FOMs would increase interoperability between future systems particularly in the Land, Sea, and Air environments as part of synthetic environment based acquisition process in the UK.  This would also leverage the work on joint and confederated training where there is a drive to use simulators and stimulators already developed to support combat system integration.4.2 Tools issuesAs seen in section 3, the CSI programme has used a large number of commercial tools to support its development. For leading edge work such as the CSI TestBed, it was found that third party products were often supplied as early versions, which often contained undocumented (undeclared) and sometimes unknown features.  Tools must be reliable from the outset, otherwise valuable (and expensive) time is wasted and confidence is lost in the tool, undermining its usefulness to the federation.  It can be cheaper to pay for a supported product than use a free unsupported product since paid, guaranteed access to a tool vendor can be more cost effective than an apparently less expensive ad-hoc arrangement.4.3 Time ManagementVarious options of time regulation were tried with Figure 5 showing the time management mechanism that was eventually adopted for the CSI federation.  The time steps, which were different, were chosen to align with the processing and update cycle of the legacy systems.Initially all federates were set up to run time regulating and constrained, where federate can both participate in determining the logical time of other federates and accept input from other federates in determining its own logical time.  However since the scenario manager is linked to a real time application, when one of the other federates fell behind, the scenario manager had to stop and subsequently re-start the application, which in turn slowed it down.  The result was a slowing of the whole federation to 1/10th real time when all of the federates were capable of broadly maintaining real time.  Initially all federates applied to be regulating and constrained at the same time as well as advancing in time.  Occasionally the scenario manager managed to go forward to 0.25 seconds before the other federates have become time regulating and constrained. As other federates time step and look ahead together was less than the current federation time (0.25 seconds) the RTI refusing to grant permission to progress time to the other federates, since this time had already passed.The mechanism showed in figure 5, which is currently implemented, allows the scenario manager to maintain real time regardless of the state of the other federates.  The hardkill flyout model runs as fast as it likes within its lookahead. The EW simulation occasionally falls behind but is then able to catch up.  The scenario manager ignores time regulation requests to slow time from the EW simulation since it cannot be constrained. The EW simulation is sometimes used as a test harness for the other federates when the scenario manager is not available hence it requires time regulating capability.  However time regulation was hard coded into this EW simulation, whereas with hindsight it would be more useful if this was included as a configurable feature. EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8   Figure 5 - CSI TestBed Time Management4.4 Implementation and Integration IssuesThe HLA federation incorporates several legacy models designed for operational analysis investigations.  The EW framework had already undergone considerable development activity to operate under HLA even though it was not designed to run in real time.  The hardkill missile flyout model was re-written in C++ from Fortran and the HLA interface was developed by the CSI TestBed team.  The most difficult federate to interface to the HLA was a multi-level generic radar performance simulation representing radar in the naval environment, with probabilistic outputs and no requirement to run in real time.  Modification of legacy OA models to run in real time and provide the required deterministic output is a complex activity requiring personnel with knowledge of the legacy model and those with HLA expertise.  In addition, legacy OA models are often not written in a language, which can readily be interfaced to HLA so multiple wrappers are needed.  Extra time should be built in to bring together experts in HLA with the relevant domain experts since it is often not practical, cost effective or desirable to educate either in the skills of the other.  The learning curve for HLA and CORBA should not be under estimated.  The EW model, which has used HLA for several years within their own programme, had developed engineers expert in both HLA and the domain subject of EW.  This undoubtedly resulted in this being the most successful federate in terms of successful integration and keeping to programme.Host hardware platforms and software implementation should be considered from the outset.  HLA RTI platform support is diminishing and the enumeration standard in terms of big and little endian between different commercial platforms needs to be recognised from the outset otherwise integration time is lost.  The scenario manager is written in Allegro common LISP, which necessitated the production of both C and C++ code to enable it to interface to HLA.  De-bugging of software across different language boundaries which is often necessary when interfacing legacy models to the HLA RTI is often difficult if not impossible.The EW simulation produced a test harness from its own code, by reversing message receipt commands to enable the sending of messages.  This test harness was validated against the FOM and used to black box test the EW development before the start of integration.  This test harness was also adapted for use by the other simulations, which was very useful particularly in situations where the scenario manager, on which all of the integration activity was dependent, was unavailable.The development of the CSI TestBed adopted a phased approach, with more federates being added in each new phase.  Considerable benefit was found at the start of phase 1 integration from using the phase 0 scenario.  The team was familiar with the scenario and the actions expected from each federate. It was also found that some modifications made to existing federates for phase 1, caused problems with the phase 0 design.  The result was that once the phase 0 scenario problems had been sorted the phase 1 scenario ran first time.4.5 RTI ObservationsIt was found that when a multithread federate resigned from the federation, it could terminate before the resign was complete.  Therefore, for multi-threaded federates, after they have resigned from a federation they should tick the RTI to allow time to perform house keeping operations e.g. generate MOM data used by the tools.  If a federate does not tick the RTI, the commercial tools do not detect its resignation.  A problem was encountered with RTI 1.3v6, by the co-ordinate converter federate, when transferring attribute ownership and shutting down, since the RTI did not know who owned the attribute concerned. The federate was re-written to introduce logic to ensure that all attribute ownership transfer was complete or discontinued to 'avoid' the problem.  This problem may be resolved when the RTI is upgraded to 1.3NG.Due to known problems associated with the synchronisation of object attribute transfer between federates, there are no plans to use this facility apart from the limited use by the converter federate, unless it becomes essential, until the HLA specification changes to resolve these problems. 4.6 Performance MeasurementThe performance of the CSI federation is key, particularly the ability of the federation to support real time operations.  This includes some hard real time requirements for the transfer of sensor data for systems such as Co-operative Engagement Capability (CEC), and the transfer of large amounts of information from sensors such as Infra-Red and Electro-optic.  The following aspects will be measured in the next phase of the programme:HLA RTI performance;HLA/DIS gateway performance;HLA to CORBA interface performance;CORBA ORB performance and interoperability;Representative performance thread assessment;Model / application performance assessment.The CSI TestBed has incorporated several models that were originally designed for use in Operation Analysis studies with no constraint on operating time i.e. they could run as fast or slow as required.  However another area of concern is the ability of these federates to handle large scenarios with a number of manoeuvring objects.  5 Future WorkThe models and simulations in the CSI TestBed have been or are planned to be used in different parts of the simulation based acquisition process including:Command & control (C2) researchAssessment phase deliberationsDe-risking future applicationsSupport to IntegrationInteroperability investigationsMany if not all of the models and simulations being incorporated in the CSI TestBed have been used for years to support command and control research.  The bringing together of these models in the CSI TestBed permits them to be used to explore wider issues.Figure 6 shows a potential future implementation, with the CSI TestBed configured as a future aircraft carrier combat (or information) system connected to other testbeds.  The connection to the UK Future Offensive Aircraft (FOAS) and Merlin Helo testbeds would allow issues associated with the operation of the aircraft to be investigated early in the procurement lifecycle, during the assessment phase.  There is the further potential requirement to use the aircraft carrier as a host for the Joint Force HeadQuarters when it is taken afloat for re-location.  The linking of the CSI TestBed to an appropriate land test rig (which is already in existence in the UK) would permit early investigation of the interfaces between the different force systems. EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure 6 - CSI TestBed Support to AssessmentCurrent UK platforms have their own shore integration facilities on which systems are tested before they are deployed on ship for final acceptance.  These facilities already incorporate bespoke simulation and simulation suites as well as real equipment.  For future systems, before they have procured their own land based test facilities, our CSI TestBed provides a mechanism for early de-risking of outputs from the research programme or new systems, for example the Co-operative Engagement Capability (CEC) system from the US as shown in Figure 7. Figure 7 shows the two Co-operative Engagement Processors located on simulated T45 destroyer and T23 frigate platforms.  These devices are connected via the Wrap Around Simulation Programme (WASP) which simulates the operation of the CEC Data Distribution System (DDS) communications device.  The radar on each of the platforms is simulated, with the scenario being managed by the scenario manager.  C2 system picture compilation applications are included to provide a comparison facility for demonstration.  An existing DIS link is used to the WASP to pass the two ship positions. EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure 7 - De-Risking of Future SystemsLand based test facilities are heavily over subscribed in terms of users since the main drive is to get a working system to sea.  The CSI TestBed and its constituents can provide a useful stepping stone from low fidelity simulation, through high fidelity simulation/emulation to stimulation of the real equipment when this becomes available.  Finally, much of the research and integration activities to date have been concerned with inter platform combat system issues.  The emphasis in the future is on inter platform operation within both UK, NATO and coalition forces.  Figure 8 shows the CSI TestBed configured as future FSC and FASM platforms with a link to the current platform T23 frigate shore integration facility.  CSI TestBed interoperability will be tested with the link between the CSI TestBed and the Merlin Helo man in the loop simulation at DERA Farnborough.  The CSI scenario manager is used to co-ordinate the scenario across the systems.  In addition, a FOM interoperability study is being undertaken which assesses the compatibility of the CSI FOM with other similar C4I FOMs currently in use or development in the UK.  Progress on this study is reported in a separate paper entitled ‘Development of a FOM to Support a Combat System Integration Research TestBed’ 01S-SIW-034.A distributed configuration of testbeds permits separation and investigation of the all important area of interoperability between future surface, subsurface and air platforms.  The link to the US NUWC at Newport Rhode Island will also permit some aspects of interoperability to be investigated between US and UK Navies. EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure 8 - Interoperability6. SummaryThe following main observations are offered from the UK CSI TestBed experiences with HLA to date.Time management is always going to be a key issue with any HLA federation particularly with legacy federates some of which are designed to operate in real time and others which are designed to run as fast or slow are required.  The CSI TestBed is to be instrumented in future phases to enable the performance at specific points to be monitored to determine whether unexpected timing problems are errors or simply caused by a federate being unable to keep up.  In addition, time synchronisation between the C4I applications and HLA federation will also need to be automated in the future. Performance of individual federates, the federation as a whole and the underlying infrastructure including the CORBA to HLA interface, the DIS-HLA gateway and the RTI itself needs to be measured and monitored as the size of scenario increases.  There is a need for cross fertilisation of ideas and experiences, both in use of standards such as HLA and in the use of commercial tools.  A central repository for UK real time FOMs would increase interoperability between future systems particularly in the Land, Sea, and Air environments as part of the synthetic environment based acquisition (SeBA) and also to support joint and confederated training.The use of support tools is key to any integration activity but the tools must be in place i.e. understood and in reliable working order before integration starts.Modification of legacy OA models is a complex activity requiring personnel with knowledge of the legacy model and those with HLA expertise.  The learning curve for commercial standards such as HLA and CORBA that operate under a methodology, which is probably different from that used by legacy domain experts, is not to be underestimated.The future for the CSI TestBed is in its role to support future ship and submarine procurements, as part of the UK synthetic environment based acquisition process.  A particular area for CSI TestBed development and use is in interoperability demonstrations between both surface, subsurface and air platforms, and coalition forces.Author BiographySALLY WHITE joined DERA 3 years ago from the UK Defence industry, where for many years she worked on the design and implementation of surface ship Command and Control and Combat Systems.  She currently works within the CSI research programme, which is investigating the key risk issues associated with future Combat System procurement, post 2015. She has been responsible for the functional and performance aspects of the work and for the technical development of the HLA simulation environment. She will shortly take on responsibility for the integration, test and evaluation aspect of the programme, which centres on practical investigation and demonstration along with the gathering of metrics, using the CSI TestBed.  In addition she is part of multi-national team building an HLA federation to support the NATO Interoperability and Reuse study (NIREUS)..( Crown copyright 2001. Published with the permission of the Defence Evaluation and Research Agency on behalf of the Controller of HMSO.Threat Evaluation and Weapon Assignment (TEWA), Command Support Aids and Planning, Unmanned Air Vehicle Command & Control (UAV C2), Hardkill and Softkill Command & Control (C2), Co-operative Engagement Capability (CEC).	 PAGE 2					 	 PAGE 7					