CoBRA:  Striking Towards HLA Object Automation for Battleforce SimulationsWendy R. GilkersonStephen M. GossSYNETICS Inc.16539 Commerce Drive, Suite 10King George, Virginia 22485 (540) 663-2137 HYPERLINK "mailto:wgilkers@dv.synetics.com" wgilkers@dv.synetics.com HYPERLINK "mailto:sgoss@dv.synetics.com" sgoss@dv.synetics.comKeywords:Object Automation, Analysis, Data Reduction, Visualization, Tactical Systems, Strategy, Tactics, CoBRAABSTRACT:  A major objective in military simulations is the provision of scenarios for training ground troops, pilots, and sailors in a realistic coordinated battle force environment.  Scripted scenarios of historical military events have provided our military personnel with valuable lessons in the tactics and strategies of our greatest military leaders and the ability to relive these through simulation.  However, the scripted scenarios cannot capture many of the hair-raising, split-second events that have occurred during combat and training exercises that really test the metal of our military personnel.  Systems that provide a means for converting data, extracted during these critical military events, to create HLA object models, attributes, interactions, and parameters that allow for the visualization of events would provide a valuable asset to military simulations.  The Coordinated Battle force Replay and Analysis (CoBRA) Integrated Analysis Environment (IAE) and its associated Plug-in applications currently provides the U.S. Navy with the ability to replay actual tactical events in DIS simulations, along with providing the ability to analyze the data.  This paper explores how the CoBRA IAE concept could provide for the automation of HLA objects, attributes, interactions and parameters, with their subsequent infusion into a FOM/SOM and federation execution, to provide real-life behavior as the background for HLA scenarios used in training.  IntroductionWar seems to be an inevitable occurrence within our world despite efforts during the course of history to change the hearts of mankind.  When war erupts, the United States Military is called to perform the honorable duty of defending our nation and helping our allies in the free world.  The amount and quality of training for which our troops participate translates directly into how well equipped our personnel are for wartime events.  Our military personnel can only be as capable as the level at which they have been trained.  It is important, therefore, for our military personnel to receive the most realistic training possible.  When troops are able to train with real equipment (e.g. weapons, tanks, ships), or operate simulated equipment that accurately model the real thing, a great amount of knowledge is acquired about the equipment operation and its effectiveness.  When personnel are able to relive a military event from history, wisdom is gained and more readily passed on.  It’s this historical replay of real-life tactical events, either to relive a tactical situation or to provide as a background to scripted situations, that this paper wishes to explore.   Benefits of Realism in TrainingThe military spends billions of dollars annually on training troops for battle.  Until the advent of high speed and high efficient computers, which lent to the advancement of simulation technologies, training was performed in live physical environments that were as close to realistic as possible.  Within the U.S. Navy, the training of sailors for Naval Gun Fire Support (NGFS) was performed at various locations around the world where live firings were used for training.  Real-life spotters were placed on the beach to call the missions and the ships involved would respond accordingly by firing live ammunition at real targets.  This training provided the spotters with practice in calling for proper round placement and chart reading and provided excellent training for the entire ship’s company involved in the gunfire missions.  There is “nothing like the sound of the big guns on the main deck” to build a sense of mission and confidence in the crew.  Realism provides the personnel being trained with a new level of confidence by lowering the amount of doubts and raising the amount of confidence.  Unfortunately, this real-life training is also extremely expensive both in dollars (i.e. fuel costs, blade time, ammunition) and in human lives through mistakes.   Modern SimulationsWith 1) the advent of modern, high-speed computer systems, 2) advancements in graphical representations, and, 3) a more thorough understanding of human factors, training can be better accomplished using Advanced Distributed Simulations (ADS).  ADS technologies provide a virtual battlefield environment useful for training personnel and reduce the necessity and cost of live training that requires firing real ammunition at real humans or equipment.  This virtual battlefield environment can greatly reduce the cost of training.  But the challenge lies in developing the best possible realistic scenarios to prepare our military and commercial entities for real life situations.  As described in an earlier paragraph, historical battle events provide a great deal of depth regarding tactical decisions.  If these events could be recreated in a modern simulator, tacticians, analysts and military personnel would be able to replay the events and further study the advantages and disadvantages to events that occurred and decisions that were made.  Additionally, tacticians, analysts and military personnel could play the what-if question game by attempting to change historical events during these after action reviews by either mixing supplemental simulation, or modifying attributes of the existing events.  Currently, the Distributive Interactive Simulation (DIS) community has such a method of replaying real tactical data, thus providing the events as they were recorded by the military.  This DIS capability is provided to the Navy through the Coordinated Battle force Replay and Analysis (CoBRA) Integrated Analysis Environment (IAE) and its current set of Plug-in applications.  This same technology and concept could provide an HLA capability to the Navy as well.  An HLA plug-in to the CoBRA IAE, like that built for DIS, could be generated for use in automating the creation of HLA objects and interactions, defining their respective attributes and parameters, and providing the mechanism to join and execute within a federation based on live real-life tactically recorded data.  Before describing how this might be accomplished, historical, operational, and architecture descriptions of the CoBRA IAE and its current Plug-in applications and capabilities are presented.CoBRA IAEThe Coordinated Battleforce Replay and Analysis (CoBRA) Integrated Analysis Environment (IAE) was developed to provide a coordinated, near real-time capability for data collection, analysis, and replay (i.e., after action review) among single system and/or multiple system, and single player and/or multiple players (i.e., Joint), within various DoD exercises.  This coordinated effort greatly expedited the process for problem identification, isolation, and correction as related to interoperability issues, especially as new, more sophisticated, systems were introduced into the military arsenals.History and DIS CapabilityThe CoBRA IAE concept originally grew out of the Naval Surface Warfare Center, Dahlgren Division’s (NSWCDD) experience and support of its in-service tactical programs, which include the Aegis Weapon System (AWS), the Gun Weapon System (GWS), the Shipboard Gridlock System with Auto-correlation (SGS/AC), and the Cooperative engagement Capability (CEC).   NSWCDD engineers have been involved for many years in numerous Naval and Joint exercises that have relied on detailed and accurate data analysis for verification of mission success.  In order to perform these analyses, system engineers were required to extract data from the systems on multiple platforms (ships, planes, and land based test facilities) that were involved in the exercises and then send the respective data to a land-based analysis facility having experience in a specific type of data for problem resolution.   The collection and analysis of the data occurred on a system-by-system level (i.e., stovepipe analysis) using the specific systems data analysis tools. This process, although successful from an individual systems perspective, has proven to be unsatisfactory when attempting to coordinate information to identify and/or resolve battle force level interoperability problems such as track identification and engagement from several different ships operating within a single operational area.   To help answer the analysts needs when evaluating battle force level interoperability problems, the CoBRA IAE was designed and built.  The CoBRA IAE provides a well thought out and designed home for plug-and-play tools that address the battle force level interoperability problems. To date, CoBRA IAE Plug-in applications exist which provide the analysts with the ability to simultaneously reduce, analyze, and replay (i.e., overlay) Time Space Position Information (TSPI), Global Positioning System (GPS) information, Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) (both send and receive), Gun Weapons System (GWS) information, C&D 5PhIII and 6PhI information, and SGS/AC information..  This fiscal year, CoBRA IAE Plug-ins for the Cooperative Engagement Capability (CEC) and the Command and Control Processor (C2P) are in development.CoBRA DescriptionThe CoBRA IAE, as illustrated in Figure 1, provides the analysis community with an environment that focuses on the needs of engineers and analysts by providing the following basic services:Desktop Management – the management of the look and feel of the users desktop, to include the location and size (i.e., space taken on the desktop) of applications that the user has brought into the IAE.Collaboration Management – the management of network protocol and related options to allow for the effective and efficient exchange of information between CoBRA IAEs, to include basic text chat. Tool Integration Management – the ability of users to integrate and/or establish individual tools as part of the IAE, whether a particular tool is or is not CoBRA IAE Enabled (i.e., can utilize the CoBRA IAE Application Programmers Interface (API)). Within the framework of these basic services, a set of CoBRA IAE enabled Plug-ins provide the following list of capabilities:Coordinated collection of multi-system, multi-player data extractionAbility to effectively replay the multi-system, multi-player data 2D-plan/3D-stealth display of battle space pictureVCR-like control of playbackFull featured filtering and color controlNear real-time for "quick look" support and post exercise replay for in-depth analysisIncorporation of ground truth informationAbility to automate the identification of potential problems via bookmarks within the data extraction replay processAbility to isolate problems, down to the message level (per Interface Design Specification (IDS)) as neededAbility to interact with DoD simulation protocols such as Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) and High Level Architecture (HLA)Remote site analysis (when local support is not available) via Ethernet communications (i.e., e-mail, WWW, SIPRNET)Replay for training purposesProvide a significant residual capability for operational forcesWork in-concert with a particular systems current reduction and analysis tools (i.e., ADAR for Aegis), providing for seamless transition from CoBRA IAE to its HMI and associated capabilities when appropriateWork in-concert with Test Observation Report (TOR) database applicationsAbility to collaborate real-time and share information between analysts (who may or may not be co-located) as interoperability issues are addressedAbility to support the computation of interoperability based Measures of Effectiveness and Measures of PerformanceThe CoBRA IAE is able to provide this because of its focus on the integrated analysis aspects of the interoperability analysis engineer’s problem domain, a key area of the interoperability analysis solution that, until now, had not been properly addressed.  The CoBRA IAE provides an integrated analysis environment to analysis engineers, offering them the ability to periscope in on an issue, starting at the battle force level and driving down as far as possible/required. Once properly identified, the issue can then be handed-off electronically (with real-time collaboration support as needed) to the unique systems analysis tools and Subject Matter Experts (SMEs). To this end, the CoBRA IAE is interested only in the information that is exchanged between systems, system-of-systems, and platforms (note the yellow circles in Figure 1). The CoBRA IAE does not desire to be the end-all analysis tool for any-and-all systems. The detailed analysis of the inner workings of each particular system, such as C2P, CEC, or CDS, is still best left to that systems subject matter expert and their unique tools.In the world of simulations, information collected by real tactical systems and provided to the CoBRA IAE for analysis (i.e., through one of its plug-in applications) can be replayed on a DIS network using the CoBRA IAE DIS Plug-in application.  For example, AEGIS C&D track data can be converted to DIS Entity PDUs and broadcast in a currently running simulation.  This provides entities that were real-life tracks with their real-life characteristics within a DIS simulation.  Likewise, the CoBRA IAE could be enhanced (i.e., an HLA Plug-in developed) to assist in HLA simulations as well, providing HLA federations the real-life tactical scenarios.CoBRA IAE and HLAAs described in paragraph 2.1 above, the CoBRA IAE consists of multiple plug-in applications that can read, access, and process tactical data extraction and perform analysis for either individual systems and its data sources, or, allow the playback and integrated analysis of all the data together to get a solid battle force picture.  Each CoBRA IAE Plug-in application has an object-oriented data manager responsible for the parsing and subsequent processing of the specific data types for that application.  For instance, the SGS CoBRA Plug-in can process any one of the many forms of SGS data from all platforms in the U.S. Navy.  The SGS CoBRA Plug-in data manager knows the exact formats of the data, specific characteristics of the SGS system, and all information necessary for proper analysis and display of SGS information within the battle force picture.  The C&D CoBRA Plug-in, likewise, knows the specifics about the AEGIS C&D baselines and how to properly process C&D information for the overall battle force picture.  This cognitive capability within the CoBRA IAE is the foundation for this environment’s ability to convert specific track information into DIS PDUs for broadcasting on the networks.  The data managers of the CoBRA IAE Plug-ins know if the track is an air or surface track, many of its characteristics, and its identification information to name a few.  With this information, DIS Entity PDUs are created.  This same information and process could now be used in the creation of HLA object models that will allow CoBRA IAE Plug-in applications to act as federates within HLA federation executions.  The following paragraphs will discuss the development of the HLA object models using AEGIS C&D information.CoBRA IAE Object Model Definition The data extraction capabilities of AEGIS C&D are superior and provide just about any information that an analyst would need to get a complete picture of events.  Information can be obtained about any track present during an event. This information could be identification information and operator actions on the consoles to name a few.  It is this information that can be used to develop the appropriate HLA object (as defined by a FOM) to be used in an HLA execution.An initial processing of the data would identify specific entities.  If the data extraction has information on an F-16 aircraft that was present in the operation area during an event, then an F-16 object model would be added to the SOM.  Further analysis would have to be performed to determine the attributes associated with this F-16 object model or this F-16 object model could be derived from an existing FOM or SOM (e.g., RPR-FOM) or from Base Object Models (BOMs) that were previously captured and archived.  In the case where existing SOMs, BOMs and FOMs don’t contain the specific object class or it is not readily apparent, then further analysis must be performed to determine the object model characteristics for an attribute definition.  This is where the inherent knowledge of the specific data within the CoBRA IAE Plug-in takes over.  The CoBRA IAE Plug-in knows the type of information available and can determine, for instance, the specific parametric data for the entity.  If the entity has velocity and position information being extracted, then acceleration components can be derived.  Therefore, an acceleration attribute for this entity can be defined.  Further processing of the data could be performed to gather additional attributes.  This provides one example of how objects can be defined or extracted.It is also possible to implement filters that would exclude information that cannot be represented by the current FOM from the real-life tactical playback.  If the simulation is an air-based exercise, then our FOM may not contain elements for exchanging Navy platforms, and therefore could be filtered out.CoBRA Interaction Class DefinitionInteraction classes can be derived in a similar manner as described for object models.  Take, for instance, extracted data that describes a particular weapon being fired from aircraft or at the aircraft.  This information can be used to define a Weapon Fire interaction.  Parameters such as Initial Velocity Vector, Initial Velocity Vector, Quantity Fired can also be determined from the data.  This process of extracting interaction classes and parameters, as well as extracting objects and attributes in paragraph 3.1 is not a trivial matter.  However, it is possible with the correct algorithms and knowledge of necessary HLA components (such as BOMs).Summary and ConclusionsThe CoBRA IAE and its associated Plug-ins provide an excellent environment for the replaying of tactical data extracted from live events to provide realistic scenarios for training within a virtual battlefield environment.  The fact that great amounts of parametric data are recorded and CoBRA’s ability to successfully produce DIS entities is the foundation for CoBRA’s transition to HLA.  It is understood, though, that much design would have to go into the responses of the CoBRA IAE HLA federate objects when operators are trying to change the course of history in a given scenario during replay allowing what-if scenarios to take place.  HLA and CoBRA’s object-based approach allows this modification of live-recorded data through the alteration of objects and interactions and its specific attributes and parameters.  These additional capabilities provide an improved tool that can be used in the military classroom environment for distributed training and in ready rooms for mission rehearsal and wash-up reviews.Author BiographiesWENDY R. GILKERSON is a software engineer on the CoBRA development team for SYNETICS and has been involved with the modeling and simulation community for two years as a team member on the development of HLA implementation tools.STEPHEN M. GOSS is the Software Engineering Manager for Synetics System Engineering Division supporting STRICOM, Orlando, FL. as the design engineer for the CoBRA development team. He has been active in modeling and simulation technologies since 1992.  Mr. Goss has over twenty-five years of Naval Tactical Weapon System hardware and software engineering and engineering support experience.Figure 1. CoBRA IAE Conceptual Diagram