An Environmental Data Model for 3D ModelsDr. Dale D. MillerAnnette JanettLeo SalemannSteve FarsaiEvan Y. MillerLockheed Martin Information SystemsAdvanced Simulation Center3605 132nd Ave. SE, Suite 400(425) 746-6800Bellevue, WA 98006ddmiller@lads.is.lmco.com,  HYPERLINK mailto:ajanett@lads.is.lmco.com ajanett@lads.is.lmco.com,  HYPERLINK mailto:lsaleman@lads.is.lmco.com lsaleman@lads.is.lmco.com,  HYPERLINK mailto:sfarsai@lads.is.lmco.com sfarsai@lads.is.lmco.com, emiller@lads.is.lmco.comDr. Paul A. BirkelThe MITRE Corporation1820 Dolley Madison BlvdMcLean, VA 22102(703) 883-6399pbirkel@mitre.orgKeywords:synthetic natural environment, environmental data model, 3D models,SEDRIS Environment Data Coding SpecificationABSTRACT: Formal Environmental Data Models (EDM) capture the features, attributes, and their inter-relationships for specific simulation or C4ISR systems. Existing examples include the JSIMS EDM for Terrain and the DMSO Ocean and Atmosphere Requirements and Data Models (OARDM). EDMs are currently under development to support the OneSAF Objective System (OOS), several C4ISR systems, and EDMs have been reverse-engineered for legacy systems including the Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT) and the OneSAF Testbed. All of these EDMs have been based on the data dictionary defined by the Environmental Data Coding Specification (EDCS). They serve to promote interoperability among multiple systems, specify requirements for data content from authoritative providers and define the effects the environment may have on a simulation’s models of equipment and cognitive behavior.The DMSO Terrain Scenario Generation and Archiving (TSGA) project has developed an EDM for 3D models. The goal was to develop a sufficiently rich classification and attribution schema so that any 3D model from a variety of legacy model libraries could be unambiguously identified by its classification code and attribute values (instead of by the use of an arbitrary, but unique, name). These legacy libraries include the CCTT, STOW97, and several SIMNET model libraries. The existing EDCS classifications, attributes and enumerations were not sufficiently rich to meet our goal. Research was conducted into additional mechanisms for characterizing urban terrain zones, architectural styles, roof patterns, material codes, etc., which are important aspects of 3D Models used for visualization and reasoning in simulations. Based on this, additional classifications, attributes and enumerations were defined and have been proposed for incorporation into the EDCS. Using the extended EDCS as a basis, an extensive specification of 3D model classifications and associated attributions was developed. An accompanying design rationale document serves as a basis for future extensions of the EDM to support, for example, multi-spectral sensors and the representation of building interiors. To assign classification and attribute values to the many hundreds of 3D models in the legacy libraries, each model was manually inspected and classification and attribute values assigned and entered into a database. A SEDRIS application (the EDCS Attribute Adder – EAA) was developed to read a model library STF, add and/or modify the classification and/or attribute values from the database, and then output a fully classified and attributed model library STF. Most of the resulting attributed 3D model libraries will be accessible via the Master Environmental Library in FY01, for unrestricted use in the M&S community.IntroductionIn recent years, formal environmental data models (EDM) have been used to specify the content of environmental databases for modeling and simulation (M&S) systems. Reference  REF _Ref503187212 \r [1] describes several such data models. Formerly, environmental data modeling had been ad hoc, with the data models captured only in implicit fashions such as in source code or data files, if at all. The Army Warfighter Simulation (WARSIM) 2000, a component of the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS), defined a Terrain Common Data Model (TCDM) for use throughout the JSIMS Alliance. The Army Synthetic Natural Environment (SNE) Science and Technology Objective (STO) has developed a Common Data Model Framework (CDMF) to promote the comparison of program specific EDMs and support the higher resolution requirements of the OneSAF Test Bed and the Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT). The Reference EDM which will ultimately result from the unification of these program-specific EDMs will provide an important infrastructure for achieving environmental interoperability within the community of land combat simulations. In a related activity, the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) is extending the CDMF concept from terrain to the ocean and atmosphere domains. Creating these EDMs for Ocean and for Atmosphere supports the overall goal of establishing a general Environmental Data Model composed of environmental sub-domain EDMs (terrain, ocean, atmosphere and space) from which user community Reference EDMs and program specific EDMs would be generated as profiles. This paper reports on an EDM of a slightly different nature, viz., an EDM for 3D models. We have restricted our domain to terrain-based, or “static” 3D models: buildings, bridges, towers, factories, warehouses, etc. Our intent is not to develop an EDM for a specific simulation system, but rather to develop a data model which can unambiguously describe all 3D terrain based models from a number of legacy simulation systems. These models will be discoverable via the Master Environmental Library (MEL)  REF _Ref503394905 \n \h [2]. Many of these models, developed for government use, will be placed in the public domain. Because of the classifications and attribution defined in the data model, automated mechanisms can be developed to support queries such as:Find a 3D model of a factory whose dimensions (H X L X W) are approximately 20 X 40 X 20 meters, predominant exterior colors are red and gray, has two smokestacks, produces chemicals, has various roof levels, a metal roof, and an exterior wall pattern of brick.The model returned from this query might look something like this:Our goal was to provide classifications and attribution for a large number of legacy static 3D models so that any model is uniquely identified by its classification and attribute values. This will support the discovery of models by automated means. The model libraries used for developing this data model include those from the Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT), Synthetic Theater of War (STOW 97), and databases developed by Lockheed Martin Information Systems of Newfoundland, Bosnia, Germany, Sweden, and other regions. All models in these libraries will be fully attributed according to this data model and converted to SEDRIS Transmittals. Enhancing the ability to “find the right model” in model archives is only one benefit of this EDM for static 3D models. A second benefit is the ability to specify in greater detail the characteristics of a new 3D model required by a system; characteristics not so specified can be treated as “don’t care” by the developers of the 3D model. This makes both specification and model acceptance testing more rigorous, and potentially reduces rework.This effort is part of the DMSO-sponsored Terrain Scenario Generation and Archiving (TSGA) project, which is part of the Integrated Natural Environment (INE) Program. The goal of TSGA is to produce reusable, freely available archives of cleaned feature and elevation data, integrated 3D terrain databases, and 3D model libraries in SEDRIS format which are discoverable and accessible through the MEL.Environmental Data Coding SpecificationA data model requires both semantics and syntax. The phenomena/features and attributes of the physical environment need unambiguous and agreed-upon meanings as well as a coding schema to support machine parsing. The Digital Geographic Information Exchange Standard (DIGEST) Feature and Attribute Coding Catalog (FACC)  REF _Ref503203043 \r \h [3], a NATO standardization agreement (STANAG 7074), was initially used as the language for the JSIMS TCDM. However, FACC does not fully cover the spectrum of environmental data now required in M&S applications. The Environmental Data Coding Specification  REF _Ref503203095 \r \h [4],  REF _Ref503203109 \r \h [5] (EDCS) was initiated as a part of the DMSO-sponsored SEDRIS project and will eventually provide a code for each object and attribute likely to be included in any simulation database describing the physical environment. The EDCS is becoming an international standard under processes established by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC).The current EDCS Version 2.7 does not contain sufficient classification and attribute codes to adequately describe the 3D models in the subject model libraries. It does not contain attributes to describe wall and roof visual patterns and composition, location of primary entrance, number of floors, presence of observation decks and antennae, etc. TSGA has proposed significant extensions to the EDCS, which will be described subsequently.Our methodology for extending the EDCS was to first extract all EDCS Classification Codes (ECC) and EDCS Attribute Codes (EAC) which might potentially apply to 3D models. Then the models in the legacy libraries were examined to determine characteristics which were not adequately covered by the existing EDCS. Research was undertaken to ascertain whether other authoritative classifications exist which can satisfy these requirements. In some cases, e.g., Urban Terrain Zone, attributes were found and adapted to the EDCS coding system. In other cases, web searches provided images of real world structures which elucidated a latent requirement, e.g., an image of a military bunker suggested the need for an attribute specifying the number of antennae:A Consistent RationaleOne difficulty in developing any EDM is to ensure consistency: if two classifications (features) are similar, then the attributes associated with them should also be similar, and any differences need clear rationale. Tools such as spreadsheets and relational databases can assist in ensuring such consistency, but ultimately the decisions are based on analysis.First, the legacy 3D model libraries were examined and ECCs assigned to each model (requiring new classification codes in some cases).Some general “rules of thumb” were developed to help ensure such consistency. The following non-exclusive classes of ECCs were defined:Vertical structuresVertical structures which are not buildingsBuildingsCommercial and industrial buildings and facilitiesAggregate features (multiple structures)Bridges and bridge spansIn general, all vertical structures receive the following attributes:CCC_Colour Code CategoryDGENDamage, GeneralFARFFront and Axis ReferenceHGT_Height Above Surface LevelLEN_Length / DiameterMCC_Material Composition CategoryNAM_NameOBV_Object VariantPOT_Point Object TypeSIC_Snow / Ice CategorySPROStructure Protection TypeWID_WidthIn addition, vertical structures which are not buildings receive an attribute of SMC_ (Surface Material Category) (buildings will receive a material category for the roof and walls, separately).Buildings receive all attributes of vertical structures plus the following:CTYPConstruction TypeDEP_Depth Below Surface LevelNA3_Classification NameNFLRNumber of FloorsNMEENumber of Entrances/ExitsOVDOverall Vertical DimensionPEL_Primary Entrance LocationRFPTRoof PatternRSMCRoof Surface MaterialSSC_Structure Shape CategorySSR_Structure Shape of RoofWAPTWall PatternWSMCWall Surface MaterialCommercial and industrial buildings and facilities receive all attributes of buildings plus the following:PRO_Product CategoryVSDHVehicle Storage Door, Primary, WidthVSDWVehicle Storage Door, Primary, HeightVSTAVehicle Storage AreaAggregate features (collections of structures) receive the attributes associated with its primitive features plus the following (if not already specified by its primitive features):CTYPConstruction TypeDEP_Depth Below Surface LevelFFA_Fuel Facilities AvailableNA3_Classification NameOVDOverall Vertical DimensionPRO_Product CategorySFA_Storage Facilities AvailableUSE_UsageUTZ_Urban Terrain Zone TypeVSDHVehicle Storage Door, Primary, WidthVSDWVehicle Storage Door, Primary, HeightVSTAVehicle Storage AreaRecognizing that foolish consistency is unjustifiable, these feature classes and associated attributes became guidelines to ensure consistent attribution. Exceptions were taken to nearly every one of these “rules”, but with solid rationale, which has been documented in detail.This process defined a total of 84 current and new ECCs, and 60 current and new EACs. To support consistency of attribution application, a spreadsheet was constructed by creating a record for all 84 ECCs for each EAC, with a field indicating whether that ECC should have the EAC associated with it. Then all 84 X 60 = 5040 records were analyzed by the authors to ensure the attributes were consistently applied.  REF _Ref503210041 \h Table 1 lists the 84 ECCs used in this EDM for 3D models and provides an example of this analysis for the attribute RSMC (Roof Surface Material), a newly proposed EDCS Attribute Code. Shaded records indicate that RSMC does not apply to that ECC. The reader will note ECCs which do not have roofs (e.g., Haystack, Pipeline) do not receive the RSMC attribute, while those which do (e.g., City Hall, Warehouse), do. As a result of this exercise, significant changes (hopefully, improvements) were made to the initial data model derived from the original “rules of thumb”.Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 1: Example showing to which ECCs Roof Surface Material (RSMC) Attribute Code appliesRig / SuperstructureAA040Aircraft WreckageAB003Burner / Flare StackAB020Oil / Gas RefineryAC045Piping ComplexAC047Industrial Works AC050Industrial BuildingAC075RSMCFactoryAC080RSMCOre RefineryAC115Power PlantAD010RSMCSubstation / Transformer Yard AD030Repair BuildingAE051RSMCCraneAF040Commercial BuildingAG010RSMCBankAG020RSMCRetail FacilityAG050RSMCShopping CenterAG060Public Inn / RestaurantAG070RSMCExplosive Mine - LandAH026Wire ObstacleAH038Underground BunkerAH060Command BunkerAH061RSMCMilitary Administration / Operations BuildingAH100RSMCOperational Training Structure (MOBA bldgs)AH150RSMCAdministration BuildingAH200RSMCCity HallAH210RSMCMunicipal HallAH211RSMCGuard Shack / Guard RoomAH268RSMCPost OfficeAH280RSMCMobile HomeAI025RSMCApartment HouseAI045RSMCBarracksAI050RSMCHouseAI070RSMCBarn / Machinery ShedAJ072RSMCHay StackAJ073TheatreAK165RSMCFishing Pier / Promenade PierAK190BuildingAL015RSMCShedAL019RSMCBuilt Up AreaAL020CemeteryAL030Dragon TeethAL060Grave MarkerAL090Tower (Non-communication)AL240Place of WorshipAL300RSMCHospital BuildingAL321RSMCSchool BuildingAL351RSMCStorage Bunker / Storage MoundAM060Storage TankAM070Water TowerAM080WarehouseAM100RSMCRailroad Storage / Repair StructureAN041RSMCVehicle BarrierAP041Service / Refueling Station (Motor Vehicle)AP070RSMCBridge SpanAQ045Bridge Tower / Bridge PylonAQ055Bridge PierAQ056Control TowerAQ060RSMCPipeline / PipeAQ113Pumping StationAQ116RSMCPipeline TerminusAQ117Parking GarageAQ142RSMCDepot TerminalAQ145RSMCDisk / Dish AntennaAT010Power Transmission LineAT030Power Transmission PylonAT040Communication BuildingAT050RSMCCommunication FacilityAT055Telecommunication Switching StationAT057RSMCTelephone-Telegraph Pylon / PoleAT070Communication TowerAT080Communication AntennaAT090Pier / Wharf / QuayBB190Maritime PlatformBD110Dam / WeirBI020Hydrographic LockBI030Ground Surface ElementDA010Large Isolated Rock, Boulder or Rocky FormationDB161Tree (Individual)EC032Bush / Shrub (Individual)EC033Aircraft HangarGB017RSMCHelicopter Landing PadGB030Airport TerminalGB090RSMCMunitions ObjectMH102EDCS ExtensionsProposed new ECCs are given in  REF _Ref503239764 \h Table 2. They have been submitted as extensions to the EDCS via the SEDRIS Change Request (SCR) process. Proposed new EACs are given in  REF _Ref503239774 \h Table 3 and have similarly been submitted as extensions. In addition, a total of 325 new enumerates have been added for existing and new enumerated attributes, which are too numerous to list here.Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 2: New ECCsECCNameDefinitionAA052Oil / Gas FieldAn area over land where oil and/or gas is pumped or otherwise removed from the ground.AA057Bridge PlatformAn area in which the terrain has been leveled or otherwise sculpted to support a bridge abutment. The bridge platform would typically be sculpted into the terrain surface such that a bridge abutment and/or pilings may be supported or secured.AB003Aircraft WreckageWreckage of an aircraft, which is isolated, conspicuous, and can be used for navigation.AC047Piping ComplexA group of pipes, and associated pumps, used to transfer liquids or gases from one location to another.AG070Public Inn / RestaurantA structure or outdoor area where food and drink are served to the public and lodging may be available.AH061BunkerA  facility, which may be underground, used by the military either for location of command/control centers or for troop encampment. (See also UNDERGROUND_BUNKER.)AH150Training BuildingBuilding used exclusively for training of military, police, fire or rescue personnel in urban areas.AJ073HaystackHay or straw in which equally sized portions are stacked upon each other to form a large interlocking structure. A haystack may often be covered with a tarpaulin.AQ117Pipeline TerminusThe apparent end of an above-surface pipeline, where it enters the ground, often occurring at a pumping or industrial facility or where the pipeline may cross under a road or railroad. (See also PIPELINE_OR_PIPE.)BD160Maritime Oil / GasFieldA maritime area where oil and/or gas is pumped or otherwise removed from the ground.MH101Explosive ChargeAn explosive device, that may be detonated to either damage or destroy structures, or to move rock, soil or other terrain surface materials. (See also EXPLOSIVE_MINE_LAND.)Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 3:  New EACsEACNameDefinitionAPIDAirport IdentificationA unique set of numbers preceded by the appropriate country code which enables an individual airport to be uniquely identified within the database. (DAFIF)BCMTBridge Component TypeStructural component associated with a bridge or bridge segment.CCC_Predominant Colour Code CategoryPredominant colour of the attributed object. If the object has multiple colors, this colour produces the largest single contribution to the object's total color.CCIDComplex Component IdentifierObject identification number used for relating objects to each other.COMTCommunications TypeType of communications structure such as radio, television, radar, repeater station.CTYPBuilding Construction TypeDescribes type of construction techniques used when a given building is constructed.  Basic techniques are mass (where the walls carry the load) and framed (where an internal frame caries the load, and walls simply protect the interior from the elements.CYDTCycle DateIdentifies the calendar period in which the airport or runway data was added to airport maintenance records or last revised. The first four digits indicate the year, the last two digits indicate the 28 day cycle in which the addition/change was made. (DAFIF)FARFFront and Axis ReferenceAssociates the front or long axis to the LSR coordinates. For example, observation of a structure may show the primary entrance to be on the postive x axis of the LSR coordinate system originating from the center of the structure, and in this case, the enumeration will be positive x.HCIDHost Country IdentifierA location identifier assigned by the federal aviation administration (faa) as designated in faa location identifiers handbook 7350.* or host country publication. (DAFIF)LDA_Landing Distance AvailableThe length of the runway which is declared available and suitable for ground of an aircraft landing. (DAFIF)NAMIName, InternalA name being used for internal processing.NFLRNumber of FloorsNumber of horizontal subdivisions within a structure for accommodating people or equipment, possibly distinct from the number of stories in the structure, where these subdivisions may include underground floors as well as above ground floors.NMANNumber of AntennaeThe number of distinct antennae on a building, tower, or other structure.NMEENumber of Entrances/ExitsTotal number of entry and/or exit points intended for ingress and egress, without including such points as windows, skylights, garage doors, or holes.NMHPNumber of HelipadsNumber of helipads associated with an object (e.g., an airfield or building).  (See also EDCS_AC_NUMBER_OF_RUNWAYS)NMSSNumber of SmokestacksNumber of smokestacks associated with an object (e.g., an industrial facility).NPLWNumber of WiresNumber of wires associated with a structure, power/communications line, or supporting pylon.OSPLObservation Deck PresenceIndicates the presence of one or more observation decks.OVD_Overall Vertical DimensionThe overall vertical dimension which includes both above and below ground/water components.PDCEPreparation for Destruction Completion, Explosive (Fraction)The degree to which a structure, obstacle, or other object has been prepared for destruction by explosives.PEL_Primary Entrance LocationLocation of primary (general) entrance when observed from outside the structure looking toward the front of the structure.PLURPluralityIndicates whether this object represents one, or more than one, instance of the object type.POA_Primary Operating AgencyTwo basic categories: military/federal government and civil airports open to the general public.  (DAFIF)RFPTRoof Pattern, PredominantDescription of the predominant visual pattern of the roof.  Usuall describe the shape and arrangement of shingles, but can also describe smooth, corrugated, and gravel roofs.RHEIRunway High End IdentifierSpecifies the higher degree identification of the runway in a two-digit identifier ranging from 19 - 36, determined from the approach direction, derived from the runway magnetic heading (high end) rounded to the nearest ten degrees, and divided by ten. Designated in accordance with appropriate host nation documents. Analyst derived runway numbers will use six arc degrees as the break off point for the next highest number.  In the case of parallel runways, a third character shall be entered to differentiate between left (L), right (R), center (C), or short take-off and landing (S) runway positions. A (T) True will be entered when the runway ident is and heading are true with no magnetic variation applied.  (DAFIF).RLEIRunway Low End IdentifierSpecifies the lower degree identification of the runway in a two-digit identifier ranging from 01 - 18, determined from the approach direction, derived from the runway magnetic heading (low end) rounded to the nearest ten degrees, and divided by ten. Designated in accordance with appropriate host nation documents. Analyst derived runway numbers will use six arc degrees  as the break off point for the next highest number. In the case of parallel runways, a third character shall be entered to differentiate between left (L), right (R), center (C), or short take-off and landing (S) runway positions. A (T) True will be entered when the runway ident is and heading are true with no magnetic variation applied.RSMCRoof Surface Material, PredominantDescription of the predominant outermost roofing material.RSTYRegional StyleGeographic description of the architectural or construction type of a building or other man-made structure.SPROStructure Protection TypeThe degree to which a structure provides protection to itself or its contents by resisting the effects of explosions, ordnance, and natural disasters such as hurricanes, tornados, and earthquakes.TORATakeoff Run AvailableThe length of the takeoff run available plus the length of the overrun if available for an aircraft to takeoff. (DAFIF)UTZ_Urban Terrain Zone TypeType of Urban Terrain Zone, consisting of a Class (Attached, Close-Set, Open-Set Buildings) and a Level (core area, apartments/hotels, houses,industrial/storage, commercial ribbon, outer city, shopping center, administration/cultural).  See UTZ-Based Urban Terrain Feature Database SBIR Phase II Final Scientific and Technical Report Volume 1 and Volume 2, July 1996.VSDHVehicle Storage Door, Primary, HeightHeight of the doorway into a garage, hangar, tunnel-shelter or other structure used for ingress and egress of vehicles.VSDWVehicle Storage Door, Primary, WidthWidth of the doorway into a garage, hangar, tunnel-shelter or other structure used for ingress and egress of vehicles.VSTAVehicle Storage AreaTotal area of garage, hangar, tunnel-shelter or other structure used for storage of vehicles.WAPTWall Pattern, PredominantDescription of the predominant visual pattern of the exterior walls of a structure.  Examples are stucco, clapboard, and mosaic.WSMCWall Surface Material, PredominantDescription of the predominant outermost wall covering.EDM ExamplesThe TSGA EDM for 3D models contains 1860 ECC–EAC pairs.  Each ECC has an average of 24 attributes which apply. Three examples are shown in  REF _Ref506967181 \h Table 4.Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 4: Examples of attributes applied to classificationsEDCS Attribute AdderThe EDCS Attribute Adder (EAA) is a software application for adding EDCS attribution to an existing SEDRIS transmittal (STF). It was designed to be easily extensible to support modification of other data than attribute values. It leverages existing APIs and applications as much as possible. The EAA is compatible with SEDRIS 3.0 transmittals and utilizes the new “update” capability of SEDRIS 3.0. A data flow block diagram is shown in  REF _Ref503276418 \h Figure 1.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1: EAA Data FlowThe EAA is an ANSI C-language application that operates on an existing input STF and results in a modified output STF. The SEDRIS read API is used to read the input STF, and the SEDRIS write API “update” capability is used to write a new output STF. The software contains an option to make a copy of the input STF since the update capability modifies the input STF in-place.The application uses a previously (generally manually) filled out spreadsheet (Input Mapping Table) to assign ECC and EAC values to a retrieved model. Attributing Models from Legacy LibrariesIn total, 878 models have been fully attributed. This was largely a manual process; an analyst visually inspected each model, and utilized other information including the model file name and any other metadata available. Dimensional attributes were automatically generated. Several examples including model images and all classification and attribute values are given in  REF _Ref503398495 \h Figure 2.Barn from CCTT Primary 1Command bunker from STOW Southwest AsiaWater tower from JCOS Stephenville, NewfoundlandMOBA-J from McKenna MOUTRailroad bridge from STOW Southwest U.S.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2: Example specific classification and attribute valuesConclusions and Future WorkWe have demonstrated an EDM for 3D models which captures classification and attribution data sufficient to digitally describe 3D model characteristics in several legacy simulation systems. For a number of legacy 3D model libraries, these specific classification and attribute values have been captured and inserted into STFs which are being made publicly available via MEL. These STFs contain complete geometry and texture data as well as the classification and attribution. STRICOM, under the Synthetic Natural Environment Science and Technology Objective (SNE STO), will be using the developed EDM and associated tools to capture, value-add, and populate additional STF-based libraries using models harvested from the Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT).As a requirements data model, it is expected that OOS will be able to use this to fully specify 3D models to be built and/or procured in a manner which is much less influenced by the vagaries of individual perceptions and subjective judgement, therefore allowing streamlined acquisition, testing and acceptance procedures to be applied.Currently, the dynamic terrain component of the Environment Federation uses EDCS classification and attribute values to instance models in the terrain database at runtime, and these classifications and attributes are specified in the Federation Object Model (FOM). A natural extension to this would be extend the Environment Federation FOM to include all classifications and attributes in the EDM for 3D models and to extend the software to find a model in the model library which most closely matches the specified description.While this effort was restricted to terrain-based "static" models, a follow-on effort addressing models of vehicles and equipment ("dynamic” models) has begun. In particular, there are nearly 10,000 vehicle and equipment types currently defined for Modeling and Simulation use in the Enumeration and Bit Encoded Values for Use with Protocols for Distributed Interactive Simulation Applications  REF _Ref506963167 \r \h [6] companion to IEEE Standards 1278.1-1995 and 1278.1A-1998. These vehicle types and the attributes describing them are not currently represented in the EDCS where they need to be in order to be used for attribution of dynamic models in SEDRIS transmittals. This work will address conversion of Entity and Bit Values data into a cohesive and reasonable set of EDCS classifications and attributes. In addition, SEDRIS Transmittals of dynamic moving model data that make use of the enhanced classification and attribution will be provided. This new work might eventually supplant the use of the Entity and Bit Encoded Values document as referenced in the Realtime Platform Reference (RPR) FOM.AcknowledgmentsThe authors wish to thank Juan Perez, who leads the DMSO INE Program and Nancy Gardner of the US Army Topographic Engineering Center, who is the COR for this contract.ReferencesD. Miller et al., “Environmental Data Modelingfor Simulation System Requirements Specification”, I/ITSEC 2000, paper no. MS-038, November, 2000.http://mel.dmso.mil/.http://www.digest.org/.R. Richbourg et al., “Standardizing the codification of environmental objects: the Environmental Data Coding Specification”, Proc. Simulation Interoperability Workshop, paper 00F-SIW-071, September 2000.ISO/IEC WD18023 Environmental Data Coding Specification (EDCS), see also HYPERLINK "http://www.sedris.org/wg8home/index.htm"http://www.sedris.org/wg8home/index.htm.Enumeration and Bit Encoded Values for Use with Protocols for Distributed Interactive Simulation Applications, Institute for Simulation and Training, IST-CR-00-10, August 13, 2000.Author BiographiesDR. DALE D. MILLER is the manager of Advanced Technology Development for the Advanced Simulation Center group of Lockheed Martin Information Systems. He led the projects Dynamic Terrain and Objects in a Virtual World and the Terrain Database Generation & Technology for Synthetic Environments both sponsored by DARPA and USATEC. He was also the technical leader for the terrain database and terrain data fusion development for the WARSIM Program. Currently he leads the STRICOM Common SNE and DMSO Dynamic Terrain in the Environment Federation projects. Dr. Miller received his Ph.D. in Mathematics from the University of Washington in 1976. Since then he has contributed to the areas of DIS and its successor, HLA, data models for terrain representations, real-time computer graphics, computer image generator design, adaptive filtering, image processing, feature extraction, machine vision, and optical character recognition.Annette Janett is a senior software engineer with Lockheed Martin Information Systems Advanced Simulation Center. She previously led in the development of the OpenScene visual system, the STOW Dynamic Terrain and Objects, and Dynamic Virtual Worlds programs, and STOW SE integration with virtual simulation. Ms. Janett provided the expertise and development experience necessary to implement SEDRIS as the DTDB for point features.LEO SALEMANN is a senior software engineer with Lockheed Martin Information Systems and was responsible for researching new ECCs and EACs to support this work.STEVE FARSAI is a senior staff software engineer with Lockheed Martin Information Systems and was responsible for developing the EDCS Attribute Adder software.EVAN Y. MILLER is an analyst with Lockheed Martin Information Systems and was responsible for assigning ECC and EAC values to all the models in the legacy 3D model libraries. DR. PAUL A. BIRKEL is a senior principal scientist for The MITRE Corporation. He currently provides technical support to DMSO in multiple environmental areas including the Synthetic Environment Data Representation and Interchange Specification (SEDRIS) and Terrain Scenario Generation and Archiving (TSGA) projects, the STRICOM WARSIM and OneSAF Program SNE activities, and the Army SNE Science and Technology Objective. In addition he provides technical support as needed to other DoD M&S and C4ISR programs via the US Army Topographic Engineering Center (USATEC).