Modeling Operations Other Than War/Complex Contingency OperationsPhilip S. Barry, Ph.D.The MITRE Corporation1901 North Beauregard StreetSuite 500Alexandria, VA 22331703-998-0660 HYPERLINK mailto:pbarry@dmso.mil pbarry@dmso.milPaul BlembergWarren Switzer, Ph.D.IIT Research Institute/AB Technologies Group1901 North Beauregard StreetSuite 400Alexandria, VA 22331703-933-3306		703-933-3345pblember@msiac.dmso.mil 	wswitzer@msiac.dmso.milMichael LoesekannThe Science Application International Corporation1901 North Beauregard StreetSuite 500Alexandria, VA 22331703-998-0660 HYPERLINK mailto:Wswitzer@msiac.dmso.mil mloeseka@dmso.milKeywords:OOTW, SSC, CCOABSTRACT: It is becoming increasingly common that our military forces find themselves responsible for nontraditional missions that cover a broad spectrum of missions and tasks.  These missions have historically been  referred to as Operations Other Than War (OOTW), although the more recent and accurate term is complex contingency operations (CCO).  By whatever term, traditional models and simulations frequently do not support these missions nor is the required data available.  Although an informal survey found that numerous models and simulations claim utility for OOTW, the warfighter frequently is unaware of their existence.  For example, a warfighter survey found needs for civilian demographic/traffic flows, entity level simulation for non-combatant missions, political instability forecasting model and small scale contingency models amongst others.  This paper examines the CCO modeling challenges facing warfighters for today. First, the paper provides a synopsis of the problem arena and identifies where modeling and simulation can provide utility for the warfighter.  Second, the paper identifies relevant M&S work in CCOs.  Third, the paper looks at a current effort within DMSO to address these challenges and indicates where additional research and development remains to be done.  1.0	IntroductionSIMTECH 2007 observed the general agreement that there is a low probability of a major theater war within the next decade.  Yet, there is a high probability that there be a significant increase in operations other than war, including asymmetric warfare, urban warfare, use of weapons of mass destruction, cyberwarfare, and attacks against critical infrastructure [1].Further, the spectrum of involvement in has greatly increased.  Switzer [2] shows in figure 1 the traditional role of military forces was concentrated in the high-tension area of or near open warfare. However, recent operations illustrate the spectrum of involvement has moved significantly to the left (lower intensity) side of the scale.  This means that the number and type of missions in which the military is involved has expanded while the clarity of objectives has decreased. The projection is that the US military will spend far more time and resources in the coming decade performing lower intensity missions than those its has more traditionally addressed.Meeting this increased obligation will be challenging. It is generally understood that extant modeling and simulation tools are inadequate for training, analysis and acquisition. For example, the Modeling and Simulation Information Analysis Center (MSIAC) conducted a recent DMSO-sponsored survey examining warfighter modeling and simulation needs.  This survey revealed a number of functional areas needed to be better addressed:Modeling of non-lethal weapons models (PACOM)Development of an Operations Other Than War (OOTW) crisis action planning tool (PACOM and TRAC)More detailed modeling of civilian demographic/traffic flows (JFCOM and J9)Modeling of entity level simulation for non-combatant missions (SOUTHCOM)Development of a political instability forecasting model (EUCOM)Development of small scale contingency models (EUCOM/WPC)Development of socio-economic models (SOUTHCOM)This paper will examine some of the modeling challenges for CCOs.  First, we will discuss what is meant by CCOs and look at some current M&S tools.  Next, using a generic identification of modeling and simulation challenges as a launching point, some of the complexities in modeling CCOs will be considered.  Finally this paper will conclude with a discussion of an effort that DMSO has initiated to address some of these challenges.2.0	Background To get a better understanding of the problem space, it is necessary to define a set of terms.  Joint Chiefs of Staff Publication JP 3-07 [4] defines Military Operations Other Than War (MOOTW) as operations that encompass the use of military capabilities across the range of military operations short of war.  These military actions can be employed to complement any combination of the other instruments of national power and occur before, during, and after war. Within JP 3-07, one will find discussion of disaster relief under the heading of Domestic Emergencies.  Domestic Emergencies are defined as those emergencies affecting the public welfare and occurring within the 50 states, District of Columbia, Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, US possessions and territories, or any political subdivision thereof, as a result of enemy attack, insurrection, civil disturbance, earthquake, fire, flood, or other public disasters or equivalent emergencies that endanger life and property or disrupt the usual process of government.  The term domestic emergency includes any or all of the emergency conditions defined below a civil defense emergency.Consideration of stability operations and refugee resettlement can be placed under the broad heading of peace operations to include peace building, peace-enforcement, peacekeeping and peace making.  From JP 3-07, Peace Building involves post-conflict actions, predominately diplomatic and economic, that strengthen and rebuild governmental infrastructure and institutions in order to avoid a relapse into conflict.  Peace Enforcement is defined as the application of military force or the threat of its use, normally pursuant to international authorization, to compel compliance with resolutions or sanctions designed to maintain or restore peace and order.  Peacekeeping refers to military operations undertaken with the consent of all major parties to a dispute, designed to monitor and facilitate implementation of an agreement (cease-fire, truce, or other such agreement) and support diplomatic efforts to reach a long-term political settlement.  Peacemaking is used to describe the process of diplomacy, mediation, negotiation, or other forms of peaceful settlements that arranges an end to a dispute, and resolves issues that led to it. 2.1	Representative M&S CCO ToolsThere are several tools currently used to model CCOs As a means of providing a representative sample, this section looks at several types of models and simulations in the inventory.  This discussion is merely illustrative, and is not in any way intended to be a comprehensive, listing of today’s CCO-related M&S technology.SPECTRUMPerhaps the best known CCO simulation is SPECTRUM.  SPECTRUM was developed about five years ago as a tool that combines conflict modeling with a multivariate sociological model.  The goal of SPECTRUM is to replicate the unpredictable and chaotic environment associated with military missions and CCOs.  SPECTRUM can exercise policy formulators, operational staffs at several levels depending on the stage of deployment (CINC, Embassy, Corps, and Division), and tactical staffs.  In operation, SPECTRUM simulates a political, economic, and sociological environment where strategic and operational policies, projects, and campaign plans can be implemented and analyzed.  The model is deterministic and can be used for forecasting trends and predicting the outcome of strategic and operational policies, projects, and campaign plans.SPECTRUM’s functionality includes replicating: a social region based on user-defined societal groups; societal groups having the capability of thinking and reacting toward policies, projects, and campaign plans; simulating stratified and clustered political polls to gauge population reaction and measure success; and posing public perception and media problems.   SPECTRUM portrays a thinking and reacting civilian population which allows U.S., coalition, and combined forces, non-governmental agencies, and other groups to conduct CCO.  SPECTRUM produces decision making procedures, exercises staff coordination and interagency coordination and communication.  Some of the operational/tactical functions include command control; psychological operations; civil affairs; medical; maintenance; fratricide; transportation; maneuver and mobility. DEXESThe US Army Land Information Warfare Agency developed the Deployable Exercise System (DEXES).  DEXES was built with the idea of having a human-in-the-loop.   It is able to interject various CONPLAN and CCO-related operations.  It comes in two versions, (training and analysis) and is an exercise driver for peace-keeping operations, civil affairs and humanitarian assistance/disaster relief exercises.  It controls scenario event flow and forecasts effects of scenario and trainee actions.  DEXES often is used with JCATS and CATS (see below). SIAMThe Science Applications International Corporation on a DARPA grant developed the Situational Influence Assessment Module (SIAM).  SIAM is an automated tool based on Influence Nets.  It helps users construct graphic depictions of complex, cause-and-effect relationships involving uncertainty.  SIAM is a useful tool for performing “what-if” analysis.  SIAM can highlight the causal linkages among factors and events so it can identify important factors and events that could change the scenario’s outcome.  SIAM is not a replacement for the human operator and relies on subject matter experts during its execution. COASTThe Course of Action Selection Tool (COAST) supports comparative analysis of proposed courses of action based on user-selected criteria; its inference mechanism is based upon fuzzy logic algorithm.  COAST also can be applied to non-military scenarios.  While a bit dated, this tool is interesting in that it originally was designed for the civil sector and not for CCOs.  However, COAST is a good example of a tool that has been modified from a non-military application to meet the needs of DoD. CATSThe Consequence Analysis Tool Set (CATS) deals with natural and technological disasters including war.  This tool has been available for some time, is used in the civil arena (e.g., by FEMA) and has undergone modification at several stages.  Its principal DoD proponent is the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA).  It is included here because of DTRA’s active operational involvement with several Federal and State-level agencies dealing with such disasters.  A version of CATS has been made available to allies and non-governmental organizations. JCATSThe Joint Conflict and Tactical Simulation (JCATS) is a multi-sided, interactive, high-resolution, entity level simulation that can address the spectrum of warfare from the high fidelity entity level simulation to high level multi-service actions.  It has the ability to model small group tactics in rural and urban terrain, can depict different light conditions (during day and night) and include a number of human characteristics such as suppression, fatigue, fratricide, health, etc.  JCATS can dynamically aggregate and de-aggregate units during the game allowing small scenario play at various echelons.  Due to its flexibility and relative ease of use, it is rapidly becoming the simulation of choice among the Services.  JCATS is currently used by all major commands, laboratories and some other government agencies (e.g., Treasury).  3.0	A View to the Computational ChallengesAt the 1999 Winter Simulation Conference [5] a panel addressed strategic directions in distributed simulation.  One panelist, Roger Smith, pointed out that even though Moore’s Law has been proven true, increases in computational capability have not always kept pace with the requirements for processing power necessitated by increasingly more complex simulations.  This has particular significance when one considers the desire to incorporate modeling and simulation into tactical decision aids.  This problem is also particularly acute with CCOs, where highly detailed models often are warranted to represent individual combatants and realistic representations of the natural environment.  This need for greater computational power is exacerbated by the other side of the spectrum where there is a desire to model larger systems at higher levels of fidelity.  In short, there is a demand for greater scale and greater granularity – both of which play significant increasing demands on computation development.  Twenty years ago, simulations with hundreds of objects were the state of the art, now simulations with hundreds of thousands of objects are being considered to accurately model the battlespace.  Further, many of these objects have themselves undergone development being both distributed and far more “intelligent” than previous objects.  Today, these objects often employ complicated inference mechanisms with multi-strategy learning.  Additionally, the behaviors of the objects are increasingly complex, a reflection of the need to accurately model the behaviors of the many non-military entities which populate the CCO environment. Further, the myriad of data sources, which currently are available, have created challenges in knowledge acquisition and knowledge engineering.These requirements, both for increased fidelity and more complicated behavior, are in many respects driven by the nature of CCOs.  For high fidelity modeling of small numbers of entities, individual behaviors are much more important both from a training perspective as well as realistic predictive capability.  For simulations of groups, crowds and formal organizations, effectively modeling the varied behaviors of thousands of varied individuals to observe the effect of perhaps seemingly unrelated causes also drives the necessity for additional computation and more sophisticated representational algorithms and techniques.  However, there is considerable disagreement whether large bodies of irregular forces or regular military units can or should be treated as aggregated individuals.  It is an open question whether as some point such behaviors combine to create a single entity resembling something quite different from any single entity such as with a mob turned violent.  Additionally, modeling of non-traditional organizations and loosely knit groups such as Hamas and Osama Bin Laden is still in its infancy.Smith also points out that “it is not at all easy for a human…to understand subsystem interactions or relationships between events at differing time-scales.  The fundamental problem is that modelers are able to manage a limited amount of complexity when developing or studying a model.”  This problem is especially relevant when many modelers of CCOs are not aware of which factors are critical.  A model is an abstraction of reality, but without a reasonable understanding of the mitigating factors and their relationships it is challenging at best to decide what elements are critical to represent for reasonable results.  Applications such as SWARM [6] have been built on complexity theories in the belief that many behaviors will evolve with the interactions of thousands of agents.  Real problems, such as modeling refugees in a variety of situations and confronted with a number of possible actions requires significantly more complex agents and probably an exponential increase in computational power.Osman Balci, also at the 1999 Winter Simulation conference, discussed challenges for Verification, Validation and Accreditation (VV&A) of models and simulation.  Balci suggested that automation is needed to effectively and affordably conduct VV&A.  He continued that component-based development is an effective and affordable way of creating M&S applications as well as facilitating the VV&A of models and simulations.  When reused, Balci asserted that a verified and validated model component can substantially decrease the VV&A effort as well as significantly decreasing the time and cost of development. As the demands of CCO M&S requirements drive military models to a higher level of complexity and fidelity, the VV&A challenge is only going to increase.  Particularly as the agents used to represent entities become independent, with complex interactions and learning algorithms, the VV&A challenge for the system may become acute.  Understanding at a fundamental level the representational strategies, the inference mechanisms as well as the learning algorithms employed by individual agents will be an essential step in getting verified and validated components.  Accurately validating a complex agent simulation, for example one that represents situations such as crowd control at the entity level, is non-trivial.  Consider the possibility that while complete V&V of agent-based simulations may be impractical, sufficient V&V may be possible through the use of automated systems.  Individual agent validation is fairly straightforward as inference algorithms can be verified for a number of inputs.  However, the complexity occurring when agents interact is another order of magnitude greater.  By using automated testing systems to run a large number of scenarios, it is conceivable that aggregate system behavior with respect to the design specifications and initial system requirements can be monitored.  Assuming that the resulting behavior of the system is within tolerance, it is likely that a system can be validated for a given use and be suitable for driving the input parameters for the tests.DMSO EffortsDMSO has a number of efforts to address the problems associated with modeling CCOs.  These efforts came from a process of understanding the M&S needs and requirements of the warfighters.  This ongoing effort has resulted in a report [3] as well as a soon to be released on-line warfighter needs database.  To meet some of the needs identified in this database, DMSO has initiated the M&S S&T Initiative program.  The FY01 call for S&T initiatives is focused on modeling CCOs. 4.1  The M&S S&T Initiatives ProgramThe M&S S&T Initiative program [7] was set up to find approaches and nascent technologies that show promise for bringing enhanced capabilities to the warfighter.  The S&T Initiative program balances an integrated understanding of needs and requirements against awareness of the latest technological developments such as innovations in commercial gaming.  Solicitations are sent to the DoD M&S community soliciting leading edge research concepts that will enhance the M&S capabilities of the warfighter.  From these, a select group of promising applied research efforts are provided with startup funding.  The successful research initiatives that demonstrate potential utility are then transitioned to other parts of DMSO or the DoD where the concept is matured into a full-fledged M&S capability.  This concept is shown in figure 2.The focus for the fiscal year 2001 was CCOs, specifically the identification of those technologies and techniques that enhance the development more realistic models and simulations.  In November 2000, a call was put out to the services for: improved modeling of peacekeeping operations in aggregate level combat simulation; simulation of complex sociological, economic, political, cultural, and military activities and modeling of interactive behaviors that stress human decision processes.  The goal of this effort will be to enhance current capabilities with CCO representations such as variable behavior, and realistic opposing forces influenced by social, economic, political, cultural, and religious environments.  Further, the November 2000 call sought cost models applicable to CCOs; logistics analysis tools that included the capability for modeling logistics associated with the humanitarian and security support for displaced persons.  Lessons learned in these efforts will be shared with the major joint M&S programs.As progress in modeling CCOs continues, and efforts such as the M&S S&T program begin to show fruit, the clear next step is making those tools available to users.  Key among these are the warfighters who need rapid access and problem specific composable simulations.  Modeling and simulation technological advances in areas such as interoperability, conceptual modeling, representation of the natural environment, human and organizational behavioral representation and repository support may make possible the creation of an on-line 'toolbox' of M&S analysis, planning, and mission support tools.  This toolbox enhances the warfighter’s ability to rapidly access the necessary capabilities required for successful mission accomplishment.  In the highly volatile rapidly shifting arena of international situations such capabilities are critical.5.0	Summary/ConclusionsThis paper provided a brief illumination of some of the challenges incident to CCOs (OOTW) and the parallel challenges the M&S community faces in providing adequate modeling and simulation support to the warfighter.  With or without the assistance of M&S, the  warfighter, still must address the realities of CCOs. This reality and the enhanced functionality and capabilities that M&S might provide stimulates the effort to highlight some of the generic challenges and a few of the ongoing efforts aimed at resolving or relieving them.  The challenges encountered in representing CCOs contain elements of both modeling and technology.  Several fundamental modeling issues remain problematic and will need continued research to resolve.  While fields such as complexity science and efforts within the artificial intelligence community offer promise, significant work needs to be done to realize a composable toolbox of models and simulations that  support the warfighter.  It is hoped that programs like the M&S S&T Initiatives will help the community down the path. 6.0  References[1]  SIMTECH 2007 Mini-Symposium and Workshop, Military Operations Research Society, 101 South Whiting Street , Suite 202 Alexandria Virginia 22304-3416 [2]  “Introduction to Complex Contingency Operations: Implications for Modeling and Simulation” briefing by Warren H. Switzer, Ph.D. Senior Research Analyst for Complex Contingency Operations, IITRI; briefing contained in MSSOC courseware and available through the Modeling and Simulation Information Analysis Center.[3]  Warfighter M&S Needs Assessment of the Unified Commands and Selected Supporting Commands (Final Report) 17 Nov 2000; report available through the Modeling and Simulation Information Analysis Center.[4]  JCS Publication 3-07 [5]  Panel:  Strategic Directions in Simulation Research. Ernest H. Page, Ph.D. Moderator. from the Proceedings of the 1999 Winter Simulation Conference  P. A. Farrington, H. B. Nembhard, D. T. Sturrock, and G. W. Evans, eds.[6]  http://www.swarm.org[7]  Details regarding M&S S&T Initiatives Program can be found at http://www.dmso.mil/index.php?page=14Author BiographiesPHILIP BARRY is the Chief of the Science and Technology Initiatives Program at the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, Alexandria, Virginia.  He also serves as Adjunct Professor in Systems Engineering at the George Mason University, Fairfax, VA.  His research interests include agent based modeling, human behavioral representation and applications of uncertain reasoning.  PAUL BLEMBERG is Senior Military Analyst for the IIT Research Institute/AB Technologies Group in Alexandria VA.  He is a retired US Marine Corps helicopter pilot and Weapons and Tactics Instructor who has participated in contingency operations with Special Purpose MAGTFs.  He has worked a number of projects dealing with mission planning and command and control for the Marine Corps.WARREN SWITZER is a Senior Program Analyst with IITRI/AB Technologies Gp. and deals with the application of computer models and simulations as a means to solving complexity.  He has a Ph.D. from The Catholic University of America. A retired 25 year veteran Army officer, he has been a consultant to the Ministry of Defense and Joint Command for the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, guest lecturer and invited panelist at US and foreign universities, and author of articles dealing with socio-economic strategy.MICHAEL LOESEKANN is the Executive Officer at the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO).  He has over 10 years experience in wargaming theory, development and applications with more than 7 of those years in recent management positions determining program requirements and objectives, and organizing and scheduling DBMS and projects in support of models and simulations.Figure 1:  Spectrum of Involvement EMBED Word.Picture.8  1Yr Yr 2Yr3Yr4Yr5XXSystemReqmtsDefinitionbased onWarfighterReqmts.And PromulgatingDocumentsInitiativesABCDReqmt 1Reqmt 2Reqmt 3.Reqmt nFigure 2: The M&S S&T Initiative Concept