Using Mission Essential Competencies and Attributesto Describe Federation RequirementsRobert M. ChapmanIIT Research Institute, AB Technologies GroupAir Combat CommandDistributed Mission Training Team204 Dodd Blvd, Suite 224Langley Air Force Base, VA 23665757-764-6965bob.chapman@langley.af.milKeywordsDistributed Mission Training, HLA, Conceptual Models, SimulatorsABSTRACT: In 1997, the US Air Force’s Air Combat Command (ACC) embarked on a revolutionary path for operational readiness training of its combat crews.  This revolutionary program, Distributed Mission Training (DMT), creates a synthetic battlespace by networking high fidelity flight simulators together in both local and wide area networks.  This simulation-based capability to train on a daily basis in a realistic combat environment represents a major improvement in providing operational readiness resources to combat units.  However, in fielding DMT, ACC found that the existing training paradigms did not capture the essential aspects of operational needs.  Training Task Lists are too detailed and oriented to weapons system operation and not the combat operating environment.  Joint and Air Force Mission Essential Task Lists, in contrast, focus on the combat environment but are too general and don’t capture the dynamics of how combat teams conduct operational missions.  As a result, a new readiness training concept was created, Mission Essential Competencies.  The concept of MECs was initially based on the dynamic view of air combat as a nested set of tasks expressed in a two-dimensional plane of time and complexity.  Later, based on results of the MECs,  ACC enumerated Mission Essential Attributes (MEAs).  The attributes of cognitively immersive, operationally integrated, and technically interoperable are generalized descriptions of what makes a simulator DMT-capable.  The next effort at ACC will be to use the combination of mission essential competencies and attributes to help define federation requirement in such a way that it creates a conceptual model of the federation.  1. IntroductionDistributed Mission Training (DMT) is an Air Force program to create a synthetic battlespace by networking high fidelity simulators, simulations and real-world command and control systems.  The principal elements of the DMT network are Mission Training Centers (MTCs) located at operational bases.  DMT is being pursued by incrementally adding systems to the network that was initially conceived in 1997 by General Richard Hawley, commander of Air Combat Command (ACC).  His keynote address to the Interservice/Industry Simulation Training and Education Conference, Orlando, Florida, in November 1998 eloquently encapsulates principal elements of his vision. [1]  The foundation of his network consisted of the F15C and AWACS.  Later he added the F-16C to the program.  Currently, two F15C MTCs (Eglin AFB, Florida and Langley AFB, Virginia) are operational.  Each of these MTCs has 4 high fidelity simulators locally networked so that pilots can conduct 4-ship missions.  There is also one AWACS MTC at Tinker AFB, Oklahoma.  The AWACS MTC serves the mission crew of 11-15 personnel.  (The AWACS flight deck is not part of the MTC.)  In early 2002 the locally networked F-15C and AWACS MTCs were joined into a common wide area network federation.  Later in 2002, a 4-ship F-16C MTC will be operational at Shaw AFB, South Carolina and it too will join the federation.  The addition of more sites and expansion to other weapons systems is being aggressively advocated by ACC but realization of Hawley’s vision is severely constrained by available funding. DMT presented a significant set of problems to those who contributed to the program.  To date, numerous technical challenges have been met and conquered.  As a result, the MTCs work very well and are enthusiastically used by operational fighter pilots and weapons controllers.  These advanced mission simulators have capabilities that far surpass those of legacy simulators.  Because of these improved capabilities, the simulators housed in the MTCs are being used much differently and much more frequently than legacy simulators that they replaced.  The success of DMT however, is not due solely to solving the technical challenges.  Past and current efforts on the “soft” problems of creating operational training concepts and integrating them into the system have been just as important.  For example, a visitor to an F-15C MTC would likely assume that the most important components of the system are the 4 cockpits with their impressive 360-degree visual display systems.  However, to the pilots using the system for honing aerial combat tactics, the most critical components are the mission debriefing stations.  Understanding the centrality of mission debriefing to a fighter pilot is obtained not by focusing on just the technical dimensions of the problem.  Rather, examining the combat environment exposes the way fighter pilots and weapons controllers perceive their mission and orient their decision framework.  Numerous articles, papers and presentations have been made concerning DMT.  Most of these focus on DMT from a technical or system component perspective.  The focus of this paper, in contrast, is the mission environment perspective.  1.1 Purpose and OverviewThe purpose of this paper is to describe Mission Essential Competencies, Mission Essential Attributes and how, in the future, they might be used to construct a conceptual model of the DMT federation.  The state of the effort is still immature.  While an extensive amount of progress has been made in developing the first two topics, the development of a conceptual model is just beginning.  The majority of the paper records the operational training issues and challenges explored by ACC program leaders and Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) research scientists at Mesa, Arizona during the initial development of DMT from 1997 through 2001.  In this period, they discovered that the existing training paradigms for using simulators did not capture the essential aspects of what operational squadrons needed.  When this effort began, Training Task Lists (TTLs) and the Joint and Air Force Mission Essential Task Lists (METLs) were the two major constructs for describing training activities.  However, both were lacking when applied to DMT.  The TTLs were found to be too detailed and oriented to weapons system operation and not the combat operating environment.  The METLs, on the other hand, focus on the combat environment but are too general and don’t provide the specificity needed to implement a substantive training program.  Furthermore, neither captures the dynamics of how combat teams conduct operational missions.  Another shortfall of both is that their semantics and syntaxes don’t correlate to those used by pilots or weapons controllers.From several false starts and exploration of dead-ends, emerged a new readiness training concept, Mission Essential Competencies (MECs).  To say that MECs bridge the detail of TTLs with the mission orientation of METLs is true.  But MECs are also much more in that they capture much of the cognitive framework of pilots and controllers as they practice combat skills.  The concept of MECs was initially based on the dynamic view of air combat as a nested set of tasks expressed in a two-dimensional plane of time and complexity.  Later the idea of collective state change was added using the computer as a metaphor for cognitive processing.  The designation of Mission Essential Attributes was the result of needing to answer the question of what a simulator needed to have in order to be “DMT-capable.”  This question comes up frequently especially in audiences where simulator developers are present.  They need to know what components need to be part of new simulators or, alternatively, what components need to be improved or added to existing simulators.  The attributers of: cognitively immersive, operationally integrated, and technically interoperable were derived from observing how crews use existing DMT systems at their operational units and at the AFRL test bed.  The question of federation interoperability is now becoming one of the most important aspects of DMT implementation.  Linking together two systems, such as the F-15C and AWACS Mission Training Centers, is relatively straightforward because the real-world interaction between them is well understood and, from both a technical and conceptual modeling perspective, somewhat limited.  The High Level Architecture (HLA) Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) provides a useful process for creating such a federation.  In the case of the initial DMT federation, technical interoperability insures meaningful interoperability.  There is no practical need for a conceptual model of the federation that defines what mission essential objects and interactions must be accommodated in a simple 2-site, F-15/AWACS federation.  However, as other weapons systems are added, the problem becomes complex especially when one realizes that the DMT federation must be agile and persistent.  In order to provide a better user-oriented description of the federation needs, the ACC DMT program office is beginning an effort to use MECs and MEAs to create a conceptual framework for the DMT federation. 1.2 Organization of the PaperSection 2 provides background information supporting the assertion that, in the past, simulators have had limited usefulness for operational squadrons.  Technological advances, though, have increased their utility so that today they are being used to practice combat skills that cannot be accommodated in any other type of training venue.  Section 3 outlines the development of structure that focuses on the mission-essential competencies associated with team combat.  Section 4 describes how these competencies are derived from the interplay of individual, team and inter-team skills in a dynamic environment where the team exhibits a collective state that transitions between phases based upon the decisions made by flight leaders and members.  Section 5 provides a short summary of mission essential attributes.  Section 6 briefly outlines the HLA federation development process and delineates meaningful interoperability from technical interoperability.  Section 7 closes the paper with a short summary of the future conceptual modeling effort for the DMT federation.  2. Utility of Military Flight SimulatorsIn the past, flight simulators have been used extensively to train aircrews in basic aircraft system operation, instrument flying, and emergency procedures.  Although there is an extensive body of knowledge concerning the use of simulators with respect to basic flight skills there is very little data available about the effectiveness of simulators for training combat skills.  (See Bell and Wang. [2])Nevertheless, simulators are a critical component of the military Services’ basic pilot training and initial mission qualification courses for combat aircraft.  Figure 1 compares the simulator requirements for training and operational fighter squadrons.  For example, during initial fighter training, nearly half of the sorties are accomplished in a simulator.  Once the pilot reaches an operational squadron, however, the yearly requirement for an inexperienced wingmen is 12 simulator sorties per year.  The requirement falls to 8 per year for experienced pilots such as flight leaders and mission commanders.  (Data extracted from the ACC Ready Aircrew tasking message, FY 2000.)  Legacy simulators, therefore, are not a critical part of an operational fighter squadron’s combat readiness training program.  Indeed, many Air Force squadrons do not have a simulator at their base.  For example, although the A-10 has been in service since the mid 1970’s, only now is a simulator being developed for this system.  DMT, though, is changing this situation because technological advances are mitigating many of the previous limitations of fighter simulators with respect to the need for high fidelity visual systems, simulation models, and computer networking.  These limitations are discussed below with respect to how they differ from the use of simulators by major airlines.  (Airline use of simulators is often advanced as the preeminent example of simulator utility.  No major air carrier uses real aircraft for training.  A new pilot’s first “real” flight is on a revenue service flight.)High fidelity visual systems - The utility of flight simulators to operational fighter pilots has been limited for several reasons.  One of the most obvious is the difficulty in providing a realistic out-of-cockpit visual display.  In addition, fighter pilot skills, such as navigating at low altitudes or attacking moving targets, are more visually oriented and diverse than an airline crew’s task of high altitude navigation. Simulation models - The operational environment is also very complex.  The routes and procedures followed by airline pilots are well defined, structured, and regulated.  In contrast, the air combat environment is chaotic and variable.  As a result, a fighter simulator, in addition to aerodynamic and aircraft system models, requires additional complex computer simulations to represent the air combat environment.  Examples are surface to air missiles, radars, terrain and targets that accurately reflect damage from bombs, etc.  Networking - Another reason that simulators have not been used for fighter pilot readiness programs can be attributed to basic fighter tactics.  Airliners fly singly.  Fighters aren’t employed as single aircraft.  They are nearly always composed of flights of 2 or 4 aircraft.  Furthermore, several flights of fighters are usually “packaged” together to accomplish a mission.  Media videos of air warfare in the Gulf War and, more recently, in Kosovo and Afghanistan give an incomplete presentation of modern air tactics.  There are very few single, stand-alone targets.  Most mission packages attack systems of targets sequenced and integrated to insure self-protection, the ability of the weapons to achieve damage, and mitigation of unwanted effects such as collateral damage.  Therefore, to be useful to readiness training, fighter simulators must be networked together to support flight and composite force training.  Managing the data that must be shared among 2-4 high fidelity simulators and their supporting combat simulation models linked together is a technological challenge.   But even more difficult is the linking together of several geographically dispersed sites.  Yet this is what is required so that fighter crews can practice combat missions at their home bases.3. Individual, Team and Inter Team SkillsIn 1997 when fielding DMT, ACC discovered that the existing training paradigms did not fit the implementing visions of the ACC commanders.  These training paradigms are either too focused on individual tasks or oriented to force-level activities.  Training Task Lists (TTLs), for example, tend to focus on weapons system operations – how to operate radars, perform an intercept, etc.  The TTL used for the F-16C, for example, has several hundred separate entries.  TTLs can be very useful for initial training of pilots at formal training squadrons where basic actions such as successfully completing checklists are important.  Generally speaking, they focus on discrete actions and downplay the importance of representing the combat operational environment.  However, they quickly lose their utility in an operational environment where squadrons must consider specific theaters, their unique warplans, restrictions, geography and rules of engagement.  At the other end of the spectrum are the Mission Essential Task Lists (METLs) delineated in joint and Air Force publications and programs. [3]  Where the TTLs are too detailed, the METLs are defined at such a high level that they are unsuitable for defining the team combat skills required of operational aircrews.  For example there are only 2 primary METLs for an F-15C wing both one-sentence statements.  And like TTLs, METLs are static in the sense that it is very difficult to demonstrate how tasks are accomplished over time and integrated into larger events such as a campaign or joint force mission statement. The first attempt in defining a new approach was to focus on the mission environment.  The ACC DMT program leaders first espoused a team-oriented approach that used the F-15C and AWACS mission relationship as the model for DMT training.  This approach is depicted in the following narrative and Figures 2 and 3 which are taken from an early DMT document that later served as the basis for the subsequent CONOPS. [4] The rationale for DMT is derived from the characteristics of contemporary warfare.  Today’s military forces operate within a battlefield that is increasingly lethal and complex.  The range and performance of modern aerial weapons systems enable domination of larger areas.  Tighter linkages between sensors (e.g., AWACS and JSTARS) and shooters (e.g., fighters and bombers) require increased emphasis on teamwork for successful mission execution.  Tactics are increasingly based on the technology and behavior of an adversary’s integrated defense systems rather than individual platforms.  Taken together, these trends are blurring the distinction between the operational and tactical levels of war.  They are also expanding the dimensions in which these operational/tactical missions are executed.  The concept of operations for the DMT environment is based on the following characteristics of the contemporary military environment:Teams, not individuals, execute missions.  For example, a flight of four F-15s working in close cooperation with other teams - an AWACS and several flights of F-16 strike aircraft - performs an Offensive Counter Air mission.Team skills are built upon, but different than, individual skills.  For example, proficiency in Basic Fighter Maneuvers, an individual skill, is a necessary but not sufficient for proficiency in Air Combat Maneuvering, a team skill.  Three important concepts emerged at this point in DMT concept development.  The first was the word task was abandoned as a description of DMT training activities.  This was done primarily because the word already had two different interpretations as explained previously in the discussion of TTLs and METLs.  Skill was selected instead because it evoked the idea of competent performance and is frequently used in the training community.  The second concept that emerged was the partitioning of skills into team and individual skills. Soon however, it was apparent that like task, team was an overused word with broad usage and meaning.  It seemed that everyone who was remotely connected to an air-air mission, from the security personnel at the front gate to the Air Component Commander considered himself or herself a team member.  While this is true in the way the mission is described in the Air Force METLs, it is a definition too expansive for the practical enumeration of specific team skills.  As a result team was applied to small groups with persistent, close relationships such as a 4-ship flight or the mission crew on an AWACS or bomber.  Inter-team was added to describe closely coupled interactions among teams.  The following narrative and figure 4 is extracted from the ACC DMT CONOPS published in late 1998 reflects this restricted interpretation of team skills. [5] Team Training – Initially, DMT will be focused on team training.  Team training is the hierarchy of individual, team, and inter-team skills needed by warfighters to engage in team combat.  The following descriptions further explain the individual, team, and inter-team skills that compose DMT team training.High-end Individual Skills – The dynamic individual skills needed to effectively employ a weapons system in a team combat environment (e.g., offensive weapons employment, defensive reactions, and practicing appropriate tactics for specific adversary behavior, etc.).  Proficiency in individual high-end skills, such as tactical formation, station keeping or Cockpit/Crew Resource Management (CRM), is necessary for development of team skills.  Team Skills – The collective skills needed to execute missions (e.g., Defensive Counter Air) or significant portions of missions (e.g., Air Combat Maneuvering).  Teams are individual combat ready crewmembers with formal, well-defined relationships (e.g., 2-ship elements, 4-ship flights, an AWACS mission crew, bomber crews, etc.).  Teams are usually composed of a single type of weapons system from the same unit.  Inter-team Skills – The composite skills needed to execute missions (e.g., an interdiction mission conducted by a composite force) or significant portions of missions (e.g., weapons control).  Inter-team relationships are not as permanent as team relationships.  They are normally based on temporary assignment of teams from several units to a composite force package.  Because inter-team training requires participation by different types of units, most inter-team training currently takes place during Red Flag or other large-scale exercises.The third concept that emerged was the insight that these individual, team and inter-team skills are nested in a hierarchical dependency.  Consider a Defensive Counter Air (DCA) mission being accomplished by a flight of F-15Cs supported by AWACS.  (See Figure 5.)  The F-15Cs man a Combat Air Patrol (CAP) station.  In coordination with AWACS they maintain surveillance of the area.  If a target appears that meets commit criteria they depart the CAP to intercept the target.  If the target is hostile, then the F-15s will engage and employ the appropriate weapons while defending themselves against any weapons fired by the adversary.  Depending on the results and number of targets remaining the flight will separate from the engagement, reform and return to the CAP.  4. Mission Essential CompetenciesViewed in this way inter-team, team, and individual skills are closely linked.  In addition, the relative importance of the skills varies by the phase of flight.  Furthermore, transition among inter-team, team and individual skills can be very rapid and occur several times during a mission.  Therefore, not only are the skills nested in a hierarchy but also are also dynamically related.The team training hierarchy of inter-team, team and individual skills provides a useful conceptual structure for DMT training activities because it bridges the gap between the specificity of TTLs and the generality of METLs.  In early 1999, this emerging structure produced the name Mission Essential Competencies (MECs).  MECs not only linked TTLs and METLs but also offered the possibility of capturing the dynamics of the combat mission environment, a critical limitation of both TTLs and METLs.  The MEC concept generated a considerable amount of cooperative research and field evaluations among the researchers at the AFRL in Mesa, HQ ACC DMT program leaders, the USAF Weapons School, and operational ACC squadrons.  The one problem that remained was to flesh out the approach to construct the detailed elements of a conceptual model for describing the dynamic aspects of team combat performance.  It took nearly a year, from mid 1999 to mid 2000, to formulate an appropriate methodology.  By mid 2001, candidate MECs and a working definition were developed.  The current definition is provided below (MEC examples are provided later): Higher-order individual, team, and inter-team competencies that a fully prepared pilot, crew or flight requires for successful mission completion under adverse conditions and in a non-permissive environment.The approach used to develop MECs was based on listening to the F-15C and F-16C weapons school experts talk through mission employment and by applying a popular modern metaphor.  If one observes a F-15C flight briefing or debriefing, the first thing that strikes the observer is that the pilots have unique semantics oriented to the type of mission being flown and the particular phase in which the mission is in.  (Some of the unique syntax are words listed in Figure 6 – commit, engage, separate, etc.  There is a very extensive body of knowledge that prescribes what, how and when specific words are to be used in communications during fighter employment.)  In addition, pilots tend to talk about responsibilities, actions and decisions in an attempt to construct flexible rules that can be applied to a wide variety of situations within a phase.  Furthermore, the flight leader will normally discuss how the rules alter between missions. For example, within the category of radar responsibilities, a flight leader will brief radar search responsibilities for each member of the flight and delineate how the responsibilities change as the mission progresses from CAP to intercept to engagement through separation and back to reforming the flight.  The syntax of fighter pilot mission language bears no resemblance to the static taxonomy of the TTLs or METLS.  It does, however, resemble models of digital systems.  For example, a former commander of the F-16C Fighter Weapons School published an article on the best way to facilitate learning in a mission debriefing.  The approach he advocated was to analyze mission performance by dividing performance errors into three separate bins; input, decision and output. [6]  The metaphor of the mind as a computer is a popular contemporary theme and it was natural to see if it could be applied to combat team mission activities to provide a dynamic interpretation of mission skills.  Specifically, is there a collective state of awareness in a combat team such that the flight’s behavior can be modeled as a discrete event system?  In a discrete system theory, the state of system determines how inputs to the system produce outputs.  While the output may vary as the input changes, the rule set that processes inputs into outputs remains constant.  The state of the system is unchanged unless a transition function is activated at which time the state changes and the rules that translate inputs into outputs change.  The challenge was to see if we could treat the flight as having a collective state that went through definite state changes.  As it turned out, once we starred looking, it was easily observed because it was naturally embedded in the way fighter pilots briefed their mission phases and decision points.  Figure 6 provides a summary of this team model.  It also outlines some of the benefits of using it in for training system engineering efforts.Figure 7 depicts the follow-on work that resulted in the development of MECs for the F-15C.  As was mentioned previously, one of the deficiencies of TTLs, is that they are too numerous – several hundred for most fighters.  In contrast, there are only 7 MECs for the F15C.  They are also more specific than the Air Force or Joint METLs.  The real value of MECs, though, is that they are clearly oriented to the dynamics of air-to-air combat, a shortcoming of both TTLs and METLs.  (It is beyond the scope of this paper to describe the details of the MEC development process.  The interested reader is encouraged to read other papers that are have been written concerning MECs.)In summary, the effort to construct a suitable structure for capturing the value and utility of training combat teams was a several-year effort that culminated in a new concept of Mission Essential Competencies.  This structure is being applied to the DMT weapons systems.  In addition, it will used to help define the user requirements of the DMT federation.  But before federation development is discussed, it is necessary to present generalized physical attributes of the DMT network.5. Mission Essential AttributesThe use patterns of our pilots, our success with MECs and the emphasis on mission integration in ACC have also resulted in a review of the physical components that comprise a DMT-capable simulator.  Before the F15C MTCs were operational, the informal definition of what a DMT simulator required was vague.  There was little requirement beyond having a high fidelity visual system and the capability to be networked.  As a result, ACC established definitions of three attributes that describe what is needed to make a simulator DMT-capable.Mission Essential Attributes (MEAs) are descriptions of DMT system features.  The development and maintenance of mission essential competencies requires DMT to have a shared replication of the operational battlespace.  This battlespace will be a synthesis of simulators, simulations and, when needed, live components such as command and control systems.  To satisfy the training and rehearsal of mission essential competencies the DMT must be:Cognitively Immersive - high fidelity simulators, simulations and models based on physical properties and interactions of their real-world counterparts.  A DMT-capable simulator should provide a high fidelity representation of the mission space, including theater-specific terrain and accurate physics-based simulation of mission essential objects (weather, targets, weapons, sensors, threats, civil activity, etc.).  Cockpits or mission workstations should replicate the actual look and feel of the combat system.  A DMT system should so realistic that it evokes combat behaviors and responses from mission-ready crews. Operationally Integrated - on-demand training and rehearsal, responsive to the daily training and rehearsal requirements of operational commanders.  DMT-capable simulators should provide warfighting teams with the ability to debrief team and inter-team missions based upon data captured during the DMT event.  For this reason, a robust briefing/debriefing system should be an integral part of the DMT simulator and provide the mission commander with the ability to capture mission essential data tailored to mission objectives.  The capability to record, playback, and analyze mission data should be of the detail and quality that can support activities Technically Interoperable - scalable and extensible system architectures to provide the connectivity needed for team and inter-team training.  Team training is often conducted within a single unit requiring local networking.  Inter-team training of a mission, offensive counter-air, for example, usually requires wide area networking.  Because DMT is a mission readiness tool, the need to preserve operational and program security must be supported by the local and wide-area networks. DMT components must be able to be rapidly configured to support multiple simultaneous small and large training and rehearsal events in both synchronous and asynchronous formats.6. DMT FederationMany technical challenges are being overcome in the DMT program but the theory and practice for engineering their solution is fairly well understood.  This does not mean that these problems are trivial or easy to surmount.  As the system grows and matures, we are likely to find that DMT will make significant technical contributions in the areas of real-time simulation and wide area networking.  Nevertheless, at present the most challenging aspect of DMT is not establishing technical linkage but determining how to achieve meaningful interoperability.  Typically, the HLA federation development and execution process (FEDEP) brings together many individuals from several diverse groups: domain experts, developers, users, technicians, etc.  But without a common landscape from which to navigate, the FEDEP can turn into a lost, wandering journey.  This is especially true for complex immersive systems such as DMT.  Figure 9depicts the typical FEDEP process.  The first two steps are primarily oriented to defining user requirements in such a manner that step three can begin the federation design.  Achieving meaningful interoperability in complex immersive federations such as DMT requires one to consider a broad range of topics in modeling and simulation (fidelity, validity, conceptual modeling, etc.) and the cognitive sciences (training theories, cognitive models, behavior, etc.).  However, even a cursory review of modeling and simulation literature will reveal that when most simulationists discuss federation design they write of the engineering challenges and less frequently other aspects.  One reason for this apparent lack of dialogue is that there are few tools and little theory to guide them in practicing the art of modeling and simulation – creating abstractions of reality that can then be translated into executable computer code. For example, during federation development, one has to establish which federation objects and interactions are essential and must be shared among federate components.  Similarly, in accrediting a federation, a decision is made that the validity of the federation is sufficient for specific purposes.  Both development and accreditation require that the federation be described in a manner that relates the intended use of the federation to the abstract representations of the real world that the federation components are simulating.  A conceptual framework can provide the structure to help address these and other important modeling and simulation issues.   7. Concluding CommentsThe DMT program is beginning an effort to use the knowledge gained from the MEC process to help create a better FEDEP.  The concepts of mission essential competencies and attributes serve as the basis for developing a conceptual framework as depicted in Figure 8.  The intent of the framework is to create the process and structure one needs in order to create a schematic model of the federation such as a Federation Object Model.  It is too early to claim success, however, it appears that if nothing more the effort will result in a better understanding of how DMT-like federations can be implemented.  The outcome is likely to have important effects because DMT is an example of an exciting application of simulation technology.  In addition, it may advance the field with respect to other general issues such as and validation and accreditation.  The emergence of complex immersive federations creates a number of challenges for the modeling and simulation community that extend beyond questions of technical interoperability into the relatively unchartered realm of meaningful interoperability.  Is the federation valid?  For what uses can it be accredited?  What federation objects and interactions are essential to create an immersive environment?  None of these questions can be addressed without a having a conceptual model of the federation.  A conceptual modeling framework for complex immersive systems is based not only on representing the real world domain and expected use but is also dependent on how the user is immersed in the application.  The work presented in this document describes an approach to creating a conceptual modeling architecture for complex synthetic federations using current efforts in the Distributed Mission Training program8 References[1]	Richard Hawley, Keynote Address to Interservice/Industry Simulation Training and Education Conference, Orlando, Florida, November 1998.[2]	Herbert Bell and Wayne Wang, “Evaluating he Effectiveness of Flight Simulators for Training Combat Skills: A review,” draft manuscript accepted for International Journal of Aviation Psychology.[3]	US Air Force, “Air Force Task List,” Air Force Doctrine Document 1-1, August 1998.[4]	Air Combat Command, “Distributed Mission Training - Background Concepts,” staff document, March 1998.[5]	Air Combat Command, “Concept of Operations for Distributed Mission Training,” October 1998.[6]	Todd Denning, “Debriefing to Win,” USAF Fighter Weapons Review, Summer 1991.[7]	Defense Science Board Task Force, “Training Superiority and Training Surprise,” Final Report, January 2001.Author BiographyROBERT M. CHAPMAN is the Senior Program Analyst for the Air Combat Command Distributed Mission Training Program.  He holds a BS from the Air Force Academy and a MA from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, and is now pursuing a PhD in Modeling and Simulation at Old Dominion University. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 1 EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 2 EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 3 EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 4 EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 5 EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 6 EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 7 EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 8 EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 9