Using Low Cost PCs to Simulate Crew Stations for Team Training on T-72 Tanks and BVPsBenjamin D. Blood Jr.Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC)12901 Science DriveOrlando, FL  32826407-243-3365 HYPERLINK "mailto:bloodb@saic.com" bloodb@saic.comKeywords:  Collective Training, Low Cost, Reconfigurable SimulatorsABSTRACT:  This paper explains the development of team training standards, and the use of training simulators to conduct team training and evaluations.  Over the past 20 years, the US Armed Forces has evolved collective (team) training to a goal oriented performance based system.  The addition of full mission trainers and simulators has resulted in the ability to perform these evaluations and remedial training at the home station, reducing the cost of field exercises, and improving the value of the field exercises when they are conducted.  The introduction of low-cost  “Desktop" simulators and constructive simulations has further increased the opportunities for team training. In the fall of 2001, the Center for Ground Forces in Vyskov, Czech Republic opened with capability to exercise five manned vehicles (T-72, BVPs) in conjunction with additional simulated friendly (company level) and opposing forces. The Czech Military has enjoyed the benefit of this training capability with a number of brigades participating in at least one exercise over the past year. Desktop simulation has introduced affordable practice in command and control procedures, communications skills, unit leadership, mission and exercise planning, and command decision-making.   All of this has occurred in the non-threatening environment of the simulation center and at a fraction of the economic and environmental cost of full field exercises.IntroductionTeam and unit training has been a major concern in the US Armed Forces for many years.  Team training is defined as training multiple individuals to carry out cooperative tasks.  Normally, the soldier receives training in his individual tasks during basic training at an Army Training Center (ATC).  The soldier then progresses to Advanced Individual Training (AIT) where job specific training is conducted, along with some limited cooperative training.  Due to time and funding constraints, the soldier is only partially trained when he departs the Training Center for his first tactical unit, and must be trained to proficiency at the unit.  The US army changed their training strategy in the mid-1970s from a lock-step formal schedule to a flexible goal oriented process.  The old system relied on an Annual Training Test (ATT) or Annual Service Practice (ASP) to determine the readiness status of its battalions, and the training proficiency of the subordinate units, the companies/batteries, platoons, and squads/sections.  The results of this annual test were used to structure training programs for the following year.The Goal Oriented program was a substantial change, geared to continuous improvement in the collective training posture.   Goal Oriented training focuses on frequent informal evaluations of crew proficiency based on a list of tasks that are appropriate for each unit’s mission.  It is impractical to have a unit stationed in a tropical climate practice artic survival techniques.  These evaluations are based on a published task, condition, and standard.  The task describes precisely what the team or unit is required to accomplish.  A howitzer unit would have tasks such as “Emplace a 155mm self propelled howitzer and make it ready for firing.”  The conditions for the task describe the environment and preexisting actions, such as the howitzer is part of a convoy that has just entered a new firing position on level terrain.  The standard describes the time frame, accuracy, or other measure of success for the task, stated in clearly measurable criteria.  For the howitzer task, the standard might be that the howitzer is emplaced with camouflage netting installed, and the gun is laid to within +- 2 mils of the desired direction, within 5 minutes of arrival at the gun position.Simulation TechnologyThe US Army has embraced simulation technology for team training.  The Simulation Network (SIMNET) program was started in the 1980s to provide realistic networked tactical vehicle simulators.  Under this program, over 250 manned simulators were built and fielded to training stations in the US and overseas.  Of those, 233 are still being supported today.  Following up on this successful program, the army created the Close Combat Tactical Training (CCTT) program to provide more realistic training to the crews, and to allow large scale exercises to be conducted entirely in simulation, or using a combination of manned simulators and computer generated forces.The SIMNET and CCTT combat vehicle simulators provide the crew members (gunner, driver, and vehicle commander) realistic views of the simulated battlefield, and simulated communication equipment to allow them to operate the vehicles exactly as they would on open terrain.  The simulation can use digital terrain from their home station where they normally train, or they can use digital terrain from any location where they may have to deploy.  This multiple terrain capability also allows units to perform mission rehearsals and to become familiar with the environment of the country where they may be deployed.  The realistic digital terrain is linked to the communication simulations so that the radio range is realistically degraded by the effects of the terrain.The army has deployed the CCTT simulators at the Fort Knox and Fort Hood training areas, and they are in constant use by the soldiers and units stationed there.  The US Army also uses a similar approach to providing training to the Close Air Support (CAS) aviation units.  At the Army Aviation Center in Fort Rucker, Alabama, there are many helicopter simulators used for different aircraft and types of training.  Some of these simulators are linked together using Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) or High Level Architecture (HLA) protocols, and can join exercises with ground forces being conducted at any of the training sites using a Wide Area Network (WAN).  This allows the helicopter crews to get realistic training in providing fire support to ground operations in a manner that is not possible on any of the existing training ranges. It also forces the aircrews to react appropriately to the ground threat forces, or risk being “killed“ by the antiaircraft fires from the opposing forces.  In addition to the CCTT simulators, the other forces on the battlefield can consist of either other manned simulators being operated by soldiers at one or more locations, or computer generated forces.  The use of computer generated forces is a tremendous labor saving device, allowing a unit to operate in concert with adjacent units exercising all of the required command and control functions, without having to staff the adjacent units for the exercise.  The same thing is true for the opposing forces, with computer generated forces supplementing the humans who are setting up and manipulating the opposing force units and carrying out their operation plan.The amount of time that is available for field training exercises is usually limited, and every effort must be made to take maximum advantage of each hour of time at the exercise/live training area, and to take maximum advantage of each live round fired.  With the current curtailment of live training, more and more emphasis is placed on using training simulations and simulators to supplement the live training. The most effective training method is to use training simulators to identify shortcomings in the training proficiency, and to schedule training to specifically address those shortcomings.  Again, the simulator can be used to provide the training platform.  Many team or collective tasks require situations that are difficult to simulate in the home station, or on the live fire ranges.  An example of this situation is the training of a platoon of tanks.  The combat situation will require the coordination of fires between the tanks and other fire support assets, in addition to the coordination of locations and movement.  The tank commanders and gunners must be able to effectively engage the enemy targets prior to the enemy engaging them.  In a realistic training engagement, the soldiers must be forced to contend with the situation where the targets shoot back.  In addition to coordinating the fires, the tank platoon must also keep track of its logistics situation. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 1 - Training Savings through SimulationFigure 1 depicts the anticipated relationship between resources (time and expense) versus operational readiness when utilizing field training only, vice training with simulation. Simulation provides the opportunity to realize cost savings in terms of time and money while increasing readiness. Field training exercises are rare events in the military due to the expense associated with deployment and actual conduct of the event. Low cost desktop simulations offer the ability to conduct team training to maximize the training conducted during actual field exercises. Teams are able to conduct and master basic team skills in the simulated environment. This allows the team to concentrate their field training opportunities on advanced team skills. The increase in computing speed of personal computers during the past twenty years provides an opportunity for low cost desktop training simulation to augment leader training. Using Commercial Off the Shelf (COTS) hardware and personal computers, low cost desktop simulators for both rotary wing helicopters and armored vehicles have been developed that provide the individual soldier as well as the team, a robust training opportunity. These desktop simulators, when augmented with semi-automated forces, provide a synthetic natural environment for training individuals, as well as team collective training. Desktop Simulators The desktop simulators for RWA and armored vehicles are based on long-standing dynamics and physics models. The RWA model is based on six degrees of freedom flight model, which is representative of a generic helicopter. Parameters such as airspeed limitations, engine torque and weapons load can be modified to simulate various helicopter configurations. The current RWA system has supported training of US Army AH-64 Longbow, OH-58D Kiowa Warrior as well as UH-60 Blackhawk pilots. A personal computer utilizing the Windows operating system provides the host for the RWA.  A COTS joystick, pedals and collective provide the user input devices through Microsoft gaming control software. Aircraft specific flight controls, such as a unique cyclic or collective, can be easily integrated into the host system. The host system supports distributed training through the High Level Architecture (HLA) as well as the Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) protocol. These protocols support networking of the desktop simulators through a Local Area Network (LAN) as well as long haul networks between multiple sites. The image generator for the desktop simulator makes use of PC based Stealth technology. The Stealth system provides out the window views for the system to include a gunner’s perspective. The number of out the window views is expandable to provide the necessary fidelity for the trainee.  Numerous databases for the image generator currently exist. Databases can be converted from the standard ModSAF or the OneSAF Testbed Baseline (OTB) Compact Terrain Database (CTDB) to stealth format through the use of a conversion tool. The RWA desktop simulator can also support Multi Function Displays (MFD). MFDs provide the Longbow and Kiowa Warrior pilot with acquisition information, situational awareness and intelligence information, as well as standard flight information. The RWA desktop simulator supports MFD through the use of low cost COTS flat panel displays. The integrated displays are modeled using Microsoft Visual C++ and read information directly from the host system for display. The MFDs can operate independently for single user training as well as integrated to support team training. The systems are easily reconfigurable to simulate other aircraft types.The armor desktop simulator has similar functionality for ground systems. The host system is PC based with stealth technology providing the out the window view for the driver, the gunner and the vehicle commander as shown in Figure 2. This view can be as seen through vision blocks and replicate the visual scene or the weapons system sight picture.  This host system has supported M1 and M2 individual and crew training of US Armor soldiers. Figure 2 – Crew Training StationsThe host and image generator can easily be modified through parameters to represent other ground systems. The desktop simulator can support both standalone individual training as well as collective crew and multi vehicle training through HLA and DIS.Simulators for the Czech RepublicIn 2001, as part of a Foreign Military Sales (FMS) case, five desktop simulators were provided to the Czech Republic for their Center for Ground Forces in Vyskov.  These simulators were reconfigurable between the T-72 tank and the BMP series (BVP-1, BVP-2) of fighting vehicles.  The approach taken was to use the basic armor simulators described above and modify them to represent the tanks and fighting vehicles currently used by the Army of the Czech Republic (ACR).  Based on data provided by subject matter experts of the ACR and found in other open sources, the parameters of the simulation model were changed and appropriate visual capabilities and instrument panels were designed for the simulators displays and vision blocks.  Figure 3 shows the driver view from the T-72 tank. Figure 3 - T-72 Driver Station View  The resultant desktop simulators were installed in Vyskov and have been used in several exercises since November 2001.  Another desktop simulator is to be installed at their Center for Simulation Technologies at the Military Academy in Brno in March 2002.  This simulator will primarily be used in research and concept development. The initial results of the use of these simulators coupled with their low cost has led to the purchase of 5 additional simulators to be installed in the latter half of 2002.Training ExercisesConducting a collective training exercise typically involves creating a local network of desktop simulators with supporting systems. Figure 4 depicts a potential exercise configuration. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 4 - Training Exercise ConfigurationA typical exercise will have a number of desktop simulators representing the training audience. This could be a platoon with a crew operating each desktop simulator, or a company level exercise with platoon leaders operating each station. The enemy forces and roundout friendly forces are typically provided by a semi-automated force such as ModSAF or OTB. The semi-automated forces are controlled by a battlemaster who also serves as the exercise controller. Training exercises can be augmented with C4I systems integrated into the simulation environment. These systems can be manned by the appropriate headquarters, typically battalion or brigade staff, and provide command and control to the trainees. A data logger capability captures all the events during the exercise. This log file provides the trainer with the ability to play back the exercise and conduct an After Action Review (AAR). The post process data can be stored to maintain a training record and document the improvement over time of the trainee(s).The Czech Military has enjoyed the benefit of this training capability with a number of brigades participating in at least one exercise over the past year. It has introduced affordable practice in command and control procedures, communications skills, unit leadership, mission and exercise planning, and command decision-making.   All of this has occurred in the non-threatening environment of the simulation center at Vyskov and at a fraction of the economic and environmental cost of full field exercises.  The benefits of such training have been so useful that they have decided to acquire additional simulators to train more personnel with greater frequency.ConclusionLow cost team training at training centers or home station can be conducted today at a fraction of the cost of field training utilizing desktop simulators augmented by semi automated forces. Soldiers can exercise their tactics, techniques and procedures in the synthetic environment at a significantly lower cost than a field training exercise. PC based desktop simulators provide the training audience with a robust, rapidly reconfigurable capability to conduct individual and team training to support today’s soldiers.  This was again demonstrated in the Czech Republic where recently fielded desktop simulators are being used to help teach individual and crew coordination fundamentals, to perform team training, and to provide a limited mission rehearsal capability.Author BiographyBEN BLOOD is a Project Manager for Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC) and responsible for managing the development of Simulation Centers in Central Europe. He has been the Project Director for the Slovak Simulation Center Delivery Order on the ADST II Program, and the follow-on program under the US Army Simulation Training and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM) Omnibus Contract (STOC). He has a MS in Systems Engineering from the University of Arizona, and more than 26 years of experience in technical management, systems analysis, systems engineering and development of complex communications, command and control, and training systems.CommanderGunnerDriver