Interoperable Training through a Simulation GameMichael D. ProctorMajor John CurleyUniversity of Central FloridaP.O. Box 162450Orlando, FL 32816407-823-5296, 407-681-2772 HYPERLINK "mailto:mproctor@mail.ucf.edu" mproctor@mail.ucf.edu, curley181@cfl.rr.comMajor Wilburn C Williams JrUS Army USMADepartment of Military InstructionWest Point NY 10996845 938 2287 HYPERLINK "mailto:qb8515@usma.edu" qb8515@usma.eduKeywords:Commercial Games, TrainingABSTRACT: The need for low cost methods to achieve military training is a constant.  Recently, some low-cost commercial games that simulate aspects of military operations have been used to accomplish military training.  Further, some of these military simulation games can create competition thus spurring both interest and effort of the participants in the training.  This article discusses research on the interactive use of a commercial game for command and control training at the company level by two teams of ROTC cadets, one team located at University of Nevada (Reno) and one team in University of Central Florida (Orlando).  Simulation interoperability and communications were accomplished through standard TCP/IP connections and chat boxes.  The game-based training proved successful with the ROTC teams and was subsequently explored by the Infantry School for use in a classroom setting.  This article reports on the findings of the research.1. IntroductionUsers and sponsors constantly emphasize low cost methods of achieving military training and education. In this regard, low cost console, PC and Internet games are appealing.  The gaming industry also knows how to not only to build low cost games but also attract buyers and, based on the success of the commercial market, get them to buy again and again.  Some attribute the phenomenon of widespread interest and continuing buying interest to the compelling nature of the games.   With low cost and compelling play, games are also easy to use and learn.  From a training perspective, ease of use, low cost and compelling, repetitive play are attributes any training simulation would love to have.  What better way to accomplish training but through fun?  Based on this notion, we have been exploring and developing application of games to the task of training and education for several years.  But training simulation also requires suitable military content.  Some of these games have military content.  The question remains, is it suitable, and if so, for what applications?Low-cost commercial games that simulate aspects of military operations have been used to accomplish part-task military training and education in many different applications.  Adapting a game with military content to military training takes imagination and serendipitous crossover from the world of entertainment to the serious business of training.  Two such games of particular interest to this article are Steel Beasts and Combat Mission: Beyond Overlord.  This article discusses military use and research with respect to both these games.  The discussion on Steel Beasts focuses on its use in education at the United States Military Academy.  The discussion on Combat Mission: Beyond Overlord focuses on research on command and control education at the company level by two teams of ROTC cadets, one team located at University of Nevada (Reno) and one team in University of Central Florida (Orlando).  Future potential training use by the Infantry School of Beyond Overlord is also discussed.2. Using Simulation in support of Military Science Education at the United States Military AcademyFigure 2.1. MS 302: Ground Maneuver Warfare IIThe United States Military Academy Department of Military Instruction (DMI) uses commercially developed games as part of their Warfighting Center (WARCEN) simulation suite.  The WARCEN supports all military science curriculum and most military training simulation needs for aspiring officers.  The WARCEN is more than a simulation center for military exercises; it also inspires cadets to learn more about Officership and the profession of arms.  In the capacity of supporting military instruction, DMI has developed a comprehensive and integrated simulation strategy that spans cadets’ academic careers. The plan provides for the use of modern simulation tools used in a wide range of military science courses, training events, and self-study efforts.  Among other activities, WARCEN helps cadets explore theories of Military Science within simulated battlefields.  One of the simulations in use in the WARCEN is the commercial PC game, Steel Beasts.  Steel Beasts is a game that simulates modern mechanized warfare, using the M1A1 and Leopard main battle tanks.  A cadet plays the role of a tank commander, gunner, or squad leader in a mechanized fight.  This game fits well into the mechanized flavor of the third year military science course, MS 302: Ground Maneuver Warfare II, The Application of Combat Power.  Each year, 1000 3rd year cadets participate in a one hour and 45 minute simulation exercise during MS 302.In this course, the cadet explores the five elements of combat power -- Maneuver, Firepower, Protection, Information and Leadership -- using a theory to practice methodology.  As part of the curriculum, the cadet experiences a series of unique tactical decision exercises and must make and communicate tactical decisions to the class, based on solid ground maneuver warfare theory and US Army doctrine.  In a capstone exercise, the cadet role-plays as a small unit leader in a US Army tank company team.  They receive a tactical mission, plan an operation, and rehearse the plan using a sand table to prepare for the simulated mission. The Steel Beasts game is the vehicle for USMA cadets to execute this mission.To be perfectly clear, the course instructor is paramount in the success of the course, not the commercial game.  The instructor is essential to delivery of the course content, creating a setting for the use of the game, direction during gaming, and, not least of all, conducting an After Action Review that links experiences in the game to real world military science.  Hence the objective is applying the five elements of combat power to mission planning, not simply experiencing a simulated military scenario.Integrated into the course, Steel Beasts supports instruction about applying combat power in mechanized engagement as a crew member or a tactical decision leader.  In a typical scenario, a cadet acting as a small unit tactical leader makes decisions based on the visual feedback in the simulation to his/her acting subordinates.  These subordinates participate in the game as individual players in the multi-player game.  Tactical plans are overlaid on the Map and Mission Editors contained in Steel Beasts and disseminated to subordinate players.    Figure 2.2. Tactical OverlayFigure 2.3. Tactical DiscussionFigure 2.4. AARIn addition, Steel Beasts presents to each participant a platform-level vantage point in continuous-time and interactive mode.  Local views can be obtained from within or above the platform (e.g. tank) being simulated.   Figure 2.5. Above Platform View  Figure 2.6.  Gunner ViewFigure 2.7. Vehicle ControlSteel Beasts features modern ground warfare using the Leopard 2A4 and M1A1 tank.Computer interoperability of the multi-players operating on different computer platforms is facilitated through TCP/IP over the Internet or through IPX for LAN applications.  In the USMA implementation of Steel Beasts, players conduct verbal communications with each other over tactical radios.  All participants report military intelligence using standard SALUTE reporting procedures.  Command and control coordination and synchronization of individual actions and organization operations is accomplished through radio communications and individual players responding through the control of their platform/weapon systems.    From an educational perspective, this approach has been very successful.  Future plans call for an expansion of the WARCEN with other simulations.3. Gaming with ROTC CadetsWith a similar motive, we also explored military education through gaming with ROTC cadets at UCF and University of Nevada (Reno).  We did not have access to a facility like WARCEN, but did have access to a computer with Internet access at both locations.  We also had sufficient budget to purchase Combat Mission: Beyond Overlord.  Figure 3.1. Combat Mission CoverCombat Mission: Beyond Overlord is similar to Steel Beasts in that it involves Company level operations with individual players, but there are differences between the games and how we used them.  Combat Mission is turn-based, simultaneous-execution 3D simulation of WWII tactical warfare. Combat Mission: Beyond Overlord emphasizes turn-based Platoon and Company Team operations rather than continuous, real-time play of individual vehicles or soldiers.  As such, none of the ROTC cadets in this game played roles as individual tankers, grenadiers, etc.  Instead they performed roles as Company Commander, Platoon Leader, and Fire Support Officer.  Modern warfare is currently not modeled in Combat Mission while Steel Beasts concentrates on modern warfare.  3D enables true 3D LOS, spotting, terrain, and trajectories that are more realistic than 2D approximations.  The game provides scenarios that re-create components of historical operations that took place on the Western Front from Normandy in 1944 to Germany in 1945.  Players can be either Allied or Axis, ranging from US Airborne to German Volkssturm.   Entities are represented synthetically as squads, teams, and individual vehicles. Figure 3.2. Combat Mission Screen ShotPlayers command a force as small as a platoon, or as large as a reinforced battalion. Figure 3.3. Combat Mission SquadEach entity and weapon is kept track of for maximum realism. Instead of continuous play, Beyond Overlord allows players to input planned player routes and actions for all their entities for the next turn during a pause in the action.  Figure 3.4. Planned Entity RouteWhen all players have put in their planned actions, the Combat Mission: Beyond Overlord computes the outcome and then displays the combat with compelling graphics and sound effects.  A turn is equal to 60 seconds of synthetic combat. Between turns, players give each of his/her entities behaviors to perform like firing or moving, and then these behaviors are simultaneously executed for 60 seconds of "real time" at the next turn. Typically scenarios last 40 turns, or 40 minutes of simulated combat that are aimed at achieving some ultimate objective. Operations might have an afternoon or several days' worth of combat to achieve the objective. Features include spotting via sound, misidentification of targets, and instant feedback 3D LOS check. In the UCF-UN(Reno) ROTC implementation of Combat Mission, we recreated a battle from the WWII period.  All of the cadets were in their first or second year of officer training, though many had prior enlisted service in the Active Army, Reserve, or National Guard.  Prior service ranks ranged from Specialist to Staff Sergeant.  None had ever served in the role of platoon sergeant or platoon leader.The training program was conducted within the framework of five distinct phases:1. Training Experience Survey & Tutorial2. Defensive Engagement & After Action Review (AAR)3. Offensive Engagement & AAR4. Force-on-Force Meeting Engagement & AAR5. Training System AAR & Post-Training SurveyThroughout the training the application of real-world tactics, as opposed to computer gamesmanship, was continuously stressed and monitored.  The obvious limitations and constraints of the available software and hardware used by the training program were also identified and discussed before the start of Phase 1.	Phase 1: Each participant completed a written survey that collected data on his military training experience.  Once the survey was complete, each participant was placed before a desktop computer to work his way through a written tutorial that took approximately one hour to complete.  The tutorial walked them through the game’s interface and several turns of a small meeting engagement scenario against the opposing Artificial Intelligence (AI).  Upon completion of the written tutorial, the participants were given two hours of free-play time to fight the same small battle several times using different approaches.  The additional free-play time was extremely beneficial in allowing the participants to gain a working familiarity with the game interface and an appreciation of how the game’s units interacted with one another and the 3D terrain.	Phase 2-4: At the start of Phase 2, each group was divided into two teams of 6-7 personnel each.  The personnel in each team remained with that team throughout the course of the training program, replicating the commissioned leadership within a reinforced combined arms company team. Each team consisted of: 1-Company Commander, 3-Infantry Platoon Leaders, 1-Tank Platoon Leader, 1-Scout Platoon Leader, and 1-Fire Support Officer.  The ROTC cadets maintained the same duty position throughout the three battles.At the start of each engagement, the designated team commander received a written battalion operations order.  The commander was given sufficient time and resources to develop a company scheme of maneuver to accomplish the mission objectives, and to orally brief his plan to his subordinates using an enlarged map of the maneuver area.  They in turn, using issued maps and the ability to recon the terrain on their computer terminals, formulated appropriate plans and graphics to control their designated units.  Once the platoon leaders had finished their planning and back briefed the commander, units were positioned within the maneuver area according to the approved plan.  Upon completion of deployment, the battle was begun.	Each battle had a defined time limit that was sufficient to accomplish mission objectives, but required the participants to balance the needs of force protection with mission accomplishment.  The first two battles, a defense and then an attack, were fought against the game’s AI.  The third battle, a meeting engagement, was fought against the other team within the group.  The ROTC group, one team in Nevada and the other in Florida, used a TCP/IP Internet connection to engage one another.  No problems were experienced with the Internet connection.	Phase 5: At the end of each battle an AAR was conducted on the planning and execution of the fight.  After all battles were completed and discussed, an AAR was conducted on the effectiveness and utility of the experimental training system. This data was collected using a post-training survey.4. ROTC Survey ResultsA 43-question post training survey was administered to the 13 participating cadets.  On the positive side ROTC cadets indicated in a statistically significant degree (Wilcoxon sign test) a number of advantages to the game.  These included but were not limited to providing a framework for exercising METT-TC (Mission, Enemy, Terrain & Weather, Troops, Time and Civilians) steps.  Additionally, ROTC cadets indicated the positive contribution of the game to both “the difficulties and importance” and “the teaching and practice” of synchronizing combat assets during mission execution.   On the negative side, at least two of the thirteen cadets expressed negative remarks about the “sense of realistic artillery behavior,” the “sense of realistic small-unit combat,” the ability of the system to “facilitate the understanding and implementation of reconnaissance,” and “provide battlefield information in order to maintain … situational awareness.”  The sense of the lack of realism of small unit combat probably stems from a tank engagement in which one tank was hit three times without destruction.  Students actually expressed doubts during the play about the validity of that engagement.  Further and as somewhat expected due to the non-real time nature of the game play, at least two cadets were not positive about the systems ability to promote an understanding of “the limitations and constraints of time.”  The instructor can choose to place time constraints on the players between game play.  We did not for instructional purposes.Overall the results of the survey indicate that using this commercial-off-the-shelf software is a viable, low-cost option for training tactical concepts at the platoon and company level.  Specifically, cadets indicated the game system would be beneficial “for teaching and practicing tactical concepts and troop-leading procedures to Basic Course officers at a combat-arms branch school.”  Cadets were enthusiastic throughout the game play and especially enjoyed the challenge of competing against a live opponent over the Internet.  The Internet appeared to enhance the aspects of the competition by facilitating the gaming of two different teams.5. Conclusions and Future ApplicationsThe game-based training proved successful with both the USMA and the ROTC cadets.  Both approaches used commercial games as a supplement to regular classroom instruction.  The games added not only excitement to the instruction, they provided a means for the cadets to visualize and comprehend the meaning behind the instructor words.  The use of the commercial games was economical.  The initial cost was small and maintenance and support for the games was simply a telephone call away.  Further there are large gaming communities that utilize both games that add to availability and diversity of scenarios.  The games were different in their employment.  The differences emphasized the differences in the approach of the instructor with both appearing to have equal endorsement from the students.  The Combat Mission game clock, with pauses between play intervals, also allowed the instructor to discuss battle outcome and tactical doctrine during play without disrupting that play.  Finally, play over the Internet in competition with another ROTC detachment added to the enthusiasm of the participants.Analyses of the ROTC cadet responses indicate the strong contribution of Combat Mission game to the instruction about METT-TC and tactical synchronization.  Conversely, some players questioned the validity of game play.  Subsequent to the gaming with the cadets, Combat Mission was explored by the Infantry School for use in a classroom setting.  The Infantry School response was positive and a modern day version of this game system contracted with the developer for possible future use at the School.Author BiographiesMICHAEL D. PROCTOR, Ph.D., LTC (Retired), CMSP, currently serves as an Associate Professor with the Industrial Engineering and Management Systems Department of the University of Central Florida.  Dr. Proctor’s research interests include interactive simulation modeling, gaming and training, artificial intelligence, and SBA ADL.  Dr. Proctor formerly served as Director of TRAC Research Activities at the Naval Post-Graduate School in Monterey.MAJOR JOHN CURLEY was selected for advanced civil schooling and is currently enrolled at the University of Central Florida in the Modeling and Simulation Masters program.  Major Curley has served in the U.S. Army for 15 years as an Armor officer.  He is now a FA 57.  Major Curley is married with four wonderful kids. His BA (History & English) is from FSU.MAJOR WILBURN C WILLIAMS JR is an Armor officer currently assigned at the United States Military Academy as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Military Instruction.  He has a BBA from Texas A and M University and a Masters in Industrial Engineering from University of Central Florida.  He has led and commanded tank units at the platoon and company level and currently runs the Warfighting Center, a state of the art simulation laboratory for military science.