Transmission of Simulated Entities on a T-1using an Aggregate ProcessJoe SorrocheASRC Communications, Ltd.Theater Aerospace Command and Control Simulation Facility4500 Aberdeen Blvd St. SE, Building 942Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico 87117505-853-0372, DSN 263-0372joe.sorroche@kirtland.af.mil.com Keywords:TACCSF, JQUAD, ALSP. ABSTRACT: The Theater Aerospace Command and Control Simulation Facility (TACCSF), located at Kirtland Air Force Base (KAFB), conducts and participates in Air Force distributed simulation exercises. Each exercise requires some or all of the existing T-1 links between TACCSF and other sites. The TACCSF also participates in Blue Flag (BF) Exercises each year, which are conducted by the Air Force Command and Control Training and Innovation Group (AFC2TIG). Currently, there is one T-1 between TACCSF and the AFC2TIG at Hurlburt Field, FL. Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) data is sent on the T-1 WAN, and follows the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) 1278.1a, 1998 standard. To date, only air and some ground entities generated by Distributed Information Warfare Constructive Environment (DICE) have been sent to TACCSF using a T-1. Another environment generator, JQUAD, generates tens of thousands of ground entities for each BF exercise. JQUAD can also send DIS data, which results in several thousand entity state Protocol Data Units (PDUs), and using several megabits of bandwidth on the C2TIG local LAN. JQUAD also generates aggregate data, where one data packet can represent several individual entities. This paper will address how JQUAD can send several thousand ground entities via a T-1 from the C2TIG to the TACCSF, taking advantage of JQUAD’s aggregate process.IntroductionThe Theater Aerospace Command and Control Simulation Facility (TACCSF) conducts and participates in Air Force distributed simulation exercises. Each exercise requires some or all of the existing T-1 links between TACCSF and other sites. The TACCSF also participates in Blue Flag (BF) Exercises each year, which are conducted by the Air Force Command and Control Training and Innovation Group (AFC2TIG). Currently, there is one T-1 between TACCSF and the AFC2TIG. The data on the T-1 WAN follows the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) 1278.1a, 1998 standard for Distributed Interactive Simulations (DIS). To date, only air and some ground entities generated by Distributed Information Warfare Constructive Environment (DICE) have been sent to TACCSF. Another environment generator, JQUAD, generates several thousand ground entities. JQUAD can also send DIS data, which results in several thousand entity state Protocol Data Units (PDUs). JQUAD can also send aggregate data, where one data packet can represent several individual entities. This paper addresses how JQUAD can send tens of thousands of ground entities via a T-1 from the AFC2TIG to the TACCSF taking advantage of JQUAD’s aggregate process.JQUAD DescriptionJQUAD is a suite of simulation models which permits the computer to play out many components of command and control warfare. JQUAD is multisided, able to portray red, blue, and other players, and is designated to play at the collateral level and below. JQUAD generates United States Message Text Format (USMTF) products in the volume and format expected during actual combat operations. JQUAD also produces binary data link feeds such as Tactical Information Broadcast Service (TIBS), Tactical Related Applications (TRAP), and Tactical Digital Information Link (TADIL). For Blue Flag (BF) exercises, JQUAD interacts directly with the Air Warfare Simulator (AWSIM) model to provide information to the control staff and the Air Operations Center (AOC). JQUAD also provides a TADIL-J feed to the Air Defense System Integrator (ADSI). JQUAD consists of four different simulations: Joint Electronic Combat/ Electronic Warfare Simulation (JECEWSI), Joint Command and Control (C2) Attack Simulation (JCAS), Joint Networks Simulation (JNETS), and Joint Operations Information Simulation (JOISIM). A fifth module, JQUAD Ground Game (JGG), simulates ground combat outcomes and acts as a ground mobile force generator for JOISIM intelligence collection activities. JQUAD is Aggregate Level Simulation Protocol (ALSP) compliant, and ALSP is the interface between AWSIM and JQUAD. JQUAD is also partially DIS compliant (currently one way from JQUAD) and can interface with DIS compliant virtual simulations and simulators. A description of the JQUAD components follows:JECEWSI JECEWSI is a near real time interactive simulation of the Electronic Combat (EC) environment. JECEWSI allows opposing sides to employ Electronic Warfare (EW) systems and procedures and view the effects on game situations in AWSIM and other ALSP compliant simulations.JCAS JCAS accesses fixed target data from the Rapid Application of Air Power (RAAP) database. JCAS simulates Bomb Damage Assessment (BDA) on these fixed targets using approved Joint Munitions Effectiveness Manual (JMEM) data. JCAS links to the Portable Space Model Navigation (PSM/NAV) to incorporate Global Positioning System (GPS) accuracy effects upon Precision Guided Munitions.JNETS JNETS simulates relationships between static C2 nodes, as well as dynamic connectivity for communications, transportation, and power distribution networks. JNETS is a white cell visualization tool only. JNETS provides controllers a visual representation of the cascading effects of attacks on the nodes of these networks. JNETS does not directly degrade the operation of these networks, it merely shows a controller where it would be justifiable to manually do so.JOISIM JOISIM simulates various air and space based intelligence sensors, and collects and reports intelligence information in real world USMTF TIBS, TADIL, TRAP, and OTH-Gold.The AFC2TIG produces, in electronic format, a data file (format TBD) containing current JQUAD ground truth status of command and control facilities at the DMPI level. This data is prepared and provided to the “Adversary Ground Truth” system operator approximately every 2 hours in order to maintain a control view of threat C2.JQUAD Ground Game (JGG)JGG is a fifth model hooked into the JQUAD suite of models. JGG is used to present a map overlay and moving ground targets to the wargame environment. JGG provides a feed to the DIS Local Area Network (LAN) making it easy for the players to identify moving targets using the Virtual Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (VSTARS) and the Air Force Synthetic Environment for Reconnaissance and Surveillance (AFSERS). The JGG controls ground force attrition by utilizing a JMEM table. JGG allows controllers to manually adjudicate force on force engagements and passes the data to JOISIM, which generates the appropriate reports.JQUAD sends entity state PDUs to the DIS LAN by transmitting them one by one, spacing the transmission by several microseconds. This transmission allows JQUAD to send several thousand entity state PDUs on the DIS LAN and avoid bandwidth spikes. This has been verified during integration testing with JQUAD in preparation for a Blue Flag exercise. JQUAD can also spread out the update rate, thus reducing bandwidth usage even further. However, using the ALSP protocol to transmit entities can reduce bandwidth usage such that the T-1 network can be used by other sites. The next section describes how that can be accomplished.Sending JQUAD data to the TACCSFJQUAD uses the Aggregate Level Simulation Protocol (ALSP), which is a message-based protocol. The ALSP architecture is described in the next section.ALSP ArchitectureThe basic architecture of a two-actor confederation is shown in Figure 1. Each actor is required to have an ALSP translator, which converts ALSP messages to formats used internally by the simulation. The translator is connected to an ALSP Common Module, or ACM. The ACM is responsible for both object management and time control.The ACMs are connected to each other by an ALSP Broadcast Emulator, or ABE. The ABE transfers data between the ACMs, performing source level filtering to minimize network traffic. As confederations grow in size, more ABEs can be added to improve network efficiency. ABEs can also be strategically placed to facilitate the conducting of exercises with sites spread out over large geographic distances.The two remaining components shown in Figure 1 are for system control and exercise management. The ALSP Control Terminal (ACT) is a monitor for the specific ACM or ABE to which it is attached. It allows viewing of the component’s status, which can include both AIS and actor data, as well as changing/updating selected pieces of data. ACTs were the first exercise management tools for ALSP; unfortunately a separate display area (either a VT100 terminal or a window on a workstation) is needed for each ACT. In order to control a large exercise, the number of ACTs can easily exceed a dozen, cluttering displays and hindering exercise management. Additionally, most ACT capabilities affect only the component to which it is attached, requiring typing commands at each ACT to effect changes on a confederation-wide basis.The unwieldiness of trying to manage a confederation with just the ACTs led to the development of the Confederation Management Tool (CMT). The CMT is, in effect, a “super” ACT. One CMT can attach to all the ACMs and ABEs in a confederation, summarizing the status on one display, allowing confederation wide changes to system parameters, as well as supporting all the capabilities of the ACT for each individual ACM and ABEEMBED UnknownJQUAD uses this ALSP architecture to represent several tracks as one entity. Using this format, several entities can be sent using very little bandwidth. The ALSP format can be used to send entity data via T-1 to the TACCSF, where a de-aggregation process could receive the data and convert it to entity state PDUs to be sent out on the TACCSF DIS Ground LAN. The next section describes how this would be done.Sending JQUAD data via T-1 to the TACCSFJQUAD aggregate data can be sent via T-1 to TACCSF, and could be sent to a machine or to a specific IP address that contains the De-aggregation Process. The following sections estimates the required bandwidth, verifies the estimates by testing with JQUAD, and analyzes the network, and then builds and tests the de-aggregation process.Bandwidth EstimatesThe T-1 has a bandwidth of 1.5 Mbits/sec. An entity state PDU is 1280 bits, and each entity state PDU is updated every 5 seconds for straight and level movement, and every second for other movements. The total number of DIS entities that can be sent is: EMBED Equation.3  where:B is the number of bits in a PDU,Ru is the update time in seconds,NE is the number of entities, andRb is the channel data rate in bits/second.For a one second update rate, the number of entity state PDUs that can be sent is: EMBED Equation.3  For a five second update rate, the DIS standard, the number of entity state PDUs that can be sent is: EMBED Equation.3  1.5 Mbits/sec is not an accurate bandwidth limit. The T-1 has some overhead, and using Class B network protocol, some data collisions start to occur at around 1 Mbit/sec. Also, there are a number of different PDUs sent during a DIS exercise; entity state PDUs comprise about 80% of the DIS data. Entity state PDUs usually have a 5 second update rate for straight and level flight or travel, and no change in velocity. For turns or other changes, the update rate is at 1 second. Bandwidth usage varies for a typical DIS exercise. The variables include update rates, PDU types, and other IP data on the T-1 network. Observation of several TACCSF exercises shows that the limit is at approximately 1700 entities. JQUAD can generate up to 50,000 entities that are aggregated into several thousand aggregates. Using an aggregate protocol could result in several thousand aggregate updates sent to the TACCSF.The network diagram for such a setup is shown in Figure 2.JQUAD testAn initial test will be required to verify the bandwidth estimates, and determine if the data can be sent to a specific IP address. The test will also determine if the JQUAD aggregate data will need any special data packaging before sent via T-1 to TACCSF. The test plan is as follows:Required Equipment:JQUAD, with a scenario of 20,000 – 30,000 tracksT-1 Hardware connection set up between JQUAD and TACCSFCisco 2600 Routers configured to send and receive JQUAD ALSP DataDISNAT logger at TACCSF to measure the bandwidth usage and analyze data sent by JQUAD.Test Procedure.A JQUAD operator will bring up a scenario with 20,000 – 30,000 tracks. The operator will record the approximate number of tracks.TACCSF will configure the Cisco routers to accept the JQUAD ALSP data, then connect the DISNAT logger to the network and record the bandwidth usage.Once the scenario is at the maximum number of tracks, the JQUAD operator will inform the TACCSF hardware engineer to record the bandwidth usage.Figure 2. JQUAD Aggregate NetworkIf the results show the bandwidth does not exceed the available T-1 bandwidth, then the de-aggregation process software should be installed at TACCSF and tested to confirm that a separate de-aggregation process will solve the bandwidth issue.TACCSF will monitor the ground tracks by using the Joint Conflict And Tactical Simulator (JCATS) and the VSTARS simulator. JCATS will not generate any tracks, but only read the JQUAD ground tracks. The de-aggregation process will be set up to accept JQUAD ALSP-like data from Ethernet, and convert it into entity state PDUs. A software module will be required at each end to build, and send, and receive the JQUAD data. The de-aggregation process will take this information and produce DIS entity state PDUs on the DIS LAN. The process will also record interactions with the entities generated by JQUAD. If a target is destroyed or damaged, the process will send the information to JQUAD using an ALSP-like format. JQUAD will decrement the aggregate entity, and generate battle damage assessment. The process could also provide output to a screen indicating status and other useful information.Implementation Plan.Implementation of this network will follow this plan:Determine if the JQUAD de-aggregate data can be sent via T-1, and the required bandwidth. The bandwidth usage should be less than standard DIS data usage, and should be able to handle at least 10,000 tracks.The JQUAD software is government owned and could be available to the TACCSF. Determine if the JQUAD de-aggregate process could be copied from the JQUAD software, and run on a separate machine. Modifications will be made to the process to accept information in an ALSP-like format. The process will have to read information from Ethernet, and convert to DIS entity state PDUs. The process would also record interactions from DIS and send the information back to JQUAD.Estimate the cost.Test dataTest data for the setup described in the previous section was not obtained during the latest Blue Flag Exercise. Exercise requirements were changed such that the JQUAD ground game was not required at the TACCSF. When the JQUAD ground game is required at TACCSF, the network will be configured as described in Figure 2, and data will be acquired to determine the bandwidth usage using ALSP to send ground entity data on a T-1. This paper will be updated to include the results of the network test.Conversations with Ken Roberts of CACI revealed some interesting ideas. An application that receives JQUAD aggregate data could be built and hosted on a remote machine. JQUAD and JGG would be running on one machine at the C2TIG and the de-aggregation process would be running on a machine at TACCSF. Point-to-Point messages that contain aggregate data would be sent over the T-1 from the C2TIG to TACCSF. The data would be de-aggregated at TACCSF and converted into Entity State PDUs. Ken said the application would likely exchange between 80 and 160 bytes of data each second, or approximately 240 to 480 bits per second, which amounts to minimal bandwidth usage. An estimate of the hours and cost to build the de-aggregate process will be developed. We plan to develop the process, test it and record results in the very near future.References[1]	IEEE 1278.1a, 1998 [2]	Federation Management Tool Development for the ALSP-HLA Transition, Steven A. Specht, The MITRE Corporation, 1997.[3]	Conversations with Ken Roberts, CACI software.Author’s BiographyMr. SORROCHE has 15 years professional experience; seven years experience in the Modeling and Simulation field. He has a Bachelors and Masters of Science in Electrical Engineering from New Mexico State University. He is an Exercise Engineer for distributed exercises at the TACCSF, and has been the technical lead for the TACCSF for JEFX 2000, EFX 98, JEFX 98, Distributed Mission Training, and many Blue Flag exercises. He is the technical lead for JEFX 2002, and Vice Chair for the IEEE 1278.1a Signal PDU Standardization for TADIL J messages.