Turbo Tool Verification, Validation, and Accreditation Automation Application Jennifer ParkNavy Modeling and Simulation Management OfficeOPNAV N60M2000 Navy PentagonWashington DC 20350park.jennifer@hq.navy.mil David H BroylesSPAWAR1 Innovation DriveHanahan, SC 29406843-218-5078broylesd@spawar.navy.milKeywords:Verification, Validation, Assessment, Modeling and Simulation, Tool. ABSTRACT: The difficulty of initiating Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Verification, Validation, and Assessment (VV&A) is knowing where to start, what to consider, and how to bring about a cohesive product so that an informed accreditation decision can made by the M&S  user or Accreditation Authority.  The purpose of this paper is to present Tirbo Tool that provides an automated method of submitting the key elements of VV&A as outlined in the Department of the Navy Verification, Validation, and Accreditation Implementation Handbook.  The Turbo tool assists implementers in developing  M&S VV&A plans and reports and generates the necessary documentations.  As there are many categories and types of M&S, the Turbo Tool is developed so that it accommodates all M&S development and all users.1.  IntroductionThe Verification, Validation, and Accreditation is three separate processes.  Each processes, all inclusive in an acronym VV&A, has certain processes that are defined and agreed upon by the VV&A community.  These processes are evolving.  However, the fundamentals such as defining requirements through conducting conceptual model validation, functional verification, and results validation are similar for all M&S programs.  As the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) Recommended Practice Guide (RPG) and Department of the Navy (DoN) Verification,  Validation,   Accreditation Implementation Handbook states, the VV&A should be tailored to meet programs specific needs [1] [2].  The Turbo Tool provides focus, key elements that should be considered, that assists implementer document those key elements. Turbo Tool is a document generating tool.  These documents can be presented as body of evidences that supports accreditation decision.  As an early involvement of M&S VV&A determines the success of VV&A implementation, the tool assist the implementers with this process. 2.  M&S VV&A Program OversightGoverning the Navy’s M&S VV&A program is the SECNAVINST 5200.40 [3].  This instruction provides policy and defines the general process for DoN VV&A implementation.  [Note ]In the DoN Verification, Validation, and Assessment Implementation Handbook, it addresses not only the processes but the implementation of the processes, role and responsibilities, and examples of various M&S VV&A implementation examples.   The Navy stresses the importance of tailoring VV&A needs to the users requirement and to the specifics of the program.  As legacy system is different from new program, the VV&A must satisfy the need of the user and provide the level of desired confidence in order for the M&S to be creditable.  It must be noted that VV&A is not a stand alone process.  It must take into consideration of cost, schedule, and resource into consideration.  Additionally, VV&A is closely tied to the risk and configuration management.  As stated in the SECNAVINST 5200.40, “ the primary purpose of the VV&A effort is to establish credibility of Model or simulation as a source of data.  . . .it may also serve a secondary purpose of risk mitigation, supporting the identification of potential problems or errors as early in the life cycle as possible.” [2]2.1 VV&A MethodologyThe VV&A process is continuous process of quality control.  Figure 1 depicts the VV&A process for the Navy.  The M&S process is initiated with the need that defines the intended use of the model.  The intended use is defined in the Conceptual Model stages with continuous dialogue between the user, who defines the requirement, and the M&S team.  This continuous dialogue is an important process in ensuring clearly understanding is achieved and the requirements are validated.  The requirements is needs to be documented which Turbo Tool allows implementers to do so.The requirements in turn generate systems specification or engineering specifications in which MS& are built to.  During this phase, there are developer’s testing and assessments to verify that models or simulation are built correctly.  Although Models have been built correct, it does not necessary mean that they are providing accurate representation of the intended use.  The results generated by the models or simulation must be validated against “real” data to ensure they are functioning correctly.  This is most difficult element of the process.  However, this process can be accomplished through Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) or by other methods.  The Turbo Tool follows the process from the requirements validation to result validation, documenting through planning, and captures these information.  Additionally, Turbo Tool allows reference information to be captured such as developer’s verification result and testing report where implementers may not have direct involvement.  As Turbo Tool generates documentation, these are presented to Accreditation Authority for decision. EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure 1  VV&A Process2.2  VV&A Roles and ResponsibilityThe key players of VV&A are discussed below.  It is imperative that these individuals work together to provide cohesive M&S program.  Again, it is emphasized that the VV&A program be tailored for the specific needs of the program.  Some of the roles and responsibilities may overlap and some will expand to include teams of individuals.   The roles and responsibility will change as the program matures through the development process.  The roles and responsibilities as stated in reference [1] and [2] are as follows:User – End user of the M&S Accreditation Authority – Decides whether or not a model or simulation can be applied to a specific user’s application. Accreditation Agent – Designated by the Accreditation Authority to represent and assist in the planning and oversight of the accreditation process.M&S Proponent – Responsible for developing M&S V&V plan, implementing the plan, and submitting all necessary VV&A documentation.V&V Agent – Supports M&S proponent and Accreditation Authority and acts as the lead in seeing that VV&A activities are tailored, planned, conducted, and documented.  Prepare all necessary documentation for Accreditation Authority or Agent.The interactions of these players are shown in Table 1. EMBED Excel.Sheet.8  Table 13. Turbo Tool OverviewThe Navy Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) Turbo Tool System is an automation of the DON VV&A process. The tool has been developed to prompt the V&V agent, or M&S manager through the process of tailoring the V&V Plan and Report to support the unique requirements of the use under accreditation.Models and simulations support many types of uses and the amount of V&V required for any given use will be commensurate with the Accreditation Authority’s required for any given use will be commensurate with the Accreditation Authority’s criteria and the status (or history) of the model or simulation. A standard which can support the Accreditation Authority’s agent, the V&V agent and the M&S Proponent is one that will ensure that the V&V process steps are planned based on the requirements, acceptability criteria, and desired model outputs (MOEs). No single template can cover all programs, but a tool can be provided to guide the key participants through the VV&A process and prompting the entering of pertinent data within templates tailored for a specific use.4. Turbo Tool ApproachThe user is provided a user interface that captures the list of validation activities for each required area. We have addressed seven main areas or steps involved with a VV&A effort. Turbo Tool breaks these seven areas into 37 user interface areas within six main categories to assist in M&S VV&A planning. The tool offers a detailed step driven process of capturing the activities that comprise a VV&A process.		Figure 2 Turbo Tool InterfaceM&S RequirementsDevelop a requirements document for the model. This document includes information on the types of analyses that the model would be required to perform. The requirements document would define those steps of the M&S Process that will be implemented as well as define the Intended Use.M&S Plan / V&V Preliminary ActivitiesThis section is a detailed analysis of the M&S Requirements Document. This section of the application creates the linkage between the M&S and V&V requirements ensures that an empirical method of measuring the level of performance to fidelity meets each of the defined requirements.Model Design Development / Validate Conceptual ModelConceptual model validation should be completed before significant progress has been made in model design and development. The user will use Turbo Tool in parallel with model design development in order to ensure that major changes to the conceptual model should not occur after significant progress has been made in model developmentDefine Simulation Scenarios / Functional Design VerificationThe goal of the “Functional Design Verification” is to establish the consistency and faithfulness of the actual model design specifications with respect to the validated conceptual model and the M&S requirements. Turbo Tool provides an automated review function that cross-checks the design documentation to ensure that the design supports the conceptual model. The nomenclature used is “Requirements mapping” to expand cross-checking functions across the 16 major areas of VV&A documentation.Analyze Results / Validate ResultsThe Turbo Tool application has tracked the progress of the entire VV&A process and mapped the design to the model. At this point in the process, the modeled system’s design has been verified and the simulation scenarios have been ruin. During this stage, the results of the scenarios will be analyzed and these results will be verified. As with the previous steps in the process, this analysis may result in modifications to the test scenarios and or other aspects of the model. The tool fully documents and tracks these changes and future versions will analyze the risk factor and associated cost of each requirement change.M&S Final Report / V&V Final ReportTurbo Tool produces the following documents and reports:Accreditation Plan –  Template that selects from the database the elements required to provide planning documentation to the Accreditation AuthorityAccreditation Package – SECNAVINST 5200.40 specifies that the following documents be included in an M&S Accreditation Package: M&S Software Design Document, M&S User’s Guide, M&S Programmer’s Manual, M&S CM Plan, M&S Data Documents, and archived VV&A Reports.Accreditation Report – This provides the result of implementing the Accreditation Plan.Accreditation Decision Letter – Provides template letter to be generated after implementing the Accreditation Plan and reviewing the Accreditation Report.Verification and Validation Decision Letter – After implementation of the M&S, the V&V decision letter is signed off by SME’s and the Verification and or Validation agent.Verification and Validation Report  - The final step in a VV&A documentation package, the V&V agent is the intended audience.8. SummaryA tool was asked for to help guide the V&V agent, and the model proponent, through the process of V&V for both legacy and new development M&S.  Throughout the M&S community program managers recognize that many of their resources are employed in determining how to document their V&V process. In so doing, many programs have chosen to develop their own formats. The goal of a VV&A automation tool is not only to ease the construction of the required documentation but to standardize M&S documentation to allow for dynamic database retrieval of “best fit” models allowing re-use of models for future projects.No single template can cover all programs, but an automation tool can provide participants with tailor able to the user’s needs. 9. References[1]	Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, Recommended Guide, August 2001.[2]	Department of the Navy Verification and Accreditation Implementation Handbook, February 2001.  [3]	 [4]  SECNAVINST 5200.40, Department of the Navy Modeling and Simulation Verification, Validation, and Accreditation, 19 April 1999.					Author BiographiesJENNIFER PARK  is a Communications Engineer for Space and Naval Warfare Systems Center San Diego for Network Centric Warfare Division.  She is the Navy’s Verification, Validation, and Assessment Lead in support of Navy Modeling and Simulation Management Office (NAVMSMO), CNO code N60M.  DAVID BROYLES is a Geographic Information System Analyst at Space and Naval Warfare System Center, Hanahan, SC.  He is the software designer for the Turbo Tool VV&A application. .note .  The SECANVINST 5200.40 is being revised.  The Enclosure (1) of the instruction will be incorporated in the DoN VV&A Implementation Handbook. 