EXECUTING THE DoD MODELING AND SIMULATION STRATEGY -MAKING SIMULATION INTEROPERABILITY AND REUSE A REALITYMs. Philomena ZimmermanDefense Modeling and Simulation Office1901 N. Beauregard St, Suite 500Alexandria, VA 22311703-998-0660 HYPERLINK "mailto:pzimmerm@dmso.mil" pzimmerm@dmso.milJim HeusmannScience Applications International Corporation (SAIC)1901 N. Beauregard St., Suite 500Alexandria, VA 22311703-824-3413 HYPERLINK "mailto:heusmann@dmso.mil" heusmann@dmso.mil Al SciarrettaCNS Technologies Inc.1901 N. Beauregard St., Suite 500Alexandria, VA 22311703-824-3450 HYPERLINK "mailto:asciarre@dmso.mil" asciarre@dmso.milAbstractThe widespread use of advanced modeling and simulation (M&S) is necessary if the Department of Defense (DoD) is to cost-effectively maintain readiness, accomplish its operational missions, make optimal investment decisions, and achieve dramatic acquisition savings.  To ensure M&S does provide a cost-effective environment for training, experimentation, analysis, and acquisition; users cannot be burdened with developing and integrating all the models, simulations, databases, interfaces, etc. each time they have a need to exploit M&S capabilities.  To this end, the DoD has established a strategy to foster simulation interoperability and reuse, calling for the establishment of a common technical framework (CTF) and common services.  The CTF consists of the adoption of the common High Level Architecture (HLA) to which simulations must conform; the Functional Description of the Mission Space (FDMS) to provide the basis for the coherent development of distributed interoperable and reusable simulation representations (environment, systems and human); and data interface standardization to provide common, interchangeable representations of data in M&S.  Common services include the Modeling and Simulation Resource Repository (MSRR), the Modeling and Simulation Information Analysis Center (MSIAC), the DoD Glossary of Modeling and Simulation Terminology, and the DMSO M&S Education Program. While the CTF and common services, as well as increased use of object-oriented programming (OOP), have improved interoperability and reuse, they have not provided an approach for reducing the manpower, time, and resources needed to set up a simulation.  Therefore, the DoD has begun to consider the use of component- based technology which appears to hold great promise for addressing this issue.  Specifically, Component Based Software Engineering (CBSE) which is commonly considered the next step after OOP is being examined as a potential approach for a new generation of models, simulation, databases, and other tools.This paper presents the outcome of a Composable M&S Workshop sponsored by the DMSO in July 2002.  The workshop goal was to determine if there is sufficient maturity in CBSE to use it as an approach or guide for supporting the creation of a DoD-level composable simulation development effort.  The objective of such an effort would be to create an environment that supports the automated assembly of simulations, similar to CBSE approaches and the processes used by the construction and manufacturing industries today that have a wide variety of standard components from which to choose.  CBSE would provide the user with the ability to “compose” simulations rapidly with low overhead and no significant software programming or simulation hardware development expertise.IntroductionFrom a Department of Defense (DoD) perspective, one of the greatest challenges at the present time is the difficulty of integrating a vast multitude of information systems into networks of highly interoperable systems.  Gaining ground on this challenge requires significant focus and dedication to developing a variety of standards for systems interoperability and data consistency.  In the domain of modeling and simulation (M&S) systems, this challenge is no exception.  The magnitude of this challenge helped to drive the creation of the Defense Modeling and Simulations Office (DMSO) in 1991 and the Simulations Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) in 1994. The DMSO RoleAccording to the Department of Defense (DoD) Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Master Plan (MSMP, DoDD 5000.59-P), the DoD vision for M&S is to, in part, ensure that “… modeling and simulation environments will be constructed from affordable, reusable components operating through an open systems architecture.”  The DMSO monitors and coordinates all M&S activities within the DoD.  In 2000, DMSO embarked on a new vector to emphasize support to the warfighter.  The DMSO vision is the “fostering of the interoperability, reuse, and affordability of M&S and the responsive application of these tools.  As new roles for the military emerge, it is important that simulations adapt quickly to provide the needed support. Using the guidelines set forth under the DoD MSMP and the DMSO vision, the DMSO Composable Simulation program strives to enhance reuse and interoperability of models for constructive, virtual and live simulations, while at the same time reducing the time, resources, and expertise necessary to build and run these simulations.  A recent topic of interest in the general software community involves the notion of component-based software.  The belief is a similar composable simulation framework would promote reuse of information, algorithms, and models.  Over time, as a library of fundamental components is built up and made accessible to all users, much more comprehensive representations of the mission space would be possible.  Hence, simulations that operate within a composable framework would have the potential to adapt quickly to emergent operations [1]. Thus, what is needed are formal standards of architectural design that supports both reuse of large components and also frameworks into which components can be integrated.  The High Level Architecture (HLA) is an example of a formal international standard, and it permits the integration of simulations produced by many vendors.  It prescribes interface standards defining services to coordinate the behavior of multiple semi-independent simulations.  In addition, the standard prescribes requirements on the simulation components that indicate what capabilities they must have, and what constraints they must observe on the use of shared services [2].  Currently, the HLA permits simulation models to be used in multiple contexts and, by extension, is fostering the development of a component economy in the military simulation marketplace [3].Composable M&S Workshop OverviewOn July 9-10, 2002, the DMSO sponsored a Composable M&S Workshop to investigate the feasibility of developing an approach to rapidly compose models and simulations in a distributed, collaborative environment.  It was attended by representatives from government, industry, and academia.  Prior to the workshop, the participants were provided Terms of Reference, which provided details on a number of  issues to be considered at the workshop.  A list of workshop participants, and the Terms of Reference can be viewed at h HYPERLINK "http://www.dmso.mil/composability/" ttps:// HYPERLINK "http://www.dmso.mil/public/warfighter/transformation/composability/" www.dmso.mil/public/warfighter/transformation/composability/Structure of the WorkshopThe first part of the workshop included presentations by representatives from government, industry, and academic institutions. These eight briefings focused primarily on the technical challenges and issues involved in achieving composable simulations and simulation environments.  They also provided different insights and points of view on the need and feasibility for a Composable M&S approach within the DoD.  These presentations generated considerable discussion among workshop participants regarding the requirements for Composable M&S and the barriers to developing such an approach.  The briefings are available to registered users of the site, https:// HYPERLINK "http://www.dmso.mil/public/warfighter/transformation/composability/" www.dmso.mil/public/warfighter/transformation/composability/Given these targeted briefings on topics directly related to the development of initial Composable M&S standards, and armed with focused information from different perspectives, the workshop participants were divided into four breakout groups to discuss: Concept of Operations for Composable Modeling and SimulationDesign and Architecture for Composable Modeling and SimulationNotional Composable Modeling and Simulation Languages, Databases, and DataOther Issues.Initially, all four groups wrestled with developing a shared understanding of the notional approach to Composable M&S standards.  The question “What is Composability?” dominated the first hour or more of each group’s discussions.  Each group brought a different perspective to this question.  The Concept of Operations group examined Composability from the applications point of view: “How would such a standard Composable M&S approach be useful in operations?”  The Design and Architecture group discussed issues associated with potential architectures, use cases, and business models for the Composable M&S approach.  Questions such as “What are some use cases that show how such an approach might be used?” generated a lot of discussion.  The Languages, Databases and Data group discussed issues associated with developing data models, while the Other Issues group discussed issues such as  “What are the organizational implications involved in adopting component-based technology?” and “Who owns standards, architectures, and component infrastructures when they are developed?” and “What discourages component sharing?”  Gradually, each group formulated a consensus view of the potential for some initial composability standards.  All four groups argued for much more robust and detailed definition of the proposed composable M&S standards before proceeding with any effort to develop such standards.All four breakout groups also addressed the question:  “Is Composable M&S Feasible?”   The breakout sessions examined Composable M&S feasibility from the four different perspectives, and considered technical, organizational, programmatic and economic feasibility, philosophy and enterprise culture factors.  The intent behind these breakout sessions was not for the groups to propose particular solutions for Composable M&S, but to gain better preliminary definition of the issues surrounding development of such a system.After the breakout sessions, participants reassembled as a larger group to present their findings and exchange ideas regarding each sub-area.  A discussion was then held to determine final conclusions and recommendations from the workshop. Workshop ResultsThe initial presentations and breakout sessions considered a broad range of challenges and issues surrounding the development of some sort of standard for composable M&S.  This prompted the participants to seriously consider the questions: “What is Composability?” “What should Composability become?” and “Is Composability Feasible?”  Discussion of these fundamental questions, and many others, was animated, highly focused, and succeeded in bringing to light many important issues upon which may hinge the success of this initiative.  After meeting in their breakout discussion groups, the four groups then provided a summary briefing, to the full workshop, including initial recommendations for further near-term work in this area.Breakout Group SummariesThe breakout groups spent the equivalent of a full day in their discussions.  This allowed members of each group time to achieve common understanding of some fundamental issues, to discuss definitions for key terms, exchange ideas regarding selected issues outlined in the TOR, and to achieve a level of consensus on their group’s recommendations to the full workshop.  These recommendations were presented in cross-briefings by each breakout group’s spokesperson.  The following discussion addresses the main points identified by the four groups.DefinitionOne definition for composability that was accepted by most of the participants was presented by Dr. Mikel Petty, Virginia Modeling, Analysis, and Simulation Center (VMASC), Old Dominion University.  He stated that in his research he found many definitions for composability in government and civilian documents.  Thus, he developed a proposed common definition of: “Composability is the capability to select and assemble simulation components in various combinations into simulation systems to satisfy specific user requirements” [4].Dr. Petty also proposed that one reason for the many differing definitions is that there are many differing levels of simulation components and composition.  Table 1 provides his view of these levels   SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Table 1. Differing levels of components and compositionChallenges and IssuesThe group consensus was that composability is feasible, and that limited capability for achieving composable M&S already exists.  It was also emphasized that a number of significant issues and challenges must be addressed in a systematic way in the early phases of developing composable M&S standards to support the expansion and acceptance of this capability.  Such challenges tend to arise when trying to develop new standards for any community, particularly when there are many competing fundamental approaches to the key problems at hand.  This situation was clearly applicable for initial composable M&S standards, based on discussions throughout the workshop.  In some cases, these issues were held rather uniformly among most participants and can be described as consensus views.  Examples of these were the notion that a key to reuse is the capturing of objectives, assumptions, and constraints associated with each component, and the notion that the emphasis should be on getting the semantics right.  In other cases, strongly-held divergent opinions were captured that represent a minority opinion.  An example of this was the suggestion that reuse happens when, and only when, it is in the interest of the person developing the product, and not when it is in the best interest of the person receiving the product.The biggest challenge facing the M&S community is to determine whether we are ready for a standard approach for achieving rapidly composable simulations and simulation environments.  Pushing a standard too early before there is industry consensus may fail and stifle innovation.  Often, it is better to start with a small part of a community and expand rather than to try to solve the entire problem at once.  Out of this workshop, a consensus was reached that for initial activities on standards for composable M&S, the communities of interest are ready and the technologies and organizations are sufficiently mature. At the same time, it was noted that while the use of components offer a useful mechanism to support reuse, it raises a number of questions as well.  For instance, “How do you search for them?”  “How do you put them together, and how do you know what you’ve got when you’re done?”  Thus, any standards or practices developed must be done while considering these issues and should provide some level of resolution.  It was noted that with the current pervasive use of M&S and the plethora of legacy and developing models and simulations initial composable M&S standards will not be readily developed or even immediately accepted.  It may take several years to conceive, promulgate and implement.  Component-based technology in the software engineering and modeling and simulation fields will continue to rapidly advance, making it even more difficult for standards to be defined, and for those standards to take hold in the communities of interest.  Development and procurement of large DoD M&S systems (i.e., the Joint Simulation System – JSIMS) are driven over many years and involve many Defense departments and agencies.  This development typically follows the spiral development model, wherein technical feedback on a current M&S system version being fielded is used to influence architecture and design work on the next version already underway.  Meanwhile various research labs are busy proving out concepts and developing prototypes for functionality to be introduced in the version after that.  In spiral development, multiple generations of a system are being concurrently pursued, which requires that any standards development effort must carefully consider when such a standard may be introduced to maximum benefit, and how the standards will impact strategic M&S programs that run for many years and may already be well underway.The Role of Standards OrganizationsThe SISO, currently Chaired by Duncan Miller, has two main customer bases including the defense training community and the defense analysis and experiments community.  SISO focuses much of its efforts to develop and promulgate standards to improve systems interoperability and software re-use.  SISO interoperability standards need to meet a diverse range of customer requirements.   Through SISO efforts thus far, however, comparable successes in developing composable M&S standards have proved highly elusive. Developing standards for composable M&S is particularly challenging since much of the field is multidisciplinary, broad and relatively immature (particularly when compared with modeling relatively static landforms and cultural features in the environment).  There is no general consensus among researchers and model developers on terminology, architectures, algorithms, or techniques.  While there are many approaches to component based modeling, much of what needs to be modeled is difficult or impossible to measure using current technology.  Applying the High Level Architecture (HLA) Business ModelMany of the technical challenges faced by the High Level Architecture community were the same as those now facing the Composability community:  many different domains and applications, the desire to build a standard that does not stifle future innovation, and the need to balance a desire for open exchange with individual developers’ legitimate proprietary concerns.  The really tough problems seem very similar to those now confronting Composability:  (1) getting a total set of requirements, (2) keeping commercial vendors involved but maintaining an open exchange mechanism, (3) many divergent approaches used within the HBR domain, and (4) the lack of an underlying and unifying framework.    Workshop participants generally supported the suggestion that the business approach followed by the HLA community might apply to the Composability community as well.  Although composable M&S is not as well researched and defined as in the HLA, there are many useful parallels between these two domains that make the HLA approach and lessons learned attractive.  Any attempt at a standard for composable M&S needs to involve the whole M&S community and needs to proceed in an iterative or spiral development process, given the state of the art within the community.  The workshop participants generally agreed that chartering a small focus group to further develop initial ideas put forth for a standard for composable M&S would be worthwhile.Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) -- The Toughest Challenge with the Greatest Return on InvestmentMost of the Workshop groups addressed VV&A, with the “Other Issues” group spending the most time on the topic.  The group recognized the importance of valid and credible information.Simulations are sources of information for driving training and experimentation systems, as well as making course of action, force development, acquisition, and other decisions.  As such, their value increases with both the extent and quality of information they can provide.  The attributes of simulations that contribute to the extent and quality of information they can produce are comprehensiveness, consistency, and validity [1].  Validity and credibility may be very difficult to achieve in an automated composable simulation environment.  There doesn’t appear to be a near-term solution to building automated tools for VV&A.  Advances in intelligent agent technology may provide some far-term possibilities.  Bringing together two validated models in a simulation doesn’t necessarily mean that their synergistic use is valid.  Likewise, even if their synergistic use is valid, the output may not be credible.  For example, imagine integrating a low-resolution representation of terrain into a simulation being used to assess a new tank gun that doubles the range and accuracy of existing guns.  Since low-resolution complex terrain is relatively flat, the new tank gun will have many long-range targets of opportunity and it will most likely look good.  However, if high-resolution complex terrain is used, there will be few, if any, long-range targets and the new gun may not perform any better than current guns.Other areas of interest include VV&A issues associated with aggregation/disaggregation and the use of differing security levels among models, simulations, and databases.  One approach for dealing with differing security levels is to change classified data into less- or non-classified data.  If done this way, its validity would have to be maintained.VV&A is a huge cost driver in simulation developments – even if there is a significant amount of interoperability and reuse available.  If one of the goals of the composable M&S program is to reduce costs, then VV&A must be addressed.One other point came up in the VV&A discussions – that of level of confidence associated with simulation output.  Referring back to the tank gun example, one would need to know the level of confidence or goodness of the data, given the models and databases used in the simulation.  For the example, the higher the terrain resolution, the higher will be the level of confidence.Getting StartedThe question is not one of whether research in the area of component-based technology should be pursued, but rather how best to proceed and how should research in this area be prioritized against other competing areas in the realm of M&S (Kasputis and Ng 2000).  The workshop produced several specific recommendations for Composable M&S standards development.  Here are several concepts and suggested actions for the Composable M&S focus group to consider:Develop an interchange standard for data/models.Develop a Composable M&S ontology if an adequate initial one cannot be found.  Start with a well-defined sub-area, and develop a standard representation for data needed to support modeling, as well as a set of rules and techniques related to the component-based technology needed.Conduct a business case analysis to determine if the market for composable M&S is large enough to support a standard. Conduct further research in many less-understood areas, like the impact of culture and organizations on adoption of a composable M&S approach.Evolve a process to engage basic research (6.1 and 6.2) in the component technology needs.Identify VV&A issues that may be addressed in the near, mid, and far terms.Based on these and other recommendations of these early discussions, there are already concrete ideas, albeit somewhat preliminary in their definition.  These initial concrete proposals, given greater scrutiny and deliberate review among a representative group of M&S professionals drawn from industry, academia, and government – representing engineers, scientists and operational experts – can be taken forward into a formal program proposal.  This is the substantive effort that is envisioned as the next step in the process towards standards for composable M&S.Next Steps to PursueIn the summary wrap-up session at the end of the workshop, the following actions were proposed to the full workshop:Prepare and distribute an overview report in the form of a paper on the Composable M&S Workshop for the broadest possible general M&S community review and comment.  The subject paper has been submitted to the Fall 2002 Simulation Interoperability Workshop Conference committee for inclusion in the proceedings of the next SIW.Prepare and distribute to the workshop participants and DoD leadership in M&S a more thorough and detailed summary report or white paper.  In addition to this detailed summary report, distribute the briefing and working breakout group materials to the workshop participants via a DMSO web site https:// HYPERLINK "http://www.dmso.mil/public/warfighter/transformation/composability/" www.dmso.mil/public/warfighter/transformation/composability/DMSO will conduct a second, more-focused workshop on Composable M&S Standards Development in November 2002, with 2-3 days of structured reports and working sessions, focusing on the review and assessment of selected on-going programs and efforts such as JSB, JVB, FORCENet, etc. Solicit participation in and designate the members of a Composability Standards Working Group (CSWG) to commence a formal Panel study and analysis of requirements for initial standards in composable M&S.  This Panel will comprise six to eight senior individuals including systems interoperability policy analysts, researchers, operational users and developers of component-based technology modeling products from industry, academia, and defense and intelligence communities.  The CSWG panel will be chartered by DMSO and will conduct their study in the 6-month period of January 2003 to June 2003.  The summary report will be issued in the form of a detailed white paper and annotated briefings, and will be presented to DMSO leadership during June-July 2003.DMSO will coordinate a special session on Composable M&S at the Spring SIW culminating with a by-invitation-only meeting of selected government, industry and academia representatives to review and discuss the next steps and refine the iterative Roadmap for achieving Composable M&S.DMSO will conduct a third, more-focused workshop on Composable M&S Standards Development, with 2-3 days of structured reports and working sessions, focusing on the review and validation of the results of the CSWG Panel activities described in items 4 and 5.Pending successful completion of the preceding five action plan items, during July and August, 2003, the DMSO may initiate a Broad Area Announcement to solicit proposals from organizations who would be prepared to lead the development of initial composable M&S standards as proposed in the CSWG Panel final report.Anticipating successful completion of the formal review of proposals in the August-September 2002 time frame, DMSO will initiate funding of the Composable M&S Standards development program during the early months of Fiscal Year 2003.ReferencesS. Kasputis, and H.C. Ng. “Composable Simualtions,” Proceedings of the 2000 Winter Simulation Conference, pp. 1577-1584, Dec. 2000D. Garlan,  2001. “Software Architecture,” Encyclopedia of Software Engineering,”E. H. Page, and J. M.Opper. 1999.  “Observations on the Complexity of Composable Simulation,” Proceedings of the 1999 Winter Simulation Conference, pp 553-560, 1999M. D. Petty.  2002. “Two Aspects of Composability: Lexicon and Theory,” DMSO Composable M&S Workshop July 2002.Author BiographiesPhilomena (Phil) Zimmerman has worked 18 years in development and testing for the DoD.  For the last nine years, she has worked in the development of simulation software, and the creation and management of distributed simulation systems, largely for the Test and Evaluation community.  She is currently on a rotational assignment, from the Naval Research Laboratory, to the Defense Modeling and Simulation office, working as the Associate Director, Joint Programs and Transformation Initiatives.     Ms.  Zimmerman received a BS in Mathematics from St. John Fisher College.James W. Heusmann is a Senior Systems Analyst for Science Applications International Corporation, assigned to the Support Staff for the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office.  A retired Marine Corps officer and graduate of the Marine Corps Command and Staff College, Mr. Heusmann has had command assignments at the squadron, company, battalion, and detachment level.  His last active duty position was as the Head, Test and Evaluation Branch, at Quantico, Virginia.   A graduate of the Test and Evaluation Management Course at the Defense Systems Management College, he has a B.S. in Education and a M.A. in Psychology. Albert A. Sciarretta is President of CNS Technologies, Inc., consultants in research and development, modeling and simulation, management, and support of advanced information technologies and systems. He primarily supports the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO), the office of the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Science and Technology (ODUSD(S&T)), and Director Operational Test and Evaluation (DOT&E). He previously was Manager, Advanced Information Technologies at Quantum Research International, Inc. and Program Area Manager, Advanced Information Technologies, for The MITRE Corporation. His current primary efforts include supporting DMSO in the DOD Information Systems Technology Reliance Panel, advising the DUSD(S&T) on sensor technology issues, and developing a T&E technology plan. Mr. Sciarretta has a B.S. degree in general engineering from the U.S. Military Academy and two M.S. degrees in mechanical engineering and operations research from Stanford University. As an Army officer he spent the last half of his 20-year career in assignments associated with science, technology and engineering. He is currently participating in two National Research Council studies on robotic ground vehicles and advanced energetic materials.ApplicationsEventsUnified EndeavorComponentsCompositionExampleFederatesFederationsJoint Training ConfederationPackagesSimulationsJSIMSParametersSimulationsJSIMSModulesExecutablesOneSAFModelsComposite modelsOneSAFDataDatabasesSEDRISEntitiesMilitary unitsWARSIMBehaviorsComposite behaviorsModSAF