JSF Modeling Information ManagementJames W. HollenbachSimulation Strategies, Inc.8615 Conover PlaceAlexandria, VA 22308-2515703-360-3902 HYPERLINK "mailto:jimh@simstrat.com" jimh@simstrat.comMajor Steven T. Bishop, USAFJoint Strike Fighter Program Office1213 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 600Arlington, VA 22202703-601-5647 HYPERLINK "mailto:steven.bishop@jsf.mil" steven.bishop@jsf.milDr. W. Henson GravesLockheed Martin Aeronautics Company, Joint Strike Fighter ProgramPost Office Box 748Fort Worth, TX 76101817-777-1856 HYPERLINK "mailto:henson.graves@lmco.com" henson.graves@lmco.comKeywords:  Acquisition, Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA), product development, Distributed/Digital Product Description (DPD), data engineering, data interchange, Integrated Digital Environment (IDE), enterprise integration, acquisition reform, transformation, advanced acquisition environments, weapon systems, standards, international, interoperability, system engineering, digital system model, repository, threat modelsABSTRACT:  This paper describes the Joint Strike Fighter Program’s ongoing effort to provide coherent modeling information to the JSF suite of models and simulations.  It describes the architecture and progress to date in developing a JSF Authoritative Modeling Information Database (JAMID), which encompasses the JSF Distributed Product Description, Authoritative Systems Database, and other modeling information.  Challenges in sharing system representations are described and the emerging JSF solution is explained, including its concept of operations, metadata approach, and translation strategy.  Implications for the Simulation Based Acquisition concept are noted.JSF Program OverviewThe Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program is the Department of Defense's effort to field an affordable next generation strike aircraft weapon system for the Navy, Air Force, Marines, and allied nations.  The JSF will be built in three variants – Conventional Takeoff and Landing (CTOL) for the USAF, Short Takeoff and Vertical Landing (STOVL) for the USMC, and an aircraft carrier-capable variant (CV) for the USN.  Extensive foreign military sales are also expected, with various agreements in place with the United Kingdom, Denmark, Norway, The Netherlands, Canada, Italy, Turkey, and Australia (pending).  With an estimated total procurement of approximately 200 billion dollars, the JSF program promises to be the largest acquisition program in DoD history.A primary focus of the JSF program is affordability: reducing the development, production and ownership costs of the JSF family of aircraft.  Towards this goal, the program has endeavored to apply Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) principles to the maximum practical extent throughout the JSF acquisition process.  References [1] through [5] provide an orientation to SBA concepts, which are evolving as the acquisition community gains experience with this powerful approach to the definition, production, testing and support of complex systems.In October 2001, the JSF Program passed Milestone B and entered its System Design and Demonstration (SDD) phase, with Lockheed Martin Aeronautics Company (LMAC) selected as prime contractor.  LMAC’s principal partners in the JSF endeavor are Northrop Grumman and BAE Systems.  Pratt and Whitney is the prime contractor for the F135 engine to be used in the JSF.  The three U.S. versions of the Joint Strike Fighter are scheduled to achieve initial operational capability (IOC) during the 2010-2012 timeframe.Modeling Information’s Critical RoleSBA facilitates optimization of the JSF system by early and continuing exploration of the full JSF life cycle activities, including system-of-systems mission area perspectives.  It involves both government and contractor organizations and all professional disciplines.  SBA applies computerized modeling, simulation and visualization tools to track the complex interactions inherent in such a broad trade space, surfacing key issues and insights to better empower decision makers.To accomplish this, the JSF program is using well over 100 models and simulations.  The government-managed suite of simulations is termed the Strike Warfare Collaborative Environment (SWCE), and has been discussed in references [6] and [7].  The LMAC-managed suite of tools is termed the Engineering and Manufacturing Collaborative Environment, or EMCE.As noted in reference [5], the SBA concept calls for the “efficient, automated and near-real-time sharing of relevant information among all personnel with a need to know, such that they have accurate and consistent understandings of a system (both physical and behavioral) and its external environments, including their variants, as they evolve.”  The trustworthiness of modeling and simulation (M&S) results is, of course, directly dependent on the trustworthiness of the information used to model systems and processes within the M&S applications.  This fact is colloquially expressed as “garbage in, garbage out.”Figure 1 is the JSF Modeling and Simulation Support Plan (MSSP) depiction of SBA, highlighting the fact that shared information is the hub of the entire Integrated Product and Process Development (IPPD) process.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1.  Shared Information, the Hub of IPPDProviding coherent, authoritative modeling information is essential to:Ensure M&S-derived answers are correctTracing the analyses back to authoritative informationReducing the confusion that arises if operating on wrong or logically inconsistent informationConserve resources and improve efficiencyAvoiding having to repeatedly find, produce and/or translate the same informationProviding more timely analyses, resulting in shorter decision cycle times and more efficient systems engineeringAvoiding the costs of correcting mistakes discovered late in the development processA Coordinated ResponsibilitySeveral different types of information need to be provided.  In the late 2000 version of the JSF MSSP, this was depicted similarly to Figure 2.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2.  Components of the JSF M&S ToolsetJSF system information was to be provided by the JSF Distributed Product Description (DPD), a single, logically unified product representation (see reference [8] for more detail).  Information about other friendly systems and threat systems was to be provided by the Authoritative Systems Database (ASDB).  Common scenario and natural environment data was also to be provided to the JSF suite of models and simulations.As documented in reference [6], a division of responsibilities was established between the government and the prime contractor.  The responsibilities of each are provided in Table 1.  As can be seen from this table, the JSF Program Office (JSFPO) understood that a coordinated effort would be necessary to share modeling information across the JSF enterprise.  As described below, the required extent of that cooperation has become clearer as the program has proceeded with its implementation efforts.Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 1.  Shared Responsibilities During SDDThe Government will:The SDD contractor shall:Establish and maintain a Strike Warfare Collaborative Environment in which the DPD-based JSF representations will operate, that spans the collaboration focus areas of mission effectiveness analysis, autonomic logistics analysis, engineering and manufacturing analysis and cost analysisEstablish and manage an Engineering and Manufacturing Collaborative Environment Provide configuration-managed versions of a JSF SWCE Suite of Models and Simulations Develop, populate, and manage the JSF DPD, which, as a minimum, shall provide, via a DIF, all the JSF information needed to represent the JSF in the SWCE and the EMCE SoM&S.Develop, maintain, and manage the configuration of a library of SWCE boxed sets.  Develop translations and Digital System Models (DSMs) not provided by the WSC.Develop the software that may be necessary to convert DPD information into the form needed to initialize or configure an individual model or simulation for that portion of the SWCE SoM&S that the WSC uses.  This shall include translations and JSF Digital System Models.Provide an Authoritative Systems Database (ASDB) which is accessible through the JSF Resource Access System Develop and maintain a web-based JSF Resource Access System MS&A ManagementTo coordinate SBA implementation, the JSF program is establishing the modeling, simulation and analysis (MS&A) management structure shown below.Figure 3.  JSF SBA Implementation TeamThe authors serve on the Modeling Information Sources Action Team (MIS AT), which is responsible for:A coherent representation of all modeling information required by supported SWCE and EMCE toolsElectronic access to allow M&S users to read and write this information, per their responsibilitiesAccompanying glossaries and metadata (data about data) to convey information lineage and guide its useTraining and technical supportThe MIS AT is coordinating all modeling information-related efforts in order to field an integrated capability that meets users needs.  The team has already come to see that this challenge requires a greater degree of cooperation and integration than originally anticipated.Modeling Information PathsTo effectively manage modeling information, it is necessary to comprehend how that information will be used in modeling and simulation applications.  Figure 4 provides a depiction of the three alternate paths system information may follow to produce an executable system representation.  This figure is an adaptation of a similar figure in references [6] and [8], which was jointly developed among the JSFPO, LMAC and Boeing during the preceding program phase.The uppermost path is for solely data-driven representations.  The lower two paths require some degree of software development as well.Figure 4.  Process for Providing System RepresentationsModeling Information TypesTo support these various paths to system representation, particularly the lower two, a rich variety of information must be made available.  The information types include:Parametric dataAlgorithmsSoftware codePublicationsSubject Matter Expert knowledgeThe most pressing JSF program need, and therefore the team’s initial focus, has been parametric data.  However, we are endeavoring to ensure our implementation decisions (e.g., architectures, information model, metadata provisions, user interface) allow the eventual inclusion of the full range of modeling information.Modeling Information CharacterizationAs the MIS AT examined the modeling information needs of the program, we came to appreciate the wide number of ways in which such information could be characterized.  Our discussions were initially hampered by our lack of a common lexicon to describe data characteristics, an M&S community-wide problem.  After several iterations, a consensus developed that any information instance, regardless of type or subject, could also be characterized by its:Trustworthiness:  authoritative or non-authoritativeEvidence in the real world:  empirical or derivedContext dependency:  context-independent or context-dependentGranularity:  primitive or aggregatedStructure:  atomic or complexSource (relative to enterprise):  external or internalThese characterizations are orthogonal; an information element can be described by any combination.  Definitions and examples of each characterization are available from the authors.Information FlowThe MIS AT began its work on the premise that characteristics and performance (C&P) information about a defense system (e.g., JSF, surface-to-air missile) would be obtained from the responsible organization and discretely stored in either the DPD (for JSF) or ASDB (for friendly systems and threats).  However, examination of the data inputs required for many simulations, particularly those at the mission and campaign level, showed that a great many of these inputs were interactions between or among systems, thus spanning both the DPD and ASDB.In general, these interactions were generated within the JSF enterprise by more granular M&S applications and then used by more aggregated M&S applications.  This is depicted in Figure 5, below.Figure 5.  Modeling Information InputsAn example of derived information movement among models and simulations is useful to illustrate the complex nature of such flows.  A simplified thread (“food chain”) of vulnerability-related information appears in Figure 6.Figure 6.  Vulnerability Information Flow (simplified)Thus it is clear that much “authoritative data” will be internally generated and hence more likely to encounter outside skepticism.  Providing pedigree data sufficient to gauge the quality of this information is essential to the verification, validation and accreditation (VV&A) process.LMAC and JSF government analysts must have a shared understanding of the analysis process and what organizations/tools will be regarded as the authoritative source.  Accepting derived input data from other analysis organizations will be a significant revision to the normal procedures of many organizations.  Achieving such changes poses a significant cultural challenge.  Overcoming this challenge will require that information flowing among organizations be unambiguously defined and its pedigree clearly documented.Operational ContextEach interaction among systems occurs in an operational context.  Many system performance attributes are also context dependent (i.e., conditional).  Examples are turning performance and IR signature.  Understanding the context is necessary to determine whether conditional performance attributes or interaction information is appropriate for use in subsequent analyses.  We therefore decided that operational context must be maintained as metadata (data about data) for each instance of such data.It was recognized that some of the operational context data of interest was already available as the scenarios and use cases currently employed by the JSF program, but that a richer set of information would be required.  The scope and granularity of relevant operational context information varies with the scope and granularity of the M&S representation.  For example, order of battle information is normally relevant to campaign and mission level models, but not to engagement and engineering level models.  The desirability of standardizing operational context information across the JSF enterprise, as a constraint on analysis, was recognized.The team therefore examined what operational context information should be standardized, as opposed to that which should be left to analyst discretion.  Our desired list of information that should be included in the JSF Operational Context Database (OCDB), in prioritized order, is:ScenariosRoad to warBlue TPFDOrders of battle (UOB, EOB, etc.)Geographic areaInfrastructure targets, locationMission GroupsMissionsVignettesUse CasesInitiating inputs, required actions, measures of performance (MOPs)Natural environment conditionsTime of day, weatherConcept of Operations (CONOPS)Force doctrineTacticsRules of engagement (ROE)Firing doctrineInfrastructure lay down (other than targets)We concluded the following information should not be included in the OCDB, rather being captured elsewhere:Study-specific archivesInput datasets, discretionary analyst decisions (e.g., routes), raw execution outputsSystem C&P dataNatural environment instance dataInfrastructure C&P dataJAMID – An Integrated Database SystemThe MIS AT concluded that the various modeling information databases needed to be cooperatively developed as an integrated whole, termed the JSF Authoritative Modeling Information Database (JAMID).  There were several reasons for this.  We concluded the DPD should not be developed, populated and configuration-managed separately from the threat data upon which interactions depend, the operational context of those interactions, or the natural environment conditions under which they occurred.  In an integrated database system, metadata fields could more easily point to, vice replicate, much of the relevant contextual information, offering several efficiencies.  A coordinated development of the DPD and ASDB would likewise allow use of the same data interchange formats (DIFs) for both JSF and other aircraft C&P information, offering savings in translation software.A coordinated approach makes it easier to link the various databases into the Resource Access System (RAS) and togive users a consistent user interface for accessing modeling information.  It also facilitates their assembling of complete sets of the required information.  A summary depiction of the JAMID and its information flow relationship to users and tools is provided in Figure 7.  The capabilities depicted in this figure are not yet realized; implementation efforts are still underway.Configuration Management and Access ControlSome SBA descriptions imply, and many individuals infer SBA requires, that all information be available in real-time across the enterprise.  Such a concept is not practical due to several factors.The first impediment is the natural reluctance of any individual to show their work to their superiors before it is mature.  We all experience this hesitancy, preferring to deliberate and create in private, and we worry about our boss taking action before it is appropriate.  Across the JSF team, information will likewise exist in multiple versions with various states of maturity.  Thus, the JAMID must manage many different versions of modeling information.  It must likewise allow for various levels of access to that information.  For instance, only members of the Airframe Integrated Product Team (IPT) should get to see a possible design variant of the landing gear until the IPT is sure it will be a viable alternative design (at which point they will submit it for broader consideration).Figure 7:  Information Exchange with the JAMIDThe second impediment to enterprise-wide, real-time access to the latest information is posed by the sequential nature of the analysis process.  As illustrated in Figure 6, often a series of analyses must be performed to get the final answer to the question of interest.  If, during the course of those analyses, a substantive change occurs to the modeling information (e.g., a threat’s engagement range expands), the analysis process will become incoherent (logically inconsistent).  Therefore, changes to the modeling information must be deliberately coordinated.  We envision updating threat and operational context information in concert with changes to the JSF’s baseline design, with such an event occurring not more frequently than a period of several months and probably in conjunction with major program events.  Changes to the tool suite, and consequent changes to the scope of information required, will likewise be made in a coordinated manner.These two considerations require the program maintain both baseline and developmental versions of most modeling information, with access to the developmental versions of that data restricted to those with a need to know.  At any point in time, different analysts may be working with either baseline or developmental data.  For instance, a USAF vulnerability analyst at Wright Patterson Air Force Base may be examining JSF survivability against a specific threat aircraft using the current baseline information about both.  At the same time, a Lockheed analyst may be assessing a potential Mission Systems IPT-proposed change to a JSF sensor antenna, as recorded in a developmental version of the DPD, by examining how it impacts the JSF’s detection of that threat aircraft, as described in the current baseline version of the ASDB.  While those activities are occurring, another Lockheed analyst, alerted that new National Aerospace Intelligence Center (NAIC)-produced information about that threat aircraft is now in the developmental version of the ASDB, may use that to consider what impact it has on the ability of the currently approved JSF baseline design to satisfy the JSF contract specification.  To support such a capability, a rigorous configuration management plan must be implemented.Post-Processing and PublicationAs noted in section 8, much authoritative data will be internally generated by one analyst for subsequent use by others.  The producing analyst must process the raw M&S results of his simulation executions to arrive at a reasonable, clear result.  The post-processing may consist of discarding spurious results, averaging, weighing, curve fitting, etc.  This yields the analyzed, smoothed results needed by others.The analyst publishes (sends) these smoothed results to two destinations:  The decision maker and the JAMID.  The decision maker gets the measures of merit (MoM) appropriate to answer the questions the analyst had been asked to examine.  The JAMID gets the information (e.g., JSF interaction data) needed by other simulations.Translation ResponsibilityA key concept for cost-effective sharing of modeling information is that it should be interchanged in a standard (at least to the program) data interchange format (DIF), for this avoids the N2 problem inherent in maintaining point-to-point bilateral translations.  The DIF will often have different semantics and syntax than the authoring tool/simulation that produced it and the downstream simulation that consumes it.  The DIF concept is explained in detail in references [1] and [8].To translate between the semantics and syntax of the DIF and that of a specific tool requires an understanding of both.  The people who have the best understanding of this mapping are those who do the data engineering required to develop the information model of the database involved (e.g., DPD, ASDB).  Therefore, these same people must define the initial translation/mapping.The MIS AT has considered what party should have responsibility for maintaining this translation (and associated software) when either the DIF changes (hopefully, an unlikely event) or the tool’s internal data structure changes (due to a modification made at a later date, a common event).  The choices are the modeling information database (DPD, ASDB, etc.) developer or the tool manager.  The frequency of change of the tools is expected to exceed the frequency of change of the DIF.  Hence the team’s initial intention was to have the tool manager update the translation process (and software), because he was the one that best understood the internal change to his tool and he should bear the full cost burden of any decision to update the tool.  The team’s initial plan was also to have the consumer perform the translation; he would receive the information in DIF form and translate it into his tool-specific form using the established translation process, be it manual or automated.  This was thought to align the translation burden with the party most impacted by any error in the translation.However, with the team’s increased understanding of the expected volume of information flow back into the JAMID (i.e., the fact that most data consumers are also data producers), we realized that any translation error would result in contamination of the JAMID and/or frustration of the data producer.  Compounding this was the growing concern about the difficulty in asking data producers to take on the translation task in addition to a significant change to their traditional procedures.  The cultural resistance to these combined burdens might threaten the success of the entire concept.Team members thus decided they must not only assume responsibility for defining translations, but for developing and maintaining the translation software as well.  However, the team also recognizes that there are limits to what it can do towards preparing a ready-to-run, study-specific input dataset for the analyst.  Although the team can deliver the relevant information in tool-specific form, whenever the information is conditional on study specifics (e.g., range depends on weapons load, fuel load and flight profile), the analyst will still have to make additional selections, judgments and adjustments to produce an appropriate input dataset.  The completely automated production of input datasets is not practical.Study-Specific ArchivesTo allow analysis reconstruction and the possible reuse of study-specific input data sets and software code (e.g., Brawler pseudo-code) by the same analyst, it is necessaryto preserve these products.  We therefore decided to establish study-specific archives within the JAMID.  We expect that, in most cases, access to this information will be restricted to the analyst that produced it.Modeling Information Life CycleThe planned modeling information life cycle that emerges from the above considerations is depicted in Figure 8.  This is the next level of detail for the information exchange concept presented earlier in Figure 7.  Thoroughly understanding the complex nature of the information transactions is necessary to provide an effective solution to JSF modeling information management needs.Challenges in Maintaining Information CoherencyAs discussed in section 2, the MIS AT’s objective is to cooperatively provide coherent, authoritative modeling information to M&S users across the JSF enterprise.  This enterprise includes government organizations from multiple DoD Components, spread across the United States.  It also includes the prime contractors, their partners and suppliers, extending internationally to the United Kingdom and other nations.Figure 8:  Modeling Information Life Cycle (Conceptual)The extensive differences among the tool-specific datasets, and the various degrees of abstraction among them, make it difficult to establish coherence across the full range of modeling information inherent in this endeavor.  In considering this challenge the MIS AT concluded coherence has several dimensions, including:Temporal coherenceInformation being used for different tools and sites has the same date/time stampOrganizational coherenceAll enterprise organizations are using the same set of databasesLayer (tier, level, stratum) coherenceInformation at one level of abstraction (e.g., mission level) is logically consistentGranularity coherenceInformation at different levels of abstraction is logically consistentWe concluded the first was easy; the second posed significant cultural challenges but was achievable with strong leadership; the third was technically challenging but achievable using reference [9]; and a logical mapping including the operational context would be necessary for the fourth.  A detailed explanation of the associated data engineering efforts is beyond the scope of this paper.SecurityThe JAMID will have various classification levels, as appropriate.  Information at lower levels of classification will be replicated at the higher levels.  Other security aspects are still under consideration.Spiral DevelopmentThe JAMID will be established using a coordinated spiral development process.  A schedule has been established for a series of builds, prioritized per program needs.  The first will be completed in time to support the program’s Preliminary Design Review (PDR) in March 2003.  the second and third spirals are planned to follow at approximately six-month intervals.  This series of JAMID instantiations will provide:An increasing amount of modeling information; To support an increasing number of representations;In an increasing number of M&S tools;For an increasing number of organizations across the enterprise.Implications for SBA ConceptsAlthough this effort is not yet complete, several issues can be identified, and some conclusions tentatively drawn, regarding the SBA concepts previously put forth in references [1], [2], [3], [5], [7], [8], [10] and [11].  Each issue has been discussed above to some extent, but they are elaborated here for clarity.Distributed Product Descriptions (DPDs)The concept of DoD sharing all authoritative system information via a series of DPDs, one per system, fails to satisfactorily address information describing the interactions between and among systems.  This information is a function of the capabilities of each system involved, posing questions as to who should be the authoritative source and how such information should be configuration managed.  As well, since this interaction information is context-dependent, a careful definition and documentation of those contexts will be necessary to allow such interaction information to be correctly used by others.  The need to manage JSF interaction information in an integrated way with the other data that bears on those interactions (e.g., threats, natural environment, scenarios) calls into question some fundamental aspects of the DPD concept.Collaborative Environments (CEs)The draft SBA Roadmap defined a CE as “an enduring collection of subject matter experts (SMEs) supported by interoperable tools and data bases, authoritative information resources, and product/process models that are focused on a common domain or set of problems.”  By that definition, the JSF program’s attempt to distinguish between the SWCE and EMCE is somewhat artificial because, as illustrated by Figure 6, information flows and collaboration occurs between them.  However, it would be difficult to justify calling the full set of tools a single CE because the tools themselves are far from being “interoperable.”  They may be able to sequentially ingest and produce related information in a serial fashion, but they do not meet the DoD (and SBA Roadmap) definition of interoperability as “the ability…to provide services to or accept services from other systems.”  A simulation federation would meet this definition, but surely not all of the models and simulations used by an acquisition program will ever be federated (nor should they be).  Perhaps, instead of attempting to define the borders of particular environments in which collaboration occurs, we should instead speak of degrees of enterprise activity integration.Metadata ScopeThe metadata discussions in the SBA Roadmap and other SBA documents have generally been limited to metadata describing the information source and VV&A status.  What has been largely overlooked, but looms large for JSF, is the operational context metadata and the metadata necessary to document the enterprise interactions and derivations that are part of the JSF modeling information lifecycle.  For context-dependent information, we need to develop a hopefully common, but at least understandable, way to capture that context in metadata.Real-time Information AccessAlthough timely information sharing is essential to enterprise integration, the concept is unworkable if taken to the extreme of giving everyone real-time access to all information as it is generated or changed.  Proper protection of classified and proprietary information already imposes some constraints on information sharing.  As described in section 11, there are other practical constraints.  Information updates must be carefully managed to avoid confusing the sequential analysis process.  Workflow management and human nature also necessarily require restricting access to immature/developmental modeling information.  Such accommodations can be abused and some SBA adherents may therefore see them as an unwise compromise.  However, appropriate constraints are necessary for SBA to be adopted effectively.SummaryDuring its SDD phase, the Joint Strike Fighter Program will take major steps forward in the implementation of SBA.  Prominent among these is the establishment of a modeling information management approach to effectively serve a wide range of users, models and simulations.An integrated approach has been adopted for database development, distribution and configuration management.  DPD implementation is being conducted in a coordinated way with other databases in order to avoid the problems, costs and likely failure of stove-piped developments.  Our current tasks center around realizing the integration of the multiple databases through the RAS and enabling the traceability of simulation inputs back to primitive engineering data where this is possible.In addition to directly benefiting acquisition of the JSF, the program’s experience, artifacts and lessons-learned will significantly advance the state of the practice in pursuit of better, faster and cheaper system acquisition.  Some of the issues that have been raised thus far bear on fundamental SBA concepts.  The JSFPO and LMAC have benefited from dialogue with others seeking to realize advanced acquisition environments.  As JAMID/RAS implementation continues, we look forward to continued interchanges.References“A Roadmap for Simulation Based Acquisition – Report of the Joint Simulation Based Acquisition Task Force,” Acquisition Council Draft for Coordination, 04 December 1998.R. Frost and D. Thomen, “Simulation Based Acquisition, the Road Map,” Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 1999.R. R. Lutz and J. F. Keane, “An Architecture for Simulation Based Acquisition,” Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 1999.N. E. Karangelen, “The Simulation Based Acquisition Vision – A Brief Tutorial,” proceedings of NDIA Workshop on Simulation Based Acquisition, Orlando, March 1998.DoD Acquisition Council and SBA Industry Steering Group, Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) Definition, 22 August 2000.“Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Modeling & Simulation Support Plan (MSSP), Version 5.2,” Joint Strike Fighter Program Office, November 2000 (not available for public release).J. Coolahan, F.T. Case, and R. Hartnett, “JSF Strike Warfare Collaborative Environment (SWCE),” Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 2000.J. Hollenbach and R. Hartnett, The Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Distributed Product Description (00F-SIW-077), Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 2000.Reverse Engineering for Data Integration and Sharing (REDIS) Methodology Manual, Version 1.4 (draft), Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, OUSD(AT&L), May 1996.R. R. Lutz and J. E. Coolahan, “Developmental Concepts for Digital Distributed Product Descriptions,” Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 1999.Air Force Instruction 16-1002, “Modeling and Simulation Support to Acquisition,” 01 June 2000.Author BiographiesJames W. Hollenbach holds a BS in Mechanical Engineering from Rutgers University, an MS in Aeronautical Systems from the University of West Florida, and is a graduate of the Program Manager Course at the Defense Systems Management College.  A retired Navy captain, former EA-6B squadron commander and DoD Acquisition Professional, his last active duty assignment was as Director of the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office from 1994 to 1998, where he led development of the DoD and NATO M&S Master Plans and oversaw development of the High Level Architecture.  His company, Simulation Strategies, Inc., provides modeling, simulation and enterprise integration expertise to government and industry.Steven T. Bishop, Major, USAF, is assigned to the Joint Strike Fighter Program Office in Crystal City, VA, where he serves as the Analysis Lead of the Modeling, Simulation and Analysis Team.  Major Bishop has a mathematics degree and Master’s Degree in Operations Research from the Air Force Institute of Technology in Dayton, OH.  In 1995, he gained extensive experience in the Live Fire Test and Evaluation for the AIM-120 AMRAAM weapon system while stationed at Tyndall AFB, FL in the Combat Archer Test Program.  Major Bishop returned to Dayton, OH in 1998, assigned to the Simulation and Analysis Facility at Wright-Patterson AFB.  There he was the Program Analysis Lead, where he began working with the JSF in the constructive and virtual M&S area and has supported the program ever since.  Major Bishop is a published author with a focus of the use of both constructive and virtual MS&A in the acquisition of DoD weapon systems, as well as, the use of new and emerging analysis methodologies in dealing with simulation data.W. Henson Graves is a Technical Fellow at LM Aeronautics and is the JSF DPD Architect.  He holds a BS degree in Mathematics from Tulane University in New Orleans and a Ph.D. in Mathematics from McMaster University in Hamilton Ontario.  He held a Post Doctoral Fellowship in Mathematical Physics at Queens University in Kingston Ontario and was a Research Associate at Stanford University in Palo Alto.  He has spent over 10 years in realizing the SBA vision at LM Space Systems and at LM Aeronautics.  Dr. Graves was Deputy Program Manager and technical lead at LM Space Systems for the DARPA Simulation Based Design Program and was formerly Professor of Computer Science at San Jose State University.02F-SIW-080 JSF Modeling Information Management PAGE 1Distribution Statement A.  Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited.JSF PA:  02-323