Tactical Digital Information Link-Technical Advice and Lexicon for Enabling Simulation (TADIL-TALES)02F-SIW-119Adin Burroughs, TACCSF/SRCJoe Sorroche, TACCSF/SRCNeil Barrett, JITCRobert Byers, Northrop Grumman Information TechnologyRobert Butterfield, ASTiGraham Shanks, AMStable of contentsPage TOC \o "1-4" Acknowledgment	 PAGEREF _Toc16582130 \h 1Introduction	 PAGEREF _Toc16582131 \h 41. Scope	 PAGEREF _Toc16582132 \h 42. References	 PAGEREF _Toc16582133 \h 43. Terms, Definitions and Convention	 PAGEREF _Toc16582134 \h 53.1 Conventions	 PAGEREF _Toc16582135 \h 53.2 Terms and Definitions	 PAGEREF _Toc16582136 \h 54. Acronyms	 PAGEREF _Toc16582137 \h 95. Requirements	 PAGEREF _Toc16582138 \h 95.1 JTIDS OPERATING characteristics	 PAGEREF _Toc16582139 \h 95.2 General Requirements	 PAGEREF _Toc16582140 \h 105.3 Levels of Fidelity (DIS)	 PAGEREF _Toc16582141 \h 115.3.1 TSA Level 0, Low Fidelity	 PAGEREF _Toc16582142 \h 115.3.2 TSA Level 1, Low Fidelity	 PAGEREF _Toc16582143 \h 115.3.3 TSA Level 2, Medium fidelity	 PAGEREF _Toc16582144 \h 115.3.4 TSA Level 3, Medium Fidelity	 PAGEREF _Toc16582145 \h 115.3.5 TSA Level 4, High Fidelity	 PAGEREF _Toc16582146 \h 125.3.6 Communication between JUs with different fidelity levels	 PAGEREF _Toc16582147 \h 125.4 Levels of fidelity (HLA)-TBD	 PAGEREF _Toc16582148 \h 125.5 Time Synchronization (DIS)	 PAGEREF _Toc16582149 \h 125.5.1 Low Fidelity Synchronization	 PAGEREF _Toc16582150 \h 135.5.2 High Fidelity Synchronization	 PAGEREF _Toc16582151 \h 135.6 Time Synchronization (HLA) –TBD	 PAGEREF _Toc16582152 \h 145.7 PRotocol implementation Details (DIs)	 PAGEREF _Toc16582153 \h 145.7.1 Transmitter PDU	 PAGEREF _Toc16582154 \h 145.7.2 Signal PDU	 PAGEREF _Toc16582155 \h 185.8 prOTOCOL iMPLEMENTATION dETAILS (hla) - tbd	 PAGEREF _Toc16582156 \h 25AcknowledgmentThis protocol is the result of the efforts of the SISO Tactical Data Link Study Group.  The study group began as a “grass roots” response to informal community inquiries by TACCSF.  This was followed by meeting at the 2001 I/ITSEC, which in turn led to formal organization as a SISO Study Group.   The study group had its first official meeting at the 2002 Spring SIW.  This protocol would not have been possible without the contributions and hard work of each of its members. The following individuals are:Primary authorsAdin Burroughs, TACCSF/SRC, Study Group ChairJoe Sorroche, TACCSF/SRC, Study Group Vice ChairNeil Barrett, JITC, Study Group Vice ChairRobert Byers, Northrop Grumman Information Technology, Study Group SecretaryRobert Butterfield, ASTiGraham Shanks, AMS	Study Group Members and Contributors(Listed Alphabetically)Ed Alburo Digital Wizards HYPERLINK "mailto:alburo@spawar.navy.mil" alburo@spawar.navy.milMike Aldinger TRW HYPERLINK "mailto:mike.aldinger@trw.com" mike.aldinger@trw.comDavid Allsop Boeing HYPERLINK "mailto:david.allsop@boeing.com" david.allsop@boeing.comLee Anthony USAF HYPERLINK "mailto:lee.anthony@hurlburt.af.mil" lee.anthony@hurlburt.af.milRon Arlund USAF HYPERLINK "mailto:ronald.arlund@eglin.af.mil" ronald.arlund@eglin.af.milMike Bachmann USAF HYPERLINK "mailto:Michael.Bachmann@wpafb.af.mil" Michael.Bachmann@wpafb.af.milJeanne Banks TRW HYPERLINK "mailto:jeanneb@kirtland.af.mil" jeanneb@kirtland.af.milGeoff Barbier AFRL HYPERLINK "mailto:Geoffrey.Barbier@williams.af.mil" Geoffrey.Barbier@williams.af.milBilly Barnes AFAMS HYPERLINK "mailto:billy.barnes@afams.af.mil" billy.barnes@afams.af.milMark Barrett JITC HYPERLINK "mailto:barrettm@fhu.disa.mil" barrettm@fhu.disa.milNeil Barrett JITC HYPERLINK "mailto:barrettn@fhu.disa.mil" barrettn@fhu.disa.milRonald G. Bertin Boeing HYPERLINK "mailto:ronald.g.bertin@boeing.com" ronald.g.bertin@boeing.comDon Boice Marzen HYPERLINK "mailto:boice@marzen.com" boice@marzen.comTom Brown TACCSF/SRC HYPERLINK "mailto:tom.brown@kirtland.af.mil" tom.brown@kirtland.af.milStephen Brown USAF HYPERLINK "mailto:stephen.brown@hanscom.af.mil" stephen.brown@hanscom.af.milJim Bryan Northrop Grummanjbryan@northropgrumman.comJohn Burkley Lockheed Martin HYPERLINK "mailto:john.burkley@lmco.com" john.burkley@lmco.comAdin Burroughs TACCSF/SRC HYPERLINK "mailto:adin.burroughs@kirtland.af.mil" adin.burroughs@kirtland.af.milRobert ButterfieldAsTI HYPERLINK "mailto:robertb@asti-usa.com" robertb@asti-usa.comRobert Byers Northrop Grumman HYPERLINK "mailto:RByers@northropgrumman.com" RByers@northropgrumman.comVictoria Castillo 552 ACW HYPERLINK "mailto:victoria.castillo@tinker.af.mil" victoria.castillo@tinker.af.milLarry Clark AMS HYPERLINK "mailto:larry.clark@amsjv.com" larry.clark@amsjv.comMark Crnarich Northrop Grummanmcrnarich@northropgrumman.comJim  Coody Raytheon HYPERLINK "mailto:coodyjl@raytheon.com" coodyjl@raytheon.comDean Crouch USAF HYPERLINK "mailto:dean.crouch@hurlburt.af.mil" dean.crouch@hurlburt.af.milDeryn CrockettASTi HYPERLINK "mailto:derync@asti-usa.com" derync@asti-usa.comLisa Danger Plexsys HYPERLINK "mailto:dangerl@plexsysipi.com" dangerl@plexsysipi.comArthur Daum USAF HYPERLINK "mailto:arthur.daum@wpafb.af.mil" arthur.daum@wpafb.af.milMike Drinkwater CAS HYPERLINK "mailto:mike.drinkwater@cas-inc.com" mike.drinkwater@cas-inc.comDan L. DykeUSN HYPERLINK "mailto:dykedl@navair.navy.mil" dykedl@navair.navy.milJames Evans USAF HYPERLINK "mailto:James.Evans1@wpafb.af.mil" James.Evans1@wpafb.af.milJ. Fontenoth Raytheon HYPERLINK "mailto:fontenothj@raytheon.com" fontenothj@raytheon.comZach Furness DMSO HYPERLINK "mailto:zfurness@dmso.mil" zfurness@dmso.milJerry Gibson TACCSF/SRC HYPERLINK "mailto:jerry.gibson@kirtland.af.mil" jerry.gibson@kirtland.af.milSusan Goodchild-fioreNorthrop Grumman HYPERLINK "mailto:susan_goodchild-fiore@mail.northgrum.com" susan_goodchild-fiore@mail.northgrum.comSteve Gordon AFAMS HYPERLINK "mailto:steve.gordon@afams.af.mil" steve.gordon@afams.af.milRussell Gottfried USN HYPERLINK "mailto:gottfried@nps.navy.mil" gottfried@nps.navy.milAllison Griffin Simulation, Inc HYPERLINK "mailto:agriffin@simulation.com" agriffin@simulation.comGary W. Hall General Dynamics HYPERLINK "mailto:gary.w.hall@gd-decisionsystems.com" gary.w.hall@gd-decisionsystems.comNeil Hesser FORSCOM HYPERLINK "mailto:hessern@forscom.army.mil" hessern@forscom.army.milLouis Hodges Plexsys HYPERLINK "mailto:louis.hodges@tinker.af.mil" louis.hodges@tinker.af.milThomas HoranNorthrop Grumman HYPERLINK "mailto:horanth@mail.northgrum.com" horanth@mail.northgrum.comE.S. Hougland USN HYPERLINK "mailto:houglandes@navair.navy.mil" houglandes@navair.navy.milRussell Hutt AFAMS HYPERLINK "mailto:russell.hutt@afams.af.mil" russell.hutt@afams.af.milDoug Huyck APC HYPERLINK "mailto:drhuyck@apcinc.com" drhuyck@apcinc.comO. Kohn MRI HYPERLINK "mailto:kohno@mri.co.jp" kohno@mri.co.jpRobert Kieser PLESYS HYPERLINK "mailto:robert.kieser@tinker.af.mil" robert.kieser@tinker.af.milJoe Lacetera MSTI HYPERLINK "mailto:lacetera@msti-b.com" lacetera@msti-b.comMike Lahm Boeing HYPERLINK "mailto:mike.lahm@mw.boeing.com" mike.lahm@mw.boeing.comJohn LedouxPlexsys HYPERLINK "mailto:john.ledoux@plexsysipi.com" john.ledoux@plexsysipi.comRobert Lillie ASC/YWI HYPERLINK "mailto:robert.lillie@wpafb.af.mil" robert.lillie@wpafb.af.milLee Marden Raytheon HYPERLINK "mailto:Lee_Marden@raytheon.com" Lee_Marden@raytheon.comJon MarshAsTI HYPERLINK "mailto:jonm@asti-usa.com" jonm@asti-usa.comRene Martinez TACCSF HYPERLINK "mailto:Rene.Martinez@kirtland.af.mil" Rene.Martinez@kirtland.af.milDarren Mcfarlane  Australia MoD HYPERLINK "mailto:darren.mcfarlane@defence.gov.au" darren.mcfarlane@defence.gov.auDave Mckeeby DMSO HYPERLINK "mailto:dmckeeby@msiac.dmso.mil" dmckeeby@msiac.dmso.milKeith Mcnure AFAMS HYPERLINK "mailto:keith.mcnure@afams.af.mil" keith.mcnure@afams.af.milJon Millo Stasys HYPERLINK "mailto:jon.millo@stasys.co.uk" jon.millo@stasys.co.ukSteve Monson Boeing HYPERLINK "mailto:Steve.Monson@Boeing.com" Steve.Monson@Boeing.comMike Mora TACCSF/SRC HYPERLINK "mailto:mike.mora@kirtland.af.mil" mike.mora@kirtland.af.milKevin Morello TACCSF HYPERLINK "mailto:kevin.morello@kirtland.af.mil" kevin.morello@kirtland.af.milDiane MossNorthrop Grumman HYPERLINK "mailto:mossdi@mail.northgrum.com" mossdi@mail.northgrum.comJeff MowreyASTi HYPERLINK "mailto:jeffm@asti-usa.com" jeffm@asti-usa.comTom Mullins NAICThomas.mullins@wpafb.af.milTracy Osmond TACCSF/LMC HYPERLINK "mailto:tracy.osmond@kirtland.af.mil" tracy.osmond@kirtland.af.milMichael Papay TRW HYPERLINK "mailto:michael.papay@trw.com" michael.papay@trw.comDavid F. Peden Boeing HYPERLINK "mailto:david.f.peden@boeing.com" david.f.peden@boeing.comR. Peterson Raytheon HYPERLINK "mailto:petersonmr@raytheon.com" petersonmr@raytheon.comJulian Ranger Stasys HYPERLINK "mailto:Julian.Ranger@stasys.co.uk" Julian.Ranger@stasys.co.ukPaul Raybon3Com HYPERLINK "mailto:RaybonPL@ISL-3Com.com" RaybonPL@ISL-3Com.comRichard Sauer USAF HYPERLINK "mailto:richard.sauer@langley.af.mil" richard.sauer@langley.af.milNathan Scandella Boeing HYPERLINK "mailto:nathan.scandella@boeing.com" nathan.scandella@boeing.comMadison C. Schepps Northrop Grumman HYPERLINK "mailto:MSCHEPPS@northropgrumman.com" MSCHEPPS@northropgrumman.comSiegfried Schmidt Boeing HYPERLINK "mailto:siegfried.schmidt@boeing.com" siegfried.schmidt@boeing.comGraham Shanks AMS HYPERLINK "mailto:graham.shanks@amsjv.com" graham.shanks@amsjv.comRichard E Sharp USAF HYPERLINK "mailto:Richard.Sharp@wpafb.af.mil" Richard.Sharp@wpafb.af.milKarl Shepherd General Dynamics HYPERLINK "mailto:Karl.Shepherd@gd-ais.com" Karl.Shepherd@gd-ais.comRalph Snape Stasys HYPERLINK "mailto:ralph.snape@stasys.co.uk" ralph.snape@stasys.co.ukJoe Sorroche TACCSF/ASRCC HYPERLINK "mailto:Joe.Sorroche@kirtland.af.mil" Joe.Sorroche@kirtland.af.milTim Taylor NAIC HYPERLINK "mailto:tnt56@naic.wpafb.af.mil" tnt56@naic.wpafb.af.milDuane Thorpe USAF HYPERLINK "mailto:duane.thorpe@wpafb.af.mil" duane.thorpe@wpafb.af.milTim Tibbetts Boeing HYPERLINK "mailto:timothy.a.tibbetts@boeing.com" timothy.a.tibbetts@boeing.comTony Valle SPARTA HYPERLINK "mailto:tony_valle@trwdmt.com" tony_valle@trwdmt.comGina WaldropNorthrop Grumman HYPERLINK "mailto:waldrgi@mail.northgrum.com" waldrgi@mail.northgrum.comMark Walters USAF HYPERLINK "mailto:mark.walters@majorsfield.af.mil" mark.walters@majorsfield.af.milNeil Waterman ASTi HYPERLINK "mailto:neilw@asti-usa.com" neilw@asti-usa.comSally White QinetiQ HYPERLINK "mailto:sawhite@qinetiq.com" sawhite@qinetiq.comJohn Woodyard USAF HYPERLINK "mailto:John.Woodyard@wpafb.af.mil" John.Woodyard@wpafb.af.milIntroductionJTIDS is a communications, navigation and identification system intended to exchange surveillance and command and control (C2) information among various C2 platforms and weapons platforms to enhance varied missions of each of the services. It provides high capacity, jam resistant, digital data and secure voice communication, navigation and Identification (CNI) information to a variety of platforms.  The U.S. Air Force objective is to migrate all its Tactical Data Link capable platforms to the TADIL-J message set and the JTIDS network (generically referred as Link-16) standard.  These are fully described in MIL STD 6016B.Over the past several years, various non-interoperable datalink implementations have emerged. For example, five different TADIL-J/JTIDS simulation protocols (two of which are non-DIS) have evolved over the last 10 years. There are immediate and overdue operational requirements for existing military simulations to exchange TADIL-J/JTIDS data using a single interoperable standard. As military distributed simulation evolves further in mission scale and complexity, other tactical datalink implementations need to interoperate.  The objective of this standard is to establish a single format to exchange TADIL-J messages, and to emulate a JTIDS radio frequency network.    In developing a protocol for simulating JTIDS in DIS and HLA, it is recognized that there are widely varying requirements for achieving fidelity amongst different users.  This protocol attempts to establish procedures that may be used by the vast majority of users, by establishing discrete, scalable, interoperable levels of fidelity for different users.  This in turn, allows for low cost initial implementation with a path toward upgrading to detailed JTIDS emulation as requirements evolve. Current version of this document describes the DIS protocol.  A future version will also address the HLA simulation framework for JTIDS.The DIS simulation protocol for JTIDS is described in terms of the established DIS Transmitter and Signal PDUs.  There has been no change to the IEEE 1278.1 – 1995 standard fields for the Transmitter or Signal PDUs.  JTIDS specific enumerations have been created to populate the standard fields. The implementation of JTIDS exploits the fact that both these PDUs are variable length.  In the case of the Transmitter PDUs, this protocol sets forth how the variable length “modulation parameter” fields will be populated.   In the case of the Signal PDU, JTIDS specific information is relegated to the variable length data fields. ScopeIt is the objective of this protocol to establish a standard for TADIL-J message exchange d  and JTIDS network simulation in the DIS and HLA interoperability frameworks. The intent is to prescribe the content of the standard fields of the Transmitter and Signal PDUs and establish procedures for their use.  Compliance with these procedures will ensure interoperability amongst JTIDS simulation systems.  ReferencesIEEE 1278.1 – 1995 IEEE Standard for Distributed Interactive Simulation – Application ProtocolsMIL-STD-6016B, Tactical Digital Information Link (TADIL) J Message Standard (DRAFT) 15 March 2002NATO STANAG 5602, edition 1, Standard Interface for Multiple Platform Link Evaluation (SIMPLE) 20 Feb 2001System Segment Specification for Joint Tactical Information Distribution System Class 2 Terminal, 15 April 1999STANAG 5516, Edition 1, Tactical Data Exchange - LINK 16, Ratified 15 January 1997.LINK-16 Enhanced Throughput Standard, August 11, 1998 Doc # VSD-618255-97-339-02Joint Interoperability of Tactical Command and Control Systems Variable Message Format (VMF) Technical Interface Design Plan (Test Edition) Reissue 2, August 1996.Terms, Definitions and ConventionConventionsThe following terms and conventions are used for the purpose of this standard:SHALL indicates a procedure or capability is mandatory.MAY indicates a procedure or capability is optional.WILL/IS/ARE generally used descriptively for information purposes.Terms and DefinitionsAutomatic Acknowledgement:  A machine verification function whereby a terminal that receives a message addressed to it retransmits a copy of that message back to the source during a later time slot, verifying the receipt of the original message.Epoch: A 12.8-minute time interval consisting of 98,304 time slot intervals, each of 7.8125 milliseconds duration. The time slots in each epoch are organized into three sets (A, B, or C) of 32, 768 time slots each. There are 112.5 epochs in a 24-hour period. Free Text Message:  Bit-oriented messages whose information bits may be used to represent digitized voice, teletype and other forms of free text information.  This does not refer to the fixed word format message, J28.2 “AWACS free text message”.Fixed Word Format (FWF): A 70-bit structure consisting of a formalized arrangement of predefined fields of fixed length and sequence.Fixed Word Format Message: A J-Series message utilizing fixed word format (FWF). An FWF message is started by an initial word that may be then followed by one or more extension and/or continuation words.Geodetic Position Quality:  A measure of the quality of a JTIDS/MIDS terminal's geodetic position reported in the terminal's Position and Status Reports. Geodetic Position Quality is reported as an integer from 0-15 where the higher numbers correspond to the higher qualities, i.e., lower errors in position. JTIDS Header (Message):  The leading bits of each message are coded as a (16, 7) Reed-Solomon code word that provides 35 bits of information. Initial Entry:  The procedure by which a subscriber terminal becomes a system participant initially and may achieve coarse synchronization with system time. Initial Entry JTIDS Unit (IEJU):  Any JTIDS/MIDS unit that transmits the Initial Entry message in the appropriate time slot.JTIDS Joint Tactical Information Distribution System: The JTIDS/ MIDS is a joint-service system which provides an Integrated Communications, Navigation, and Identification (ICNI) capability. The JTIDS/MIDS provides a reliable, secure, jam resistant, high- capacity, ICNI capability through the use of direct-sequence, spread- spectrum, frequency-hopping, and error detection and correction techniques. JTIDS/MIDS Net:  One of 128 time-division structures comprising a JTIDS/MIDS network. Each net consists of a continuous stream of time intervals (time slots) with 98,304 time slots per 12.8-minute epoch, during which digital data whose signal characteristics are determined by a cryptographic variable in conjunction with a unique net number are distributed.JTIDS/MIDS Network:  The JTIDS/MIDS structure (usable only with Mode 1 communications) having a total usable capacity of 98,304 time slots per epoch per net and 128 nets. All nets are synchronized so that each time slot of each net is time-coincident with the corresponding time slot (same set and number) of every other net.The signal characteristics of all data distributed within a specified multi-netted structure are determined by a cryptographic variable in conjunction with a set of net numbers that define the structure.JTIDS/MIDS Unit (JU): A unit communicating directly on Link 16. JU is used within the context of this standard to indicate a simulated TADIL-J terminal.Link 16 Message:  A functionally oriented, variable length string of one or more 70-bit words in either fixed word format or variable message format.Machine Receipt: See Automatic AcknowledgementMode 1 Communications: Mode 1 JTIDS/MIDS transmissions consist of a sequence of wide-band transmission symbol packets (single pulse, 13-microsecond packets and double-pulse, 26-microsecond packets), the pulses of which are formed by continuous phase shift modulation (CPSM) of the carrier frequency. The signal processing required to transform base-band data to the JTIDS signal waveforms for transmission includes base-band data encryption, forward error correction encoding, error detection encoding, cyclic code shift keying (CCSK) encoding, data symbol interleaving, and the selection of a variable start time.Mode 2 Communications: Mode 2 JTIDS/MIDS transmissions are identical to Mode 1, except that Mode 2 operates in the narrow-band mode.Mode 4 Communications: Mode 4 JTIDS/MIDS transmissions have signal waveform characteristics identical to Mode 2, except that Mode 4 does not employ base-band data encryption signal processing.Navigation Controller: The Navigation Controller establishes the origin and North orientation of the U, V relative grid for the Relative Navigation function. Needline/Network Participation Group (NPG):  The Needline Participation Group is a unique list of netted subscribers compiled without regard to the specific messages they exchange with each other. This list is a means of transmitting any message to a common set of users.  The Network Participation Group is a unique list of applicable messages used to support an agreed- upon technical function without regard to subscriber identities. This list is a means of transmitting a common set of messages to all interested users. For the purposes of simulation in this standard, the NPG number creates virtual networks of participants to segregate information within a JTIDS/MIDS network. Net: Net See "JTIDS/MIDS Net."Net Number:  A 7-bit code that identifies each net as a decimal number (0 through127). Network: See "JTIDS/MIDS Network."Network Time Reference (NTR):  A subscriber terminal that is assigned as the reference for system time for each synchronized netted system. The NTR terminal's clock time is never updated by system information and is the reference to which all other terminals synchronize their own clocks. There is only one NTR.Position Reference:  One or more JUs designated as a network reference. Such a JU has maintained a geodetic position accuracy of 50 feet, one sigma (standard deviation) over a long period of time.Pulse  (JTIDS): A 6.4-microsecond burst of carrier frequency continuous phase shift modulated at a 5-megabit-per-second rate by the transmission symbol. Precise Participant Location & Identification (PPLI): The PPLI function provides network participation status, identification, and position of JUs on the Link 16 interface. Radio Silence Mode:  A mode of terminal operation where the terminal receives but does not transmit fixed word format or variable message format messages.Recurrence Rate: The total number of time slots per epoch assigned (or deleted) in a single time block assignment, specified as an integer, R = 0 to 15 where 2 = the number of time slots. Recurrence Rate Number (RRN): An integer R, O < R < 15, where 2 R is the recurrence rate of the block assignment. Reed-Solomon (R-S) Code:  As applied to JTIDS/MIDS, a forward error correction encoding scheme.  In this protocol, indicating Reed-Solomon encoding in the Signal PDU, the data area is still comprised of 75 bit non Reed-Solomon encoded TADIL-J messages.Relative Navigation (Relnav): A procedure used by a terminal to determine its position and velocity in a common reference coordinate system by passive observations of Position and Status messages transmitted by other terminals. To make use of Relnav, the simulation system must achieve high fidelity synchronization (paragraph 5.4.2)Relative Position Quality: A measure of the quality of a terminal's relative position with respect to the U, V relative grid. Relative Position Quality is reported in the terminal's Position and Status Reports as an integer from 0-15, where the higher qualities, i.e., less error in position. Reporting Responsibility: The requirement for the IU with the best positional data on a track to transmit track data on the interface.Round-Trip-Timing (RTT):  The process used by a JTIDS/MIDS terminal to directly determine the offset between its clock and that of another JTIDS/MIDS terminal. This is used to achieve and maintain fine synchronization and to improve the terminal's time quality. This process involves the exchange of RTT Interrogation and Reply Messages. RTT Addressed  (RTT A):  The RTT A message provides the means for a JTIDS Terminal to synchronize with system time using the active synchronization procedure.   A specific terminal with a time quality greater than the interrogating terminal is interrogated and responds with the RTT Reply. Typically the interrogating terminal addresses the NTR.RTT Broadcast (RTT B):  The RTT B message provides the means for a JTIDS Terminal to synchronize with the system time using the active synchronization procedure.  The RTT B message is not addressed to a specific terminal. The interrogating terminal transmits the RTT B message on the net number of the highest time quality PPLI that it has received. Any terminal with a time quality equal or higher than that net number shall reply.RTT Reply:  The RTT reply message provides the means for th JTIDS terminal to support the active synchronization procedure by providing time-of-arrival data in response to either an RTT-A or RTT-B interrogation.Stacked Net: The coordinated use of specific blocks of time slots on different nets in a JTIDS/MIDS network by different communities of users.Subscriber:  A participant in the use of the system, either actively (transmission of information) or passively (receiver of information only), or both. Synchronization: Active Synchronization: A procedure used by a JTIDS/MIDS terminal to effect and maintain fine synchronization with system time based on the Round-Trip-Timing (RTT) processPassive Synchronization:  A procedure used by a terminal to effect and maintain fine synchronization with system time by passive observations of Position and Status messages transmitted by other terminals. The synchronizing terminal is not required to transmit any information. Coarse Synchronization: The state of synchronization with system time that allows a terminal to receive and process messages and to achieve fine synchronization. Fine Synchronization:  The state of synchronization with system time that allows a terminal to transmit messages. A terminal may utilize a passive or an active synchronization procedure to achieve fine synchronization.  Low Fidelity Synchronization:  Simulated fine synchronization without using RTT messages.   High Fidelity Synchronization:  Simulated fine synchronization using RTT messages.  Tactical Digital Information Link (TADIL):  A JCS approved standardized (TADIL) communications link suitable for transmission of digital information. A data link is characterized by its standardized message formats and transmission characteristic.TADIL J:  Tactical Digital Information Link J.  A secure, jam-resistant, nodeless data link that utilizes the Joint Tactical Information Distribution System (JTIDS), and the protocols, conventions and Link-16 fixed word message formats defined by the MIL-STD- 6016B.Time (System): The time maintained by the terminal assigned as the Network Time Reference (NTR) to which all other participating terminals are synchronized. Time (Terminal): The estimate of time derived by a terminal as a result of executing either the active or a passive synchronization procedure. (System Segment Specification for JTIDS/ MIDS Class 2 Terminal)Time Quality: A measure of the quality of a terminal's state of synchronization with system time reported in the terminal's Position and Status Report. Time Quality is reported as an integer from 0-15 where the higher numbers correspond to the higher levels of quality, i.e., lower errors in timing. (System Segment Specification for JTIDS/ MIDS Class 2 Terminal)Time Slot:  A 7.8125-millisecond time interval during which messages may be transmitted. Time Slot Assignment (TSA): The designation to the terminal of the specific time slot block in which it will transmit or receive messages.Time Slot Block:  A collection of time slots spaced uniformly in time over each epoch and belonging to a single time slot set. A block is defined by indexing time slot number (0 to 32,767), set (A, B, or C), and a recurrence rate number (0 to 15).Time Slot Number:  A 17-bit code that identifies each full time slot. The code consisting of a 2-bit set field (set A, B, or C) and a 15-bit slot field representing the decimal numbers zero to 32,767. (System Segment Specification for JTIDS/MIDS Class 2 Terminal)Track Quality: A measure of the reliability of the positional information of a reported track.TSA mode:  In this protocol a TSA mode corresponds one of five selectable levels of fidelity.  UsersPrimary User:  A subscriber terminal that utilizes the active synchronization (RTT) procedure and serves as a high- quality source for synchronization by the general Relative Navigation community. Secondary User: The general category for the majority of system subscriber terminals. Secondary user terminals generally utilize the Passive synchronization procedures for synchronizing in the Relative Navigation community. (System Segment Specification for JTIDS/ MIDS Class 2 Terminal) Secondary users may use RTT messages when improved time quality is needed to maintain position quality.  Variable Message Format (VMF):  A message structure using predefined fields of fixed length employing internal syntax and a header extension. The internal syntax specifies the presence, absence, and recurrence of fields as selected by the user.AcronymsCVLLCrypto Variable Logic LabelCPSMContinuous Phase Shift ModulationCVSDContinuous Variable Slope Delta (modulation)DISDistributed Interactive SimulationEDACError Detection and CorrectionHLAHigh Level ArchitectureJTIDSJoint Tactical Information Distribution SystemRelnavRelative Navigation JUJTIDS UnitLETLink-16 Enhanced ThroughputLink-16See TADIL-JLPCLinear Predictive CodingMSECMessage SecurityMIL STDMilitary StandardNPGNet Participation GroupsNTRNetwork Time ReferencePPLIPrecise Participant Location & IdentificationR-S EncodingReed-Solomon encodingRTTRound Trip TimingTDMATime Division Multiple AccessTDLTactical Data LinkTADIL-JTactical Digital Information Link TSATime Slot AllocationTDMATime Division/Demand Multiple AccessPDUProtocol Data UnitTSECTransmission SecurityVMFVariable Message FormatRequirementsJTIDS OPERATING characteristicsJTIDS uses the principle of frequency hopping Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) to divide network time, and capacity, into divisions called time slots.  Each timeslot is 7.8125 milliseconds long with 128 time slots per second. Timeslots are organized into three interleaved sets (A, B, and C).  An epoch is 12.8 minutes long comprised of 32K timeslots.  There are 112.5 epochs in a 24-hour day.  Therefore, the current epoch, set and timeslot number can be calculated from the current time.  Operationally, groups of timeslots are assigned to a common function known as a network participation group (NPG).  Timeslot assignments are published in a Network Data Load (by a central net design agency), with participation groups identified y the timeslot set, the “offset” of the timeslot, and the timeslot repetition rate.  The repetition rate is expressed as n exponential power of 2, representing how often the timeslot assigned to the NPG occurs within the set.    TDMA architecture requires that each JTIDS participant, known as a JTIDS Unit (JU) know when its transmit timeslots occur. JUs must be synchronized with a common network time to receive and transmit on the network.  In JTIDS, one JU in a Network is designated as the Network Time Reference (NTR).   General RequirementsSimulators in compliance with this standard shall at a minimum have the capability to identify the NPG and net number of transmitted data to allow them to operate at TSA mode level 0 and 1. All TADIL-J messages shall be bit encoded in accordance with the MIL STD 6016B TADIL-J specification. In the specification, each timeslot contains one 35-bit header (padded to 48 bits in the Signal PDU) and a varying number of 75 bit messages unless the message type indicator specifies otherwise. Regardless of level of fidelity, all modulation parameter fields in the Transmitter PDU shall be filled with meaningful data. When the header indicates Reed-Solomon encoding, the data area is still comprised of non Reed-Solomon encoded TADIL-J messages.Any simulator that is not emulating JTIDS network data load throughput shall have the ability to configure the maximum number of JTIDS words transmitted per second, but shall not exceed the JTIDS maximum of 1536 words per second. (Packed 4 Single Pulse timeslot *128 timeslots per second). This upper limit shall not apply to JTIDS LET (Enhanced Throughput) packets. If the packing mode from the JTIDS header and the number of messages contained in the signal PDU do not agree, (i.e. the header states that the packing mode is P2DP and there are 12 JTIDS words contained with the message) extra messages may be dropped by the receiving simulator—as would happen in a live JTIDS datalink. If there are fewer messages in the data area than prescribed by the packing mode, the receiver shall treat the missing messages as J31.7 “No statement” messages and parse the message stream accordingly.Perceived data shall be able to be sent on a configurable port separate from all other DIS data. This allows datalinks to be selectively routed without additional hardware. This also allows for gateways to forward data between legacy DIS datalink formats and the new standardized format Timeslots shall not be “pre-sent”. Systems shall wait until the timeslot occurs to transmit data in order to receive the latest update to data.  Receiving systems shall buffer messages after the timeslot has occurred to account for network latency. The amount of time to buffer messages for a timeslot shall be a runtime configuration item.If multiple messages are received with identical MSEC, TSEC, Net Number and Time slot number, receivers shall discard all messages except from the closest transmitting entity (in the simulation space).There are three operator selectable communication modes for a real JTIDS/MIDS network, modes 1,2, and 4. The selected communication mode determines whether or not the network can operate on multiple nets (by employing frequency hopping) and the transmitted data are encrypted. All JUs in a JTIDS/MIDS network must operate in the same communication mode.In JTIDS DIS simulation, the normal operation mode is mode 1.  Frequency hopping and MSEC/TSEC is simulated appropriate to the specified level of fidelity.When operating with JTIDS communications mode 2, there will be no frequency hopping, but MSEC/TSEC shall still be used, depending on the level of fidelity. The explicit frequency of 969 MHZ shall be set in the transmitter PDU frequency field and the bandwidth will be 1MHZ. The net number in the signal PDU shall be zero for all transmissions (no multi-netting).  Mode 4 eliminates communications security in addition to the features of communications mode.  The MSEC and TSEC fields shall be set to 0 when in communications mode 4 in addition to specifying the explicit transmit frequency in the transmitter PDU as in communications mode 2. Table 5.2.1: JTIDS Communication ModesTimeslots shall be numbered sequentially, such that timeslot 0 represents timeslot A-1, timeslot 90303 represents C-32767. When the epoch is 112, the last valid timeslot is 45151 (end of the day)Levels of Fidelity (DIS)This protocol allows simulations to achieve different levels of fidelity by assigning one of five Timeslot Allocation (TSA) levels.  The TSA level is set in Modulation Parameter #1 of the Transmitter PDU with an enumeration of 0-4 as described below.TSA Level 0, Low FidelityTSA level 0 is the lowest level of fidelity.  The NPG and net fields are filled in the Signal PDU, but all other data in the JTIDS transmission header is set to the default value. Multiple messages are permitted in a single Signal PDU.  All messages within the signal PDU are assumed to be for the same NPG & Net with the same assumed packing.  There is no TSA or metering with up to the maximum number of messages (as specified in the DIS standard) packed into data area of a single Signal PDU. Low fidelity synchronization is achieved in accordance with paragraph 5.4.1 of this protocol.  TSA Level 1, Low FidelityTSA Level is similar to TSA Level 0 except that there is minimal metered data: one timeslot worth of information in one signal PDU. As in TSA level 0, the NPG and Net fields are filled in, and the rest of the transmission information is set to default.  Low fidelity synchronization is achieved in accordance with paragraph 5.4.1.TSA Level 2, Medium fidelityTSA Level 2 allows for metered data with no encryption.  When TSA level is set to 2, messages shall be assigned to individual timeslots.   The NPG, Net, , and Timeslot identification  fields are filled in. The TSEC and MSEC are set to default.  Low fidelity synchronization is achieved in accordance with paragraph 5.4.1TSA Level 3, Medium FidelityThis level enables full TSA to include Encryption.  When TSA mode is set to 3, stacked nets, multinets, and crypto nets can be emulated.  All transmission information fields are filled in.  Low fidelity synchronization is achieved in accordance with paragraph 5.4.1TSA Level 4, High FidelityIf the TSA mode is set to 4, everything from TSA 3 is emulated, with the addition of the high fidelity synchronization procedures in paragraph 5.4.2.   All JTIDS header fields in the Signal PDU shall be filled with non-default meaningful values. Communication between JUs with different fidelity levelsIn a simulated JTIDS network involving participants operating at different levels of fidelity (i.e. with different TSA modes)If a low fidelity network participant is in a simulated JTIDS network with a higher fidelity NTR, it shall follow the low fidelity synchronization procedures in paragraph 5.4.1, skipping the RTT synchronization process, changing directly to the fine synchronization state once it receives a J0.0 initial net entry message from the NTR or any IEJU.If a higher fidelity network participant is in a simulated JTIDS network with a lower fidelity NTR, it shall either follow the low fidelity synchronization procedures in paragraph 5.4.1 or it shall achieve fine sync with other high fidelity simulators. This can be accomplished by exchanging RTT-Bs or by passively synchronizing with other available high fidelity simulators.  If no other high fidelity simulators are available to synchronize with, the high fidelity participant shall skip the RTT exchange, and directly entering fine synchronization once the J0.0 is received.If the NTR is a lower fidelity simulation and unable to simulate full NTR duties, the NTR must still have the ability to transmit net entry messages. The signal PDU shall be filled in with a J0.0 with zeroed timeslot information. RTT emulation will not be required of low fidelity NTRsA lower fidelity JU entering the net shall use the network synchronization ID received from the NTR/IEJU in its transmitted transmitter PDUs.  It will then issue transmitter PDUs and PPLIs at a rate of once every 12 seconds (equivalent to the A-0-6 time slot block). All simulators, regardless of fidelity shall accept another terminal’s statement of synchronization capability if the network synchronization ID matches its own network synchronization ID. In a lower fidelity synchronization simulation, non-reception of a PPLI message pair for 60 seconds shall indicate that the unit has fallen out of the datalink. Synchronization procedures must be re-accomplished--reception of a PPLI transmitter/signal PDU stating fine synchronization must occur before data from the JU will be accepted.Levels of fidelity (HLA)-TBDTime Synchronization (DIS)One station shall be designated as the Network Time Reference (NTR).  Network Synchronization IDs shall be uniquely generated by NTRs.  NTRs shall use a random function to generate a 32 bit unsigned integer, using the DIS timestamp of the time they begin to simulate a NTR as the random key seed.If a system in the real world is capable of acting as NTR, any corresponding simulator shall also be capable, at a minimum, of acting as a low fidelity NTR. If no simulators in a simulated JTIDS net are capable of acting as a NTR, participants shall be able to set the network synchronization ID to zero and transmit the synchronization state of fine synchronization. A zero in the network synchronization ID field shall be accepted as a wildcard matching any network synchronizationIf a network synchronization ID accompanying received data does not match a JUs own network synchronization ID, the data will be considered as having not been received. Simulated terminals shall accept net entry messages (J0.0) from any simulated transmitting terminal within reception range. When high fidelity synchronization is applicable (TSA Mode level 4), and the net entry message has a network synchronization ID different than the local network synchronization ID, the JU shall revert back to coarse synchronization, use the new network synchronization ID, cease sending TADIL-J data and will attempt re-synchronization with the new NTR in accordance with the JTIDS terminal specification. If the network synchronization ID (i.e. during changeover of NTR) is the same as the locally held key, the JU will not revert to coarse synchronization status and will not stop transmitting TADIL-J data.Using time and position quality from high fidelity synchronization procedures, geodetic position quality and Relnav modes will be able to be emulated in applicable terminal emulators.Low Fidelity Synchronization Low fidelity synchronization is applicable to simulation systems interested primarily in providing tactical datalink information as part of an operational scenario.  The low fidelity synchronization procedure allows such systems to exchange Link-16 messages without being encumbered by actual JTIDS transmission and message security requirements.  The NTR shall begin by issuing Transmitter PDU/Signal PDU Net Entry message pairs at a rate in accordance with the JTIDS terminal specification (Typically in timeslot A-0-6 at a rate of every 12 seconds). A unique randomly generated key shall be filled into the network synchronization ID field of the transmitter PDU. The primary JTIDS duty field shall contain a NTR enumeration.The receiving JTIDS Unit Terminal (JU) then updates its own terminal time by taking the terminal perceived time, and adding the amount of time for the message to traverse the distance between the two entities. It also shall fill it’s own network synchronization ID in the with the network synchronization ID received from the NTR. This ID shall be used in all transmitter PDUs as long as the JU remains in synchronization with the same NTR.Modulation Parameter 4 (Synchronization State) in the Transmitter PDU will be set to “2” after reception of the J0.0 Initial Net Entry message from the IEJU or NTR, corresponding to “fine synchronization”..The first data message that will be sent by a JU entering the network shall be the JUs PPLI (in a signal PDU) along with the accompanying transmitter PDU. High Fidelity Synchronization High Fidelity Synchronization corresponds to only the high fidelity TSA level 4.  It is applicable to those systems for whom accurate emulation of the RF JTIDS network is paramount, potentially in high fidelity training, network testing and network experimentation. The high fidelity synchronization procedure follows steps 1 and 2 of the low fidelity synchronization procedure above.  At this point, the JU is considered to have achieved “coarse synchronization”.  The JU then transmits the appropriate Signal PDU RTT message (A or B) and Transmitter PDU pairs. Modulation parameter 4 of the transmitter PDU is set to 1 for “coarse synchronization”. The JU will use it’s own terminal perceived time in the transmitter PDU.The appropriate NTR/JU will answer (in accordance with the JTIDS terminal specification), using the JU perceived time and the entity distance to calculate the perceived receive time. The RTT/transmitter PDU pair is then transmitted. The transmitting JU shall fill its own terminal perceived time into the transmitter PDU.The JU shall then update its own terminal time with the received round trip time, which is calculated from the received perceived transmit time. After the appropriate number or RTT exchanges have occurred (depending whether the RTT-A or RTT-B method of synchronization was used), the JU shall consider itself to be in fine synchronization and shall continually issue RTT message pairs to maintain synchronization at rates specified within the JTIDS terminal specification.   Modulation parameter 4 in the transmitter PDU is set to “2” for “fine synchronization”.All machines that are to accomplish high fidelity synchronization shall have their system times synchronized in order to allow for a consistent time “base” for all the machines to reference.  Any time errors due to the accuracy of the synchronization mechanism (NTP, etc) shall be added to the RTT timing algorithms.The first data message that will be sent by a JU entering the network shall be the JUs PPLI (in a signal PDU) along with the accompanying transmitter PDU.The time of arrival of an RTT shall be calculated by adding the perceived transmit time (PTTi or PTTR) to the simulated time of propagation (TPS) which is calculated from the distance (in the simulation space) between transmitting and receiving entities.  This modifies the JTIDS time synchronization error formula to: EMBED Equation.3  Time Synchronization (HLA) –TBDPRotocol implementation Details (DIs)Transmitter PDUIn the traditional use of the transmitter/signal PDUs, a transmitter PDU is sent at the beginning and end of a transmission, with multiple signal PDUs in between..  In simulation of TADIL-J, it is impractical to emulate frequency hopping by sending a transmitter PDU to describe the frequency for each transmission.  A single frequency is not used per timeslot; instead, a different frequency is used per pulse. There are approximately 33,024 pulses transmitted per second, depending on the packing mode—equaling a potential bandwidth utilization in the tens of megabytes per second if each pulse were to be modeled. This protocol prescribes that frequency hopping will be simulated by capturing the variables describing the hopping pattern and incorporating them into the variable length modulation parameter fields of the Transmitter PDU.   Transmitter PDUs used in Link-16 simulation shall include all of the standard information regarding transmission power, antenna pattern, antenna location, etc. The Frequency field contains the JTIDS center frequency.The Transmit Frequency Bandwidth field shall contain the bandwidth of the JTIDS frequency—simulating the use of the entire frequency band as an average over time. The Modulation Type fields contain enumerations for the major and detail modulation fields. The Spread Spectrum field shall be set to 1 for frequency hoppingThe Major modulation field shall be set to 7 for Carrier Phase Shift Modulation.The detail modulation field shall contain a 0.The System field shall be set to 7 for JTIDS/MIDSThe Length of Modulation Parameters shall be set to 16, representing 16 octets.Modulation Parameter 1 shall contain the “TSA mode” with an enumeration of 0-4 indicating the level of fidelity as described in paragraph 5.3.Modulation Parameter 2 shall contain the transmitting terminal’s primary mode.  Setting the enumeration to 1 shall indicate that the entity is the NTR.  Setting it to 2 shall indicate that the entity is a JU participant.Modulation Parameter 3 shall contain the transmitting terminal’s secondary mode, with the following enumerations: 0=None, 1=Net Position Reference, 2=Primary Navigation Controller, 3=Secondary Navigation Controller. Modulation Parameter 4 shall contain the synchronization state.  For all low fidelity simulations in which the TSA mode level (modulation parameter 1) is 0-3, this shall be set to 2 for “fine synchronization”.  Setting the enumeration to 1, “coarse synchronization” applies only to TSA mode level 4. Modulation Parameter 5 shall contain the Perceived Transit Time and shall be filled with an NTP timestamp format.  NTP timestamps are represented as a 64-bit unsigned fixed-point number, in seconds relative to 0h on 1 January 1900. The integer part is in the first 32 bits and the fraction part in the last 32 bits. The precision of this representation is about 200 picoseconds. See RFC1305 for detailed format.Modulation Parameter 5 shall contain the Network Synchronization ID.  This ID shall be a 32-bit random integer generated by using the DIS timestamp as the seed. Only an NTR can generate a Network Synchronization ID; all other participants shall use the ID obtained from the NTR that they are synchronized to.A Transmitter PDU shall be issued:When entering the simulated JTIDS network, after reception of the J0.0, in accordance with the rules specified in 5.4.1.With any signal PDU containing any J0.x (network maintenance) message. With any signal PDU containing any unit’s own PPLI message (this does not apply to indirect PPLIs).A Transmitter PDU shall be issued upon transition to Radio Silence or upon exiting the JTIDS network.	Table 5.7.1.1: Transmitter PDU for TADIL - JField Size (bits)Transmitter PDU FieldsDescription96PDU HeaderProtocol Version8 bit enumeration Exercise ID8 bit unsigned integer PDU Type8 bit enumeration Protocol Family8 bit enumeration Timestamp32 bit unsigned integer Length16 bit unsigned integer Padding16 bits unused 48Entity IDSite16 bit unsigned integer Application16 bit unsigned integer Entity16 bit unsigned integer 16Radio ID 16 bit unsigned integerShall contain the ID of the radio transmitting the signal.64Radio Entity TypeEntity Kind8 bit enumeration Domain8 bit enumeration Country 16 bit enumeration Category8 bit enumeration Nomenclature Version8 bit enumeration Nomenclature16 bit enumeration 8Transmit State 8 bit enumeration 8Input Source 8 bit enumeration 16Padding 16 bits unused 192Antenna LocationX component64 bit floating point Y component64 bit floating point Z component64 bit floating point 96Relative Antenna Locationx component32 bit floating point y component32 bit floating point z component32 bit floating point 16Antenna Pattern Type 16 bit enumeration 16Antenna Pattern Length 16 bit unsigned integer 64Frequency 64 bit unsigned integer64 Bit Int: 1131000000 (center frequency) Or unless operating in Communications mode 2 or 4, then 96900000032Transmit Frequency Bandwidth 32 bit floating point32 Bit Float: 240000000 unless in Communications mode 2 or 4, then 132Power 32 bit floating point 64Modulation TypeSpread Spectrum32 bit floating point1: Frequency HoppingMajor 16 bit Boolean arrayNew Modulation—7: Carrier Phase Shift Modulation (CPSM)Detail16 bit enumerationSystem16 bit enumerationInteger Enumeration: 7 = JTIDS/MIDS16Crypto System 16 bit enumeration16Crypto Key ID 16 bit unsigned integer8Length of Modulation Parameters 8 bit unsigned integer 24Padding 24 bits unused 8Modulation Parameter #1Time Slot Allocation Mode8 bit enumerationInteger enumeration 0-48Modulation Parameter #2Transmitting Terminal Primary Mode 8 bit enumerationInteger Enumeration: 1-NTR 2-JTIDS Unit Participant8Modulation Parameter #3Transmitting Terminal Secondary Mode 8 bit enumerationInteger Enumeration: 0=None 1-Net Position Reference 2-Primary Navigation Controller 3-Secondary Navigation Controller8Modulation Parameter #4Synchronization State8 bit enumerationInteger Enumeration: 1=Course Synchronization2=Fine Synchronization64Modulation Parameter #5Perceived Transmit Time 64 bit unsigned integerNTP timestamp format-- NTP timestamps are represented as a 64-bit unsigned fixed-point number, in seconds relative to 0h on 1 January 1900. The integer part is in the first 32 bits and the fraction part in the last 32 bits. The precision of this representation is about 200 picoseconds, which should be adequate for even the most exotic requirements. See RFC1305 for detailed format.32Modulation Parameter #6Network Synchronization ID 32 bit unsigned integer32 bit random number, use the DIS timestamp as the seed32Padding 32 bits unused32 bits unusedSignal PDUThe format of the Signal PDU shall comply with the IEEE 1278.1 – 1995 standard.  The variable length data field is specific to the use of JTIDS emulation.  Each signal PDU shall contain data for one net participant, for one NPG, for one Net Number.  Thus, each signal PDU shall only contain data of one message type identifier.The TDL type field shall be set to 100 for Link 16 Standardized Format (JTIDS/MIDS/TADIL J).The Sample Rate field shall be set to 0.The Data Length field shall contain the length of data in bits beginning after the samples field: (96 bits for JTIDS network header + 48 bits for JTIDS header + 80 bits for each TADIL-J Word + PDU padding to 32bit boundary).The Samples Field shall be set to 0.The Data Fields of the signal PDU shall be set as followsJTIDS Network HeaderNetwork/Needline Participation Group (NPG) shall be filled in accordance with Table 4.2- 1 “Message to Network PG Applicability Table” of MIL STD 6016B.  This field must be filled for all levels of fidelity (TSA modes).Interim JTIDS/MIDS Message Specification (IJMS) messages (NPG is 30 or 31) should be transmitted in reverse bit order, in accordance with MIL STD 6016B.Net Number.  This field shall be filled for all levels of fidelity (TSA modes).TSEC CVLL:  Together with the MSEC CVLL, this field permits simulated Crypto-netting (TSA modes 3-4). This field shall be set to default (all F’s) for TSA modes 0-2.MSEC CVLL: Together with the TSEC CVLL, this field permits simulated Crypto-netting (TSA modes 3-4). This field shall be set to default (all F’s) for TSA modes 0-2.Message Type Identifier:  This field specifies the format for the type of Link-16 message in the PDU.  This field shall be set with an enumeration in accordance with the table below.Table 5.7.2.1: Message Type IdentifiersMessage TypeEnumerationJTIDS Header/Messages 0RTT A/B1RTT Reply2JTIDS Voice CVSD3JTIDS Voice LPC10 4JTIDS Voice LPC12 5JTIDS LET6VMF7Timeslot ID:  This field shall contain timeslot information for timeslot and epoch number in accordance with MIL STD 6016B.The remaining data fields shall be filled in according to the message typeThe message type identifier field specifies the data content of the signal PDU.  Message type 0 is the standard message format for JTIDS. In the following fields, the PDU shall contain the JITDS header (as specified in MIL-STD 6016B), padded to the word boundary followed by a sequence of 70-bit byte-padded TADIL-J messages.Enhanced JTIDS (JTIDS LET) JUs shall modify the message header in accordance with the “LINK-16 Enhanced Throughput Standard, dated 11 Aug 1998. The number of TADIL-J messages shall also be increased according to the JTIDS LET standard. All other JTIDS simulations synchronization, transmission, and reception rules apply.VMF JTIDS participants shall indicate VMF formatted messages by using the signal PDU message body type equal to 6. All other JTIDS simulations synchronization, transmission, and reception rules applyTable 5.7.2.2: SIGNAL PDU for TADIL-JField Size (bits)Signal PDU FieldsValid RangeDescription96PDU HeaderProtocol Version8 bit enumeration  Exercise ID8 bit unsigned integer  PDU Type8 bit enumeration  Protocol Family8 bit enumeration  Timestamp32 bit unsigned integer  Length16 bit unsigned integer  Padding16 bits unused  48Entity IDSite16 bit unsigned integer  Application16 bit unsigned integer  Entity16 bit unsigned integer  16Radio ID 16 bit unsigned integer Shall contain the ID of the radio transmitting the signal.16Encoding Scheme 16 bit enumeration Bits 14-15 shall contain the value 1 to indicate an encoding class Raw binary dataBits 0-13 shall contain the number of JTIDS messages including the JTIDS header. (This is for up for discussion)16TDL Type 16 bit enumeration This field shall be set to 100 for Link 16 JTIDS/MIDS/TADIL J 32Sample Rate 32 bit integer This field shall be set to 0.16Data Length 16 bit integer This field shall contain the length of data in bits beginning after the samples field. 16Samples 16 bit integer0This field shall be set to 0.96 JTIDS Network HeaderNPG Number16 bit unsigned integer0-511Network/Needline Participation Group (NPG) Number. Used to segregate information within a JTIDS/MIDS network.   Creates virtual networks of participants. Net Number8 bit unsigned integer0-127Network Number. Used to create virtual sub-circuits within NPG for stacked nets or between NPGs for multi-net. TSEC CVLL8 bit unsigned integer0-127, 255Transmission Security, an integer identification of the crypto variable used for JTIDS transmission encryption. This variable allows for simulated crypto netting. All F’s in this field shall indicate a no statement/wildcard.MSEC CVLL8 bit unsigned integer0-127, 255Message Security, an integer identification of the crypto variable used to encode the JTIDS message. This variable allows for simulated crypto netting. All F’s in this field shall indicate a no statement/wildcard.Message Type Identifier8 bit enumeration0-9Determines whether normal JTIDS header and message, RTT A/B, RTT Reply, JTIDS Voice, LET JTIDS, or VMF follows. See below for enumeration listing.Padding16 bit padding Byte alignmentTimeslot ID32bit unsigned integer Timeslot IdentifierTimeslot NumberBits 0-160-90303Timeslot number; Timeslot 0 represents timeslot A-1, timeslot 90303 represents C-32767. When the epoch is 112, the last valid timeslot is 45151 (end of the day)PaddingBits 17-230Set to 0Epoch NumberBits 24-310-112An epoch is 12.8 minutes long, 112.5 Epochs in a 24 hour day. Part of timeslot identificationTable 5.7.2.3:  Message type = 0:  JTIDS Header/MessageField Size (bits)Signal PDU FieldsValid RangeDescription48JTIDS HeaderTimeslot TypeBits 0-2Reference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B, Table 3.3-7Relay Transmission IndicatorBit 3Reference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B, Table 3.3-6Source Track Number of SenderBits 4-18Reference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B, Table 3.3-6Secure Data Unit Serial NumberBits 19-34Reference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B, Table 3.3-6PaddingBits 35-47 80TADIL-J Word #1TADIL-J Word75 BitsReference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016BPadding5 bits 80TADIL-J Word #N (to maximum number of messages)TADIL-J Word75 BitsReference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016BPadding5 bits Signal PDU C2 Padding to doubleword boundary IAW 1278.1 16bits to increase total PDU size to a multiple of 32 bits.Table 5.7.2.4:  Message type = 1, (RTT A/B)Field Size (bits)Signal PDU FieldsValid RangeDescription48 RTT A/BRTT A/BBits 0-34Reference MIL STD 6016B, Table 3.3-8(Used in place of JTIDS header during RTT transmission)PaddingBits 35-47 16Signal PDU C2 Padding to doubleword boundary IAW 1278.1 16bits to increase total PDU size to a multiple of 32 bits.Table 5.7.2.5:  Message type = 2, RTT ReplyField Size (bits)Signal PDU FieldsValid RangeDescription48 RTT A/BRTT A/BBits 0-34Reference MIL STD 6016B, Table 3.3-8(Used in place of JTIDS header during RTT transmission)PaddingBits 35-47 16Signal PDU C2 Padding to doubleword boundary IAW 1278.1 16bits to increase total PDU size to a multiple of 32 bits.Table 5.7.2.6:  Message type = 3, JTIDS Voice CVSDField Size (bits)Signal PDU FieldsValid RangeDescription48JTIDS HeaderTimeslot TypeBits 0-2Reference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B, Table 3.3-7Relay Transmission IndicatorBit 3Reference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B, Table 3.3-6Source Track Number of SenderBits 4-18Reference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B, Table 3.3-6Secure Data Unit Serial NumberBits 19-34Reference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B, Table 3.3-6PaddingBits 35-47 225-1860JTIDS Free Text Voice DataCVSD Encoded Voice Data225-1860 BitsReference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B. Size of data area is dependant upon timeslot type.Signal PDU C2 Padding to doubleword boundary IAW 1278.1  Padding (if needed) to increase total PDU size to a multiple of 32 bits.Table 5.7.2.7: Message type = 4, JTIDS Voice LPC10Field Size (bits)Signal PDU FieldsValid RangeDescription48JTIDS HeaderTimeslot TypeBits 0-2Reference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B, Table 3.3-7Relay Transmission IndicatorBit 3Reference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B, Table 3.3-6Source Track Number of SenderBits 4-18Reference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B, Table 3.3-6Secure Data Unit Serial NumberBits 19-34Reference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B, Table 3.3-6PaddingBits 35-47 225-1860JTIDS Free Text Voice DataLPC10 Encoded Voice Data225-1860 BitsReference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B. Size of data area is dependant upon timeslot type.Signal PDU C2 Padding to doubleword boundary IAW 1278.1  Padding (if needed) to increase total PDU size to a multiple of 32 bits.Table 5.7.2.8: Message type = 5, JTIDS Voice LPC12Field Size (bits)Signal PDU FieldsValid RangeDescription48JTIDS HeaderTimeslot TypeBits 0-2Reference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B, Table 3.3-7Relay Transmission IndicatorBit 3Reference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B, Table 3.3-6Source Track Number of SenderBits 4-18Reference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B, Table 3.3-6Secure Data Unit Serial NumberBits 19-34Reference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B, Table 3.3-6PaddingBits 35-47 225-1860JTIDS Free Text Voice DataLPC12 Encoded Voice Data225-1860 BitsReference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B. Size of data area is dependant upon timeslot type.Signal PDU C2 Padding to doubleword boundary IAW 1278.1  Padding (if needed) to increase total PDU size to a multiple of 32 bits.Table 5.7.2.9:  Message type = 6, JTIDS LET Header/Message48Message HeaderLET ID SymbolBits 0-3Reference LINK-16 Enhanced Throughput Standard, August 11, 1998 Doc # VSD-618255-97-339-02Relay Transmission IndicatorBit 4Reference LINK-16 Enhanced Throughput Standard, August 11, 1998 Doc # VSD-618255-97-339-02LET Message Packing Type Bits 5-8Reference LINK-16 Enhanced Throughput Standard, August 11, 1998 Doc # VSD-618255-97-339-02Source Track Number of SenderBits 9-23Reference LINK-16 Enhanced Throughput Standard, August 11, 1998 Doc # VSD-618255-97-339-02Secure Data Unit Serial NumberBits 24-39Reference LINK-16 Enhanced Throughput Standard, August 11, 1998 Doc # VSD-618255-97-339-02PaddingBits 40-47 80TADIL-J Word #1TADIL-J Word75 BitsReference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016BPadding5 bits 80TADIL-J Word #N (to maximum number of messages)TADIL-J Word75 BitsReference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016BPadding5 bits Signal PDU C2 Padding to doubleword boundary IAW 1278.1  16bits (if needed) to increase total PDU size to a multiple of 32 bits.Table 5.7.2.10: Message type = 7: VMF Header/MessagesField Size (bits)Signal PDU FieldsValid RangeDescription48JTIDS HeaderTimeslot TypeBits 0-2Reference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B, Table 3.3-7Relay Transmission IndicatorBit 3Reference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B, Table 3.3-6Source Track Number of SenderBits 4-18Reference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B, Table 3.3-6Secure Data Unit Serial NumberBits 19-34Reference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016B, Table 3.3-6PaddingBits 35-47  TADIL-J Word #1TADIL-J Word75 BitsReference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016BPadding5 bits  TADIL-J Word #N (to number messages)TADIL-J Word75 BitsReference TADIL-J Message Standard 6016BPadding5 bits Signal PDU C2 Padding to doubleword boundary IAW 1278.1  16bits (if needed) to increase total PDU size to a multiple of 32 bits.prOTOCOL iMPLEMENTATION dETAILS (hla) - tbdThe views, opinions, or findings contained in this document are those of the author(s) and should not be construed as an official Government position, policy, or decision, unless so designated by other official documentation. PAGE 1The views, opinions, or findings contained in this document are those of the author(s) and should not be construed as an official Government position, policy, or decision, unless so designated by other official documentation.02F-SIW-1198 August 2002 PAGE 4SIW-02F-1192 August 200202F-SIW-1198 August 2002Communication Mode Frequency Hopping	Data Encrypted1YesYes2NoYes3Not UsedNot Used4NoNo