Automated Initialization of an Analysis Simulation With GCCS Track DataDavid L. ProchnowJames E. HarringtonThe MITRE Corporation7515 Colshire DriveMcLean, VA  22102prochnow@mitre.orgjim@mitre.orgDavid W. WalterSAIC10260 Campus Point DriveSan Diego, CA  92121david.w.walter@saic.comJennie A. WombleITT IndustriesNaval Research LaboratoryWashington, DC  20375womble@ninja.nrl.navy.milKeywords:HLA, ITEM, GCCS, C4I-Simulation, COA Analysis, COAAAbstract: One of the glaring problems in applying simulation for use as a planning, analysis, or decision support tool during operations is the need to rapidly initialize such simulations using data that is available within Command and Control (C2) systems.  Until recently, the initialization process was done by hand, resulting in long initialization times and inaccurately entered data.During FY02, a DMSO-funded initiative established an automated linkage over the High Level Architecture (HLA) between the Global Command and Control System (GCCS) and the Integrated Theater Engagement Model (ITEM).  This ITEM-GCCS automated interface allowed analysts to rapidly and accurately initialize ITEM with data from the GCCS Common Operational Picture (COP), enabling “what-if” analyses to be executed based on data from a real-world C4I system. The effort culminated with successful usage of the federation by the United States Forces Korea (USFK).IntroductionThe integration of the Integrated  Theater Engagement Model (ITEM) and the Global Command and Control System (GCCS) into a High Level Architecture (HLA) federation serves as a case study for the automated initialization of an analysis simulation from a C4I system.  The ITEM-GCCS federation provides significant benefits to its user, the United States Forces Korea (USFK).  At the same time, this effort barely taps the potential of a C4I-to-simulation interface for rapid initialization of a Course of Action Analysis (COAA)  system.1.1 Purpose of ITEM-GCCS FederationThe purpose of the ITEM-GCCS federation is to enhance operational analysis of the current operational picture during an exercise or operation.  By passing GCCS track information through the federation, analysis in ITEM can be performed in a much more timely and accurate fashion compared to manually entering the track information into ITEM.  This allows the J3 planning staff at United States Forces Korea (USFK) to make rapid decisions based on modeling possible courses of action from the GCCS Common Operational Picture (COP).1.2 ITEM OverviewThe ITEM system simulates many levels of combat, from small unit operations to major theater-level campaigns, and addresses the strategic and operational aspects of modern warfare.  Most warfare elements are included – naval forces, air forces, expeditionary warfare forces, theater-ballistic missile forces, ground combat forces, air defense forces, and land installations.  A full range of actions and interactions are modeled – including intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) detection and data fusion events, force maneuvers, combat engagements, and logistical support activities.ITEM is a highly interactive model with a strong emphasis on visualization.  The interface consists of two displays – a textually based GUI, the Master Interface Process (MIP); and the SAIC WarViewTM geographical warfare display system.ITEM permits the user to save the entire state of the campaign at the end of each run period and to restore the system to any previously saved point in the scenario.  The ability to interrupt a game run is a key feature of the system – a campaign does not have to be executed from start to finish.  ITEM also permits the user to control the flow of the game or analysis by specifying the simulation time-step in increments of minutes to days. [SAIC1] [SAIC2]1.3 GCCS OverviewThe Global Command and Control System (GCCS) is the battlefield situation display and information management system for theater and joint task force level commanders and their staffs. The Global Command and Control System (GCCS) and the Defense Information Infrastructure Common Operational Environment (DII COE) were developed by the Department of Defense to unify strategic command and control functions into one software suite that could be used by all Joint forces. It contains the force planning and readiness assessment applications required by battlefield commanders to plan and execute military operations. Its Common Operational Picture (COP) correlates and fuses data from multiple sensors and intelligence sources to provide warfighters the situational awareness needed to be able to act and react decisively.  The primary tool for viewing and managing the data in the COP is the Joint Mapping Toolkit (JMTK). It is the canvas upon which the user’s view of the tactical world is painted. JMTK is commonly referred to as the CHART. On the CHART, tracks appear as symbols that represents air, sea (surface and subsurface), and land objects.  [J33]1.4 Use of ITEM-GCCS for USFK AnalysesThe ITEM-GCCS system is a Course of Action Analysis (COAA) system.  By providing the capability to rapidly initialize the ITEM simulation with real-world track data, the analyst can simulate several courses of action (COAs) for the current situation.  Ultimately, the operations planner can enhance the decision-making process with this COAA capability.The ITEM-GCCS federation provides two primary benefits for USFK, which already uses ITEM for COAA.  The automated link to GCCS significantly reduces the initialization time for the analyst, as previously the analyst had to manually enter COP data into the ITEM system.  The other benefit is that the track data entered into ITEM is not subject to human error. In short, the ITEM-GCCS federation improves the analytic capabilities of USFK J3 by reducing initialization time and improving accuracy, allowing for rapid COAA on dynamic, real-world data.  ITEM-GCCS Federation DesignIn order for ITEM and GCCS to communicate over the High Level Architecture (HLA) Runtime Infrastructure (RTI), custom software was developed using RTI libraries and APIs to allow each system to send and/or receive track data of interest.  In the case of GCCS, a separate application, known as the GCCS Ambassador, was developed, which has direct access to the GCCS Track Database Manager (TDBM) and the RTI.  Thus, the GCCS Ambassador is capable of both extracting TDBM tracks to publish over the RTI and also updating TDBM tracks with data received from the RTI.In the case of ITEM, the graphical user interface was extended to include a Track Manager function that allows ITEM to participate as an HLA federate.  Through the Track Manager an ITEM operator is able to receive track data that is published on the RTI by the GCCS Ambassador and to correlate this data with simulation objects within existing ITEM databases.The remainder of this section discusses the conceptual and technical design of the ITEM-GCCS federation as deployed at USFK.2.1 Concept of Operations As seen in Figure 1, the ITEM-GCCS federation receives the Common Operational Picture (COP) from an operational GCCS at USFK.  Then the GCCS Ambassador, an application that adds a High Level Architecture (HLA) interface to GCCS, sends data to ITEM.  Once data is in the ITEM Track Manager, the ITEM operator can correlate GCCS tracks with existing ITEM objects or create new ITEM objects.  EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 1.  ITEM-GCCS Logical DiagramUsing this federation, on the GCCS Ambassador graphical user interface (GUI), the operator enters a group name (or names separated by commas) for the set of tracks to be sent. The labeling of tracks with a group name allows the GCCS Ambassador to support multiple federates as subscribing federates can filter on this data.  After inputting the group, the user then selects the function to process the tracks: ADD, UPDATE, or DELETE. ADD adds the selected tracks to a group or groups, UPDATE sends updates to the federation about selected tracks that are already in a group or groups, and DELETE removes the selected tracks from a group or groups but does not delete the tracks from the GCCS database. Next the GCCS operator selects tracks from the GCCS Common Operational Picture (COP) using either the normal “rubber band” GCCS method of selection or the selection of individual tracks, or a combination of these. GCCS highlights the selected tracks, and each selection of a boxed area or of an individual track adds the new tracks to the set of selected tracks.  Functions also exist to clear the selected tracks.Once the operator has selected a set of tracks on the COP, he pushes a button on the GCCS Ambassador GUI to send the track data.  This action brings up a second window, which is a detailed list of the tracks that were selected on the COP. The operator selects from this list the tracks that are to be sent over the RTI to the federation.  While this may sound like an unnecessary step, it allows a user to draw a box around multiple icons on a crowded COP and then specify the particular tracks to process.  This window allows sorting based on track name, side, or track type, simplifying the selection of desired tracks.  A shortcut is available to select all the tracks in this list.  Once tracks are selected, the operator pushes a button to send the tracks. An alert popup window notifies the operator how many tracks were processed.After a track group is selected and delivered to ITEM, GCCS continues to send updates to ITEM through the RTI as events occur.   These updates are stored in the ITEM Track Manager.  If the analyst desires to use the newer data, the ITEM operator will invoke a refresh command to display the new data and can then correlate tracks and later synchronize them with the ITEM database. The information will remain persistent in the ITEM Track Manager until the operator explicitly requests a refresh of data. In addition, the GCCS operator can select and transmit new tracks at any time.  These tracks will then be transmitted to ITEM with the usual updates where they become available to the ITEM user for any subsequent COA analysis.If a track is destroyed in the GCCS COP, the GCCS Ambassador will automatically invoke an HLA service that communicates the object deletion to ITEM.  The ITEM Track Manager will then indicate that the track has been deleted from GCCS.  The analyst then has the option of also removing the track from ITEM.2.2 Reuse of Previous NSS-GCCS FederationThe ITEM-GCCS federation came together very quickly, due to the reuse of many federation components.  Both the GCCS Ambassador and the Federation Object Model (FOM) came directly from the NSS-GCCS federation, which served a similar role for initializing the Naval Simulation System (NSS).  In fact, the FOM reuses object classes from three federations in which the GCCS Ambassador has participated.  This FOM contains data elements that are based on the GCCS platform and unit objects.  In some federations, GCCS has also received data for these object classes to populate its track database, but in this case, as well as the NSS-GCCS federation, GCCS published this data in order to initialize the simulation.   [PROCHNOW]2.3 GCCS AmbassadorThe GCCS Ambassador is a DII-COE software application, that when installed as part of the GCCS, provides a two-way link between the embedded RTI and the DII COE Services, databases and C4I Mission Applications [LAYMAN].  Figure 2 shows a high-level depiction.  The GCCS Ambassador interprets the Federation Object Model (FOM) and manages simulated data distribution within the C4I system.  It enfranchises the C4I system, in this case GCCS, as a C4I federate of the ITEM-GCCS federation.Figure 2. C4I Federate ArchitectureThe GCCS Ambassador provides a user-friendly GUI.  Its main window is shown in Figure 3.   The user first selects track data from the GCCS CHART, using the normal procedures for a GCCS user.  Once this is done, the user can then send data to the federation through the GCCS Ambassador by invoking options available from the GUI.Figure 3.  GCCS Ambassador Main Window2.4 ITEM Track ManagerThe ITEM Track Manager provides the ITEM user with the ability to manage track data that has been sent over the federation or loaded via an ASCII file.  The Track Manager also allows the user to correlate tracks with ITEM objects and synchronize (i.e., update) correlated ITEM objects with track location information.  The user can also create new ITEM objects based on GCCS tracks.  In addition, the track manager simplifies the manipulation of data through a Graphical User Interface, with user-friendly features such as a sorting capability and an ability to select individual tracks for more detailed information. For each GCCS track, the analyst can view the correlated ITEM object, the task group or ground unit, track type and track status.  The ITEM Track Manager main window is shown in Figure 4 below.Figure 4.  ITEM Track Manager WindowThe ITEM ship and ground unit locations can be quickly updated by synchronizing with the GCCS track position. To quickly correlate new GCCS tracks with ITEM objects, the GCCS track manager provides an automatic correlation feature to quickly find the ITEM objects with similar names.  In addition, the track manager produces a report to quickly determine the GCCS tracks that have been correlated (or not correlated) with ITEM objects, and conversely determine the ITEM objects that have been correlated (or not correlated) to GCCS tracks. Once synchronized, the ITEM analyst can adapt the scenario based upon the real track position and perform coarse of action analysis.2.5 Data Representation and FlowOperational data, specifically track data from the COP, flows from the operational GCCS machine to the GCCS Ambassador machine.  In turn, the GCCS Ambassador machine transfers this data to ITEM for initialization of the simulation.  As a result, the COP data travels in a single direction, as seen in Figure 1.The COP data comes from the Track Data Base Manager (TDBM).  Each COP workstation serves as a TDBM server or a TDBM client.  Track data is stored in a TDBM server, which in turn shares the data with TDBM clients.  For ITEM-GCCS, it is logical for the operational GCCS machine to be the TDBM server while the GCCS Ambassador machine is a TDBM client.  As the server-client configuration is performed on the server side, this will allow USFK to maintain control of where track data is sent.   In addition, this virtually eliminates the possibility of somebody at the GCCS Ambassador machine corrupting the track database on the operational C4I system.GCCS provides mechanisms to send track data from one GCCS machine to another.  One such mechanism is the establishment of an Auto-Forward table. The Auto-Forward table is designed to allow a user to automatically forward specific types of incoming and outgoing messages to selected local and remote destinations. With the Auto-Forward table, one can select destinations for broadcasts of track data.  In configuring an Auto-Forward table, the administrator must consider the network load caused by the settings.  For the ITEM-GCCS federation, USFK J3 will negotiate the frequency of track data transmissions, so as to meet J3 planning requirements with the minimum impact on bandwidth.  They may also use the COP Sync Tool, a GCCS segment.The data sent through the RTI is represented in a Federation Object Model (FOM).  The FOM contains a hierarchical arrangement of object classes.  Each object class is composed of attributes.  As the ITEM-GCCS federation is only concerned with tracks, it has a single parent class for Track, along with subclasses representing different types of tracks.  The Platform subclass represents air and sea tracks, and the Unit subclass represents ground tracks.  In addition, these subclasses have subclasses of their own to indicate whether the tracks are real-world tracks or simulated tracks.  This simple object class hierarchy is shown in Table 1 below.TrackPlatformPlatformRealWorldPlatformSimulatedUnitUnitRealWorldUnitSimulatedTable 1.  ITEM-GCCS Object HierarchyLessons Learned from ITEM-GCCS FederationThis section describes some of the lessons learned from this effort.3.1 Analysis IssuesThe GCCS-to-ITEM linkage generates some of the data for ITEM, but there is still significant input required by the analyst before execution.  Therefore, we are far from having a system in which the entire simulation is initialized from C4I data sources.  Instead, a qualified ITEM analyst is still essential for conducting COAA.Some persons have expressed a desire to include air entities in the COAA.  At present, the GCCS Ambassador sends air track data over the RTI, but the ITEM Track Manager filters this data out.  Including the air tracks in the COAA would introduce some analysis issues.  By their very nature, air entities are fast movers, and the COA runs based on these would have to occur immediately or the results would be obsolete.  While the ITEM-GCCS effort greatly reduces the time it takes to initialize ITEM, there is still too much data preparation required for an immediate turnaround of results.Another issue is what to do with data received from GCCS that may indirectly contradict data previously entered by the analyst.  For instance, the ITEM user can assign actions (i.e. military orders) for the ITEM objects, whose locations may be subsequently updated based on the GCCS COP.  For instance, the user may assign a movement path to an ITEM entity, but when updating the entity location from GCCS, this path may no longer make sense (e.g., the entity may have to backtrack before reaching its final objective).  Therefore, algorithms must exist to allow the elimination or modification of previously entered orders, or at the very least, to alert the analyst to possibly invalid orders.3.2 Operational IssuesOne of the biggest challenges for the ITEM-GCCS federation was not a technical issue, but an operational one.  Specifically, we needed to interface with the operational GCCS on SIPRNET while satisfying USFK security concerns.  When we first installed the software at USFK in Feburary 2002, we discovered that we would not be allowed to get a direct feed from a workstation on SIPRNET.  As the ITEM-GCCS system only supports operational planning if it can access the real-world COP data, we developed a workable solution that we tested out at the Reception, Staging, Onward Movement & Integration (RSO&I) and Ulchi Focus Lens (UFL) exercises.  As a result of the security concerns raised during the initial USFK installation in February 2002, the team sought two solutions in parallel to achieve connectivity with the live GCCS network for the purpose of obtaining up-to-date track data.  Firstly, we initiated the DoD Information Technology Security Certification and Accreditation Process (DITSCAP) with the hope of eventual direct network connectivity.  Secondly, we implemented an interim “air gap” solution to allow participation in the RSO&I exercise.  As part of the DITSCAP, we authored a draft System Security Authorization Agreement (SSAA) describing the federation and addressing security issues.  Because DITSCAP is a lengthy process, we did not achieve accreditation in time for either exercise, but we made enough progress that USFK granted us an Interim Approval To Operate (IATO) using the “air gap” solution. The “air gap” solution (illustrated in Figure 5) involved the use of tape drives to transfer data between the operational GCCS system connected to the SIPRNET and GCCS system participating in the ITEM-GCCS federation over a local hub.Figure 5. Air Gap Solution Used at RSO&ILive exercise track data was archived to tape from J6 GCCS using standard GCCS archive utilities.  This data was then transferred and uploaded into the J3 GCCS track database via standard GCCS restore utilities.   The full archive and restore procedure was somewhat more cumbersome and error-prone than a fully automated linkage, but under optimal conditions, the track transfer took approximately 5 minutes to complete.  During the RSO&I exercise, an average of 1100 tracks were transferred daily between the two GCCS systems using this mechanism.Future PlansThis section describes some of the future plans for the ITEM-GCCS federation as well as for related work.4.1 Security AccreditationAlthough our original plan was to achieve security accreditation by UFL, we found that this was overly optimistic.  Despite our best efforts, we barely made a dent in the DITSCAP, and it became apparent that security accreditation would be a very lengthy process, extending well beyond the UFL exercise.In a separate ongoing effort, both the GCCS Ambassador and the RTI are undergoing segmentation into the GCCS COE. The security accreditation process should be much easier once the GCCS Ambassador and RTI become official mission application segments. As a result, we postponed the DITSCAP effort but will resume it once the segmentation process is complete.4.2 Use of Additional C4I SourcesThough the ITEM-GCCS federation provides significant benefits to its user, this effort barely taps the potential of a C4I-to-simulation interface for rapid initialization of a COAA  system.  The current federation is limited to the transmission of COP data, but the inclusion of additional C4I data sources would greatly improve the simulation initialization capability.A significant enhancement to the federation would be the transmission of non-COP data from GCCS to ITEM.  Although the current federation is limited to sending COP data, GCCS also includes other data that may be candidates for inclusion.  This includes the Master Intelligence Database (MIDB), Status of Resources and Training Systems (SORTS), and Joint Operation Planning and Execution System (JOPES).Over time, GCCS is planning to move to an Integrated Imagery and Intelligence (I3) architecture that will incorporate elements of the MIDB into its architecture.  This information should in turn be available to the GCCS Ambassador for export to HLA-compliant simulations that are part of the COA initialization process.  And, of course, there are other C4I sources besides GCCS that could be used for initializing a simulation. Recently, the Army TRADOC Analysis Center (TRAC) has developed an HLA interface to the Joint Common Database (JCDB) that may provide a way of initializing applications from that data source.  Other solutions for accessing MIDB and other C4ISR databases via the RTI are under investigation.  [FURNESS] 4.3 Linkages to Other SimulationsThe GCCS Ambassador and associated FOM have been reused in several efforts already.  Still, there are certainly other simulations that could benefit from rapid initialization with real-world data.  In addition, this technology could be exploited to provide a reachback capability, in which operational cells send data back to planning cells for a quick-turnaround analysis.One particular system that shows significant promise as a potential COAA tool is the  Joint Warfare System (JWARS).  JWARS is the DoD’s next-generation, analysis simulation of multi-sided, joint, theater-level warfare. In addition to joint combat operations, it includes strategic mobility and intra/inter theater logistics supply and sustainment.  Uses of JWARS will include deliberate and crisis action planning and execution. [CACI]  As such, it would benefit from rapid initialization from real-world C4I data.  For this reason, DMSO is currently pursuing the idea of initializing JWARS with  a JWARS-GCCS federation.ConclusionsBased on our ITEM-GCCS federation work, we can make some general conclusions:Initialization of a simulation from a C4I system through an automated interface provides an effective basis for course-of-action analysis.   COAA can be conducted in a timely and accurate manner on the most current set of data in the C4I system.  Other systems that do not have direct access to the GCCS track database could access this data by reusing elements from this federation.  The GCCS Ambassador has now been used with four separate federations, but only minimal changes have been made to its FOM. Two of these federations have demonstrated the ability to initialize a simulation from GCCS COP data.  This is a reusable capability that may be exploited by other systems in the future. Use of a C4I-simulation system in an operational environment requires overcoming significant security restrictions.  As many C4I systems operate in classified environments, it is usually necessary to develop solutions that are not just technically feasible but operationally feasible as well.  The process for security accreditation requires significant effort and may take longer than the federation development effort. AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to acknowledge several organizations whose support made this work possible.  First of all, DMSO realized that the lessons learned from this effort could have wide-ranging applicability and consequently funded the project.  The United States Forces Korea served as our customer and provided the operational expertise needed to develop a system to support their exercises.  In addition, the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) supported our use of ITEM in this federation and provided help where needed.AcronymsAPIApplication Programming InterfaceC4ICommand, Control, Communications, Computers, and IntelligenceCOACourse of ActionCOAACourse of Action AnalysisCOPCommon Operational PictureDII COEDefense Information Infrastructure Common Operating EnvironmentDITSCAPDoD Information Technology Security Certification and Accreditation ProcessDMSODefense Modeling and Simulation OfficeDTRADefense Threat Reduction AgencyFMTFederation Management ToolFOMFederation Object ModelGCCSGlobal Command and Control SystemGUIGraphical User InterfaceHLAHigh Level ArchitectureIATOInterim Approval To OperateISRIntelligence, Surveillance, and ReconnaissanceITEMIntegrated Theater Engagement ModelJCDBJoint Common DatabaseJMTKJoint Mapping ToolkitJOPESand Joint Operation Planning and Execution SystemJSIMSJoint Simulation SystemJWARSJoint Warfare SystemMIDBMaster Intelligence DatabaseMIPMaster Interface ProgramMOEMeasure of EffectivenessMOMManagement Object ModelNRLNaval Research LaboratoryNSSNaval Simulation SystemRSO&IReception, Staging, Onward Movement & IntegrationRTIRuntime InfrastructureSIMCISimulation-to-C4I InterfaceSIPRNETSECRET Internet Protocol Router NetworkSORTSStatus of Resources and Training SystemsSSAASystem Security Authorization AgreementTDBMTrack Data Base ManagerUFLUlchi Focus LensUSFKUnited States Forces KoreaBibliography [CACI] “http://www.caci.com/Products/simulation/jwars.shtml”[FURNESS] Furness, Z., Isensee, E., Fitzpatrick, M., “Realtime Initialization of Planning and Analysis Simulations Based on C4ISR System Data,” Proceedings of the 2002 Command and Control Technology Symposium, June 11-13, 2002.[J33] J-33 CSOD, The Pentagon, “Global Command and Control System (GCCS) Common Operational Picture (COP) Handbook,” Washington, D.C., July 31, 1998. [LAYMAN]  Layman, G., Daly, J., Furness, Z., Womble, J., “C4I-Simulation Interoperability Using the DII COE and HLA,” Proceedings of the Spring 2001Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 25-30, 2001. [PROCHNOW] Prochnow, D., King, R., Harrington, J., Daly, J., Regala, B., Sonnenshein, J., Womble, J., “The NSS-GCCS Federation: Course of Action Analysis Using a C4I-Simulation Interface,” Proceedings of the Fall 2001 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 9-14, 2001.[SAIC1] SAIC, ITEM-TM-8.5-U-R0C0, ITEM Technical Manual, San Diego, 2001.[SAIC2] SAIC, ITEM-UM-8.5-U-R0C0, ITEM User’s Manual, San Diego, 2001.Author BiographiesDAVID L. PROCHNOW is a Lead Software Engineer in the Information Systems and Technology Division at the MITRE Corporation and is currently the technical lead on several High Level Architecture programs.  At MITRE, Mr. Prochnow previously contributed to the ALSP project and to logistics simulation efforts. While at BDM International and Control Data Systems, Mr. Prochnow developed software for various corps-level and theater-level wargames.  He received a B.S. in Computer Science from the University of Virginia in 1983.JAMES E. HARRINGTON is a Senior Software Engineer with the MITRE Corporation and currently works for MITRE’s Advanced Information Technology Center in the area of computer modeling and simulation.  Since 1996, he has worked specifically in the area of Simulation-to-C4I mediation as the lead developer of the SCG tool. He received his Bachelor of Science in Computer Science from Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University in 1991 and his Master of Science in Computer Science from the Johns Hopkins University in 1995.DAVID W. WALTER is is a Senior Software Systems Engineer with SAIC.  He received a B.S. in Aerospace Engineering (1984) from the University of Cincinnati, and postgraduate studies in Aerospace Engineering from Pennsylvania State University.  Mr. Walter has developed U.S. and Foreign Military GIS, aircraft mission planning, and combat model simulation software applications for over 21 years.JENNIE A. WOMBLE is a Senior Software Engineer with ITT AES at the Naval Research Laboratory, and works in the Command and Control Development Team in GCCS and GCCS-Maritime software developments. She has over 15 years experience in developing leading edge technology for the Navy and is the principal software developer of the GCCS Ambassador. She received a B.S. in Natural Resource Management in 1985 and a M.S. in Geographic Information Systems and Remote Sensing in 1987 from Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. The first conclusion is a repeat from the Fall 2001 paper on the NSS-GCCS federation ([PROCHNOW]), but it is repeated here as the statement was reinforced by the ITEM-GCCS effort.	PAGE \# "'Page: '#''"  Again, reference removed per J6I request, though descriptions of the GCCS Ambassador come straight from this document. EMBED Word.Picture.8  GCCS