NASMP: Building A Standardized Networking Infrastructure To Support Naval Aviation Simulator DevelopmentDan DykeJonathan GlassDan PatersonNaval Air Warfare Center Training Systems Division 12350 Research Pkwy.Orlando, FL  32826-3275. U.S.A. HYPERLINK "mailto:daniel.dyke@navy.mil" daniel.dyke@navy.mil,  HYPERLINK "mailto:GlassJP@navair.navy.mil" GlassJP@navair.navy.mil,  HYPERLINK "mailto:PatersonDJ@navair.navy.mil" PatersonDJ@navair.navy.milDavid B. CavittGary KollmorgenDavid HambyBMH Associates, Inc.5365 Robin Hood Road, Suite 100Norfolk, VA 23513 USA HYPERLINK "mailto:cavitt@bmh.com" cavitt@bmh.com,  HYPERLINK "mailto:kollmorg@bmh.com" kollmorg@bmh.com,  HYPERLINK "mailto:hamby@bmh.com" hamby@bmh.comWilliam AndrewsAllison GriffinDISTI, Inc.11315 Corporate Blvd., Suite 115Orlando, FL 32817-8340. U.S.A. HYPERLINK "mailto:bandrews@simulation.com" bandrews@simulation.com.  HYPERLINK "mailto:agriffin@simulation.com" agriffin@simulation.comKeywords: NASMP, Networking, Simulators, Standards, InteroperabilityABSTRACT: This paper presents preliminary results of on-going work to evolve a networking architecture and a set of standards to support the development of interoperable simulators and simulations used to maintain Naval Aviation readiness through the Inter-Deployment Training Cycle (IDTC). The goal is to build an advanced networking infrastructure for simulator-based training systems used to meet operational training needs of aircrew at the Fleet Replacement Squadrons (FRS) and post-FRS squadrons, and eventually larger-scale, joint intra- and inter-service training objectives. The architecture and standards development are to be manifest in the Naval Aviation Simulation Master Plan, or NASMP. The challenges associated with NASMP development are significant and the effort is further complicated by an aggressive development schedule. Development of the NASMP networking architecture includes deriving objective training requirements, characterization of scenario (network) workloads, technology assessments, training device requirements, and identification of network deployment issues such as system engineering, integration, operational use, and support. The focus of this paper is on the definition of the NASMP network architecture, networking standards development, and network component interoperability issues. Other issues as they relate to networking and system interoperability are mentioned such as visualization and imaging, databases, and tactical environments. This paper presents a useful case study for persons interested in the development of a network architecture and the standardization of enabling technologies used to inter-connect simulator and simulation components in distributed, virtual training environments.IntroductionThe Naval Air Systems Command, in support of OPNAV N789, developed the Navy Aviation Simulation Master Plan (NASMP) to launch future Navy distributed mission training (DMT) programs as well as to improve current Navy DMT programs.  NASMP development activities include deriving objective training requirements, technology assessments, training device requirements, and identification of deployment issues such as system engineering, integration, operational use, and support.  This paper presents preliminary results of on-going work to evolve a networking architecture in support of the development of interoperable simulators and simulations used to maintain Naval Aviation readiness through the Inter-Deployment Training Cycle (IDTC).Initial efforts to develop the NASMP network architecture have relied on a well-defined methodology to derive a set of networking requirements. The activities associated with this process include:The characterization of a representative use case / training scenario.The derivation of network performance requirements.The evaluation of enabling systems and related technologies.The definition of the network architecture.Characterization of a representative scenario was an essential step to define NASMP network performance requirements. The scenario was described in terms of its static and dynamic characteristics, specifically, the identification of the battlespace entities and a categorization of the activities and interaction levels during different event phases. Ultimately, the battlespace entities and interactions were mapped to network entities for the purpose of characterizing the actual throughput and bandwidth requirements. Other network performance requirements were derived based on requirements learned during the evolution of other real-time simulators used to support distributed training environments and include delay (latency), delay variation (jitter), and error rates. Technology evaluation included analysis of the different hardware and software components considered as candidate solutions for use in the NASMP network architecture. This included activities such as a FOM analysis, RTI analysis, device analysis (local- and wide-area networking components), evaluation of long-haul service providers, and evaluation of existing Navy simulator sites and technologies. The information gained during the scenario, performance requirements, and technology analyses, was used to define an initial NASMP architecture. In addition to the specification of the architecture, alternative network configurations were proposed and correlated with the known training and deployment objectives. Additionally, a cost model was developed based on various network design alternatives and is being used to support NASMP budget, acquisition, and procurement planning activities.In addition to the architecture development activities, the NASMP program is developing the NASMP Interoperability Standard.  The NASMP Interoperability Standard is made up of 4 main technical sections; networking, tactical environment, visual systems/databases, and performance measurement and After Action Review (AAR). (See  REF _Ref15205483 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 1). The Network section of the NASMP Interoperability Standard [1] describes the requirements necessary to ensure the implementation of the NASMP network to provide the component connectivity and interoperability necessary to support team and inter-team training realism. The NASMP Network requirements include: 1) networking infrastructure in terms of NASMP enabling technologies, 2) network interfaces as required by the simulators and supporting NASMP applications, 3) network performance, 4) network testing, and 5) network configuration and control.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1: NASMP ContextThe next section of this paper (Section 2) provides a brief overview of the training scenario used to drive the top-down NASMP network design and standards development presented in this paper. Section 3 defines the system boundaries of the NASMP network architecture. The remaining sections of this paper present a more detailed look at the initial standards proposed for the NASMP network. A summary of on-going NASMP network architecture and standards development is provided in Section 8.NASMP Scenario Analysis and Workload CharacterizationAs mentioned above, a representative scenario characterization was a critical first step for the capacity planning process (performance requirements) during the definition of the NASMP architecture. Subject Matter Experts, or SMEs, (military analyst) provided information related to such things as the geo-political situation, initial mission objectives (e.g., anti-surface warfare), Rules of Engagement (ROE), order of battle (BLUEFOR, OPFOR, White Forces), environmental conditions, and the sequence of events characterizing the temporal progression of the scenario.To support scenario development, the NASMP engineering team decided to leverage on-going Navy Training Meta-FOM (NTMF) work. It was decided the existing NTMF Use Cases needed to be extended or modified to provide a more robust (and some cases more accurate) scenario representing integrated Strike, Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW), and Marine Expeditionary Unit (MEU) missions. Details related to the scenario development can be found in NASMP Network IPT briefs [3] and the NASMP Network Performance Requirements Analysis [4].To derive the NASMP bandwidth requirements, the battlespace entities and interactions defined during the scenario analysis were correlated with their respective network data packet type (e.g., entity state, radio), packet size, and transmission rate. Also considered were the underlying transport protocols used as a carrier (e.g., Multicast UDP). This information was aggregated and used to arrive an estimate of the overall scenario bandwidth requirements. Results are presented in [4].The NASMP Network SystemThe Networking Infrastructure section of the NASMP Interoperability Standard addresses the requirements to design and develop the NASMP network system components used to support the access and use of the Local- and Wide Area NASMP network segments. Figure 2 provides a notional diagram useful for defining the boundaries of the NASMP network system considered during the standards development process.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2: NASMP Network System and Component Boundaries.Networking StandardsThe NASMP Network section of the NASMP Interoperability Standard provides a guideline for network specification and design. The network standard is expected to serve as a basis for NASMP networking requirements useful by persons and organizations involved in NASMP development activities. An additional NASMP objective is to develop a NASMP toolkit of pre-existing hardware (HW) and software (SW) components to support the development and integration of training simulators into the NASMP training network. The toolkit also supports application-level reuse (e.g., Environmental Data servers, Ordnance servers) to support the rapid build-up of an NASMP HLA-based federation of training simulators, simulations, and supporting infrastructure. The intent of using this approach for NASMP network design and development is to reduce overall system costs and promote interoperability among the products developed by different simulator vendors.Technical and readiness assessments of candidate networking standards must be performed to ensure the NASMP network provides the interoperability necessary to support team and inter-team training realism for fleet operations. Relevant network standard considerations include: security and accessibility, network management, transmission, interoperability, AAR and debrief, and performance monitoring. Each of these network considerations invariably impacts the other. Access standards define all aspects of federate system(s) Local Area Network (LAN) connections with the NASMP Wide Area Network (WAN) including physical environment, switches, encryption, etc. Transmission standards define all aspects of data send and receive, latency, recovery, and addressing. Network management standards define how bandwidth, latency, dynamic requirements, etc are monitored, evaluated, and controlled. External USN and industry standards in these categories are to be incorporated and modified as required based on external updates or impacts from the preliminary NASMP network design.  Interoperability consists of the various implementation requirements that dictate working with other services or organizations to conduct joint, combined, or services training requirements as the NASMP evolves.NASMP NetworkThe NASMP Network is defined in terms of a layered architecture, the interfaces that exist between layers and the protocol defining the data flow through those interfaces. Additionally, the NASMP Network defines the requirements for all external network interfaces, the principal instance being the middleware interface between the simulator and its network access component (i.e., HLA Run Time Infrastructure, or RTI).The NASMP simulator and federate synthetic objects and object interactions will comply with the IEEE 1516.2 HLA Object Model Template (OMT) standard. [2]  The FOM specification will contain the object and interaction hierarchy data along with their respective attribute and parameter data that fully describe all of the objects and interactions that can exist in an NASMP federation.NASMP simulator and federate developers are required to prepare a SOM in a format that is compliant with IEEE 1516 Standards (HLA). The Simulator Application Program Interface (API) will comply with the HLA Interface Specification version 1.3.  The Simulation Object Model (SOM) describes all of the battlespace entities, entity behaviors, and events supported by the simulator and / or HLA federate.  NASMP simulator and federate developers are required to provide analysis data and results verifying the correctness of the SOM and Simulator API in terms of mapping to their respective public data representations specified in the FOM.The NASMP federation agreement to be used during simulator development and federate application development will include: 1) the specification of all data exchanged among NASMP federates (FOM relevant objects and interactions), 2) the specification of federation object behavior and how those objects interact with each other during execution, 3) common (or at least consistent) databases and algorithms used among NASMP federate applications, 4) agreements on operational issues (e.g., federation initialization procedures, save/restore policies), and 5) data collection requirements and the methodology to produce required outputs.Each Simulator API will provide the following capabilities to support interoperability within an NASMP Federation:Creating and joining a federation.Creating and registering objects.Subscribing and discovering objects.Publishing object attributes and interactions.Sending, updating, and reflecting.Deleting / removing objects.Exchanging attribute ownership.Pausing, resuming, and checkpointing.Resigning from a federation and shutting down.Removing a federateSimulator & Application ConnectivityNASMP plans to initially use the DMSO HLA Interface Specification Version 1.3 and the RTI Version 6.0 with a migration path to the IEEE 1516 HLA standard. The NASMP Middleware is compatible with the RTI designated for use in the NASMP training environment. To support interoperability and reuse among NASMP federates, the Middleware will be implemented and delivered to NASMP in a source code format and as a dynamically linkable and loadable software module. The Middleware is structured to support the integration and use of different HLA-compliant RTI implementations. The middleware implementation supports a mixed-language programming interface by supporting function calls in the C, C++, or Java programming languages. Source code header files used to describe the interface is compatible with C and C++ languages.Federation BridgesThe NASMP system engineering team will support interoperability with two different types of external federations 1) a non-NASMP Federation and 2) an external or legacy (non-HLA) simulator or application.  For the non-NASMP HLA federations to concurrently interoperate with the NASMP Federation, the NASMP system engineering team will provide a federation bridge application to support the required FOM-to-FOM data translation.  For the external or legacy non-HLA simulators and applications the NASMP system engineering team will provide an application gateway used to interface the external simulator or application to the federation. A private network will be used to connect the simulator or application with NASMP federation via an RTI. The application gateway will support HLA(DIS (bi-directional and assuming legacy system is DIS compatible) protocol translation or translation of some other designated protocol into a NASMP FOM-compatible format.Software Configuration and Development EnvironmentsNASMP simulator and federate developers will use automated compile and link tools compatible with RTI Version 6.0. OMT tools will be compatible with the IEEE 1516 HLA OMT Standards.[2]  NASMP Middleware design will be documented using the Unified Modeling Language (UML).Network and Time SynchronizationThe NASMP Federation clock will be capable of running in two modes; relative and absolute time modes. NASMP local simulator(s) and supporting applications system clocks will be synchronized to Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) plus or minus 2 seconds. The NASMP federates will maintain a local time synchronization standard of ±1 millisecond.  Absolute time will be based on the UTC standard. Each NASMP site (network node) will maintain a GPS-based timeserver for all components configured in the site's LAN segment(s).Simulator & Network PerformanceThe NASMP network will be capable of supporting 2 concurrent NASMP training exercises. For each training exercise, the NASMP LAN and WAN segments will be able to efficiently support an integrated training scenario consisting of 3,350 military platforms (based on the NASMP Use Case) and an aggregate bandwidth of 6681.2 Kbps. The NASMP network will have sufficient capacity to efficiently carry a 13362.4 Kbps scenario data stream.NASMP plans for the network to support 28 simultaneous voice communications channels. Fourteen (14) simultaneous voice channels will be used to support training exercise control functions; seven (7) channels per training exercise. Fourteen (14) simultaneous voice channels will be used to support instructor communications; seven (7) channels per training exercise.  The bit rate for NASMP audio data transmission will be 64Kbps and the network transit delay (end-to-end, one-way) will be less than 100 ms. To support NASMP AAR / Debrief Standards, intermedia synchronization of audio data transmission will be less than 100 ms.The NASMP network will strive to have a 99.999% availability during scheduled NASMP training exercises. Individual sites will maintain a 30% average LAN utilization while the NASMP WAN utilization will be planned to run at a 50% rate.Video and Audio StreamsTo satisfy the NASMP AAR and Debrief requirements the NASMP network must be able to support 2 concurrent NASMP training exercises.  Each of these exercises requires 26 simultaneous video channels and thirteen (14) simultaneous videos channels using real-time, variable bit rate, compressed video transmission with a VCR-quality data stream that minimally complies with the NTSC standard. The bit rate for NASMP video data transmission will nominally be 1.2 Mbps using the MPEG-1 standard. The network transit delay variation (jitter) will be less than 100 ms.  The residual bit error rate for video data transmission will be less than 10-5. Intermedia synchronization for video processing will comply with the intermedia synchronization requirements for audio data transmission which should be less than 100 ms. The NASMP network will have sufficient capacity to efficiently carry a 31.2 Mbps video data stream.Simulator & Network Testing & VerificationNASMP network operations will include technology insertion and upgrade testing, as well as operational readiness testing. The tests will include performance, stress, and failure analysis. The performance tests will provide assessments regarding the level of service the NASMP network provides in terms of throughput, delay, delay variation, errors, and efficiency. The stress tests will characterize the degradation of service due to increased traffic load (offered load) on the network. The failure analysis tests will calculate network availability and accuracy in the presence of network link failures. The tests will be performed on the NASMP LAN and WAN segments.The NASMP Network test plan will be based on training requirements and will be performed to ensure that the network, M&S and Command & Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I) architecture(s) supports the accomplishment of the training objectives and to validate NASMP network and exercise control procedures.Operational Readiness TestingOperational readiness testing will be performed before each NASMP training exercise.  Operational readiness testing will insure connectivity among all required network components including NASMP components and will provide assessments regarding the adequacy of the network configuration to support the NASMP training exercise.  Testing activities will involve the NASMP network and network interfaces for the simulator, simulation, and C4I interfaces to include the network interfaces to other supporting NASMP Federation applications.NASMP Exercise Network Configuration & ControlThe NASMP exercise network configuration and control is used to configure and manage the network in support of a training event. The NASMP network will utilize simulators in stand-alone and networked training environments and as such requires dynamic configuration of LAN and WAN resources. Persons responsible for the overall conduct of an NASMP training event(s) will provide the lead NASMP Network Engineer with a list of training objectives used to determine the network configuration needed to support the exercise. All NASMP network support staff will coordinate the appropriate LAN and WAN resource configurations (and installations when required) to include coordination with the long-haul service provider to make sure the appropriate communications links and data channels are configured to meet network performance requirements. Once the network is configured, basic configuration and performance tests will be executed and results will be provided to the person coordinating the training exercise. Permission to train will be granted by the Network Engineer regarding the adequacy of the NASMP network to support the exercise.The network will be used to support pre-exercise briefing activities before the actual training exercise begins. During execution of the training event, the NASMP LAN / WAN interconnection will be proactively monitored to support real-time status assessments, provide data for any fault remediation activities, and provide post-exercise feedback regarding the adequacy of the network to support the training exercise. The network monitoring and analysis activities will be performed at a designated network operations center that will also provide a conduit for performance information from the long-haul network service provider.After the training exercise is complete, the NASMP network will remain configured to support post-exercise After Action Review and Debrief activities. Network performance information can be used to adjudicate invalid outcomes in the virtual training environment. Network management information will be saved and used during future planning activities and to support capacity planning for network expansion.Network ManagementPersons designated as leads for the exercise configuration and control functions will use authoritative and documented training objectives to determine the required network resources.  NASMP network management functions will include proactively monitoring all network resources during pre-exercise, exercise, and post-exercise activities. Data gathered from monitoring activities will be documented and used to report overall status of the NASMP network in terms of performance, faults, configuration, security, and accounting.Network performance data will be sufficient to assess end-to-end performance across the NASMP network configuration. The data will be capable of deriving the performance metrics as defined in the NASMP Interoperability Standard and used to support any required network optimizations, network service agreement assessments, and network expansion plans. The performance management function includes examining application and protocol behavior, analyzing reachability, measuring response time, and recording network route changes. When long-haul services are employed during a multi-site NASMP training exercise, performance measurements will include network reachability between NASMP simulator sites, response times, and route tracking. Echo-based response time measurements are appropriate for deriving one-way trip times but will be periodically sampled to derive a statistically valid value. Any use of unreliable performance data (e.g., route tracking data captured using Internet Protocol (IP) trace-route) will be documented.Networking monitoring will be supported by the use of a network management software application. This application will be Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP)-based and support the use of Remote Monitoring (RMON) SNMP agents. Minimal application support requirements are for data-link and physical-layer polling and alerts, packet capturing, protocol analysis, SNMPv3, and RMON Management Information Base (MIB). Non-RMON agents will provide device-specific performance information and utilize SNMP. If available, RMON2 agents will provide network application and end-to-end communications performance data. During exercise phase, network management traffic will use less than 5 percent (5%) of network capacity.The NASMP network management function will include procedures and application software to detect, isolate, diagnose, and correct network related problems, and to report problems and track problem trends. Procedures will be defined for fault resolution and dissemination of the information to network users.Graphical representations will be provided to depict which devices and network segments are healthy and which areas are at fault or need attention. Fault conditions will be event driven (alarms) and the fault management function will be notified immediately. Fault alarms will indicate the specific device and the level within the network where a fault has been discovered. The NASMP network management function will include documented procedures and mechanisms to securely maintain and distribute passwords and other authentication and authorization information to include the processes associated with generating, distributing, and storing encryption keys. The layout of NASMP LAN and WAN network components will be located in manner that prevents unauthorized physical and virtual access; privileged access to network devices and software applications will be maintained. Encrypted security audit logs will be maintained in accordance with current applicable DoD security standards and provide a level of information detail sufficient to investigate security incidents.The NASMP network management architecture will be organized as a hierarchical distributed architecture. When operating in a multi-site NASMP configuration, one site will be designated as the Network Operations Center (NOC) and will be designated as an umbrella for managing network operations. A single-site NASMP configuration will implement in-band performance monitoring; multi-site configuration will implement out-of-band performance monitoring with fault tolerance. A Network Management System will be installed at each simulator site and will display network management data, monitor and control managed network devices, and communicate with agent software responsible for collecting performance data.NASMP Network ConfigurationsThe NASMP network and the simulator will be configurable to support single-site, single- and multi-ship training exercises.  Each site will maintain a configuration sufficient to meet single and multi-ship training objectives when it is completely disconnected from the NASMP long-haul network. Each NASMP simulator site will maintain a LAN configuration capable of supporting a minimum NASMP support infrastructure to include:Instruction Operator Station (IOS), systems, and network management functions.Computer Generated Forces (CGF) representations.Synthetic Natural Environment (SNE) representations.Real-time monitoring and data logging functions.Debrief and After Action Review functions.A single site, multi-ship network configuration will able to support multiple concurrent training exercises up to the number of simulators at that site.The NASMP network and the simulator will be configurable to support multi-site, single- and multi-ship training exercises. The NASMP internetwork configuration support a minimum of two (2) concurrent NASMP training exercises and each exercise will have federate and supporting applications to include:IOS, systems, and network management functions.Computer Generated Forces (CGF) representations.Synthetic Natural Environment (SNE) representations.Real-time monitoring and data logging functions.Debrief and After Action Review functions.Support ApplicationsA NASMP call center / help desk function will be provided as a central point for notification, action coordination, and documentation of all network failures and operator trouble calls. The network call center function will be a computer-based solution that is tightly coupled (integrated or part of the same application process) with the NASMP call center function. The network call center function will maintain an automated database of reported problems and corrective actions.SummaryThe Network section of the NASMP Interoperability Standard provides the requirements for the development of the NASMP Network at the local and distributed levels.  The NASMP Network supports the development of interoperable simulators and simulations used to maintain Naval Aviation readiness through the Inter-Deployment Training Cycle (IDTC).  The use of a standard network architecture to inter-connect simulator and simulation components in distributed, virtual training environments promotes reusability and interoperability to support the successful management and use of a Naval Aviation training environment.This paper has presented preliminary results from efforts to define an NASMP networking architecture and develop a set of networking interoperability standards. The process for standards development was discussed and content from the draft standard were presented. It is expected that continued NASMP engineering and analysis activities will lead to a refinement and consequent improvement in the standards information presented in this paper. ReferencesNASMP Interoperability Standard v0.2IEEE 1516.2 HLA Object Model TemplateNASMP Networking IPT Brief, Presented to NAWC TSD, April 2002.NASMP Performance Analysis Requirements Paper, Prepared for NAWC TSD, April 2002.Authors’ BiographiesDaniel J. Paterson is an electronics engineer with the Naval Air Systems Command, Training Systems Division, Simulation & Models Division, Modeling & Simulation Development Branch in Orlando, Florida. Dan is currently the technical leader of the NAWCTSD Interoperability Laboratory, with research papers on HLA Gateways and Data Distribution Management.  In 1992 he received his MSEE degree from the University of Central Florida. In 1976 he received his BA in Mathematics from Jacksonville University, Jacksonville Florida.  In 1977 he received his Naval Flight Officer Wings from the US Navy. He spent 8 years flying in Naval Patrol Aircraft, before transferring to the US Naval Reserves where he spent another 12 years flying as a Reserve Officer for the US Navy.JONATHAN GLASS is a systems engineer with the NAVAIR’s Training Systems Division, Systems Engineering Division, Aviation Systems Engineering Branch, in Orlando, Florida.  He is currently supporting the NASMP O&I IPT.  Mr. Glass has 12 years of experience in external systems engineering in both combat weapon systems and simulations. He is a graduate of the University of Central Florida (UCF) with a BS EE degree.  Previously, he worked as the WARSIM C4I Technical Lead and as an Inertial Navigation Systems Engineer for the Naval Undersea Warfare Center in Norfolk, VA.DANIEL DYKE is an electronics engineer with the Naval Air Warfare Center, Training Systems Division, Simulation & Models Division, Modeling & Simulation Integration Branch in Orlando Florida. He has worked in simulation engineering for 24 years. He is currently the IPT lead for the NASMP Network Architecture IPT.  In 1985 he received his MSE degree from the University of Central Florida. In 1976 he received his BSEE from the University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida.David B. Cavitt is a research scientist with BMH Associates, Inc., Norfolk, Virginia. He received B.S. and Ph.D in Computer Science from Old Dominion University. He has over 15 years of experience in the development and use simulations for military and engineering applications. He is currently the Director of Software Engineering for BMH and oversees programs associated with the development and integration of distributed simulation / simulator environments. His research interests include modeling and simulation, performance analysis, and distributed systems. Mr. Cavitt is a member of ACM and IEEE CS.Gary Kollmorgen has over 15 years program management experience and over 20 years collectively in the development and application of campaign level simulation.  He has an extensive background in U.S. Navy operations and has been responsible for providing expertise in weapons, engineering, and aviation related matters.  He has provided subject matter tactical and technical expertise for the Knowledge Acquistion/Engineering (KA/E) design and validation of U.S. Navy Synthetic Forces (SF) for the DARPA STOW program, Joint Simulation System – Maritime (JSIMS), Joint Countermine Operational Simulation (JCOS) ACTD, Battle Force Tactical Training (BFTT) Air Management Node (AMN) and currently for the ONR WARCON program.  Mr. Kollmorgen was also the project manager for establishing an authoritative and validateable representation of the Navy for Modeling and Simulation (M&S) applications through the SF KA/E process.  Mr. Kollmorgen is BMH’s program manager for NASMP.David Hamby is a software engineer with BMH Associates, Norfolk, Virginia. He has worked in all project lifecycle phases of nuclear power plant core monitoring computer and operator training simulator development for 25 years before joining BMH Associates. While with BMH Mr. Hamby has worked on the NASMP Network requirements, and simulator surveys, and is learning his way around HLA and flight simulators. While serving in the US Navy he completed nuclear propulsion training and qualified in Submarines aboard USS Jack. He holds MEEE and BSEE degrees from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York.William Andrews, a founding partner in DiSTI, is responsible for the company's simulation architecture programs and leads the Simulation Professional Series training team. Bill graduated from the University of Illinois (Urbana) with degrees in Engineering Computer Science and Engineering Mechanics. Bill has held design positions at the Institute for Simulation and Training, Link Simulation, and Honeywell, in addition to consulting for numerous simulation companies. He has worked in the computer modeling field for the last fifteen years with a focus on the integration of simulation and modeling components into full scale, high-performance, simulation architectures.ALLISON GRIFFIN is currently employed as a Project Lead at Distributed Simulation Technology, Inc and has worked in the field of simulation for 7 years.  Ms. Griffin is currently serving as the standards development project lead on the Navy Aviation Simulation Master Plan (NASMP) program.  She previously worked as an Associate in Simulation at the Institute for Simulation and Training, University of Central Florida serving as the Project Lead on the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) Support project while participating in the HLABDS-D, Haptics and Interoperability projects.  Ms. Griffin also has over ten years experience in the field of nuclear power generation and the manufacture of nuclear fuel rods.  Ms. Griffin earned a B.S. in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Alabama at Birmingham in 1983 and a M.S. in Simulation Systems from the University of Central Florida in 1996.We have a disconnect between abstract and intro and then the rest of the document.  The first two talk of the “whole” standard.  The rest of the document, including summary talk exclusively of network.  Think we need a bit of a rewrite up front.  Nothing much but a line or two that discusses this paper is focused on network piece of NASMP interoperability standard.  Granted the network piece must support the others, but we really don’t talk in depth about the other sections of the standard at all.