Simulation Support Plans in the US Army:  Increasing the utility of SSP's in support of SMARTAnthony LeeIllinois Institute of Technology Research Institute (IITRI)1701 N Beauregard StreetAlexandria, VA 703-601-0013 x 24 HYPERLINK "mailto:Anthony.Lee@hqda.army.mil" Anthony.Lee@hqda.army.milAugust 8, 2002Keywords:Simulation Support Plans (SSP), Modeling and Simulation Support Plans (MSSP), Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA), Simulation and Modeling for Acquisition, Requirements and Training (SMART), M&S Policy, ArmyABSTRACT:  The Army's version of the SBA concept, Simulation and Modeling for Acquisition, Requirements and Technology (SMART), expands the use of Modeling and Simulation (M&S) from just acquisition to include combat development and training issues.  One of the most effective tools for a PM to utilize under the SMART program is the development and implementation of Modeling and Simulation Support Plans (SSPs).   SSP's can provide visibility into a program’s M&S planning.  Coordination and planning between M&S stakeholders is an integral part of SSP development.  Additionally, the SSP helps Army Headquarters better understand what is occurring in the field with respect to M&S.  This understanding is necessary to effectively manage M&S resources.1. IntroductionThis paper describes the Army's experiences with the SSP.  It describes how a Program Manager (PM) M&S planning document is becoming a management tool that helps Army M&S Stakeholders and Managers beyond the Acquisition community implement SMART.  It discusses the processes, policy and guidance required to increase the utility of the SSP and compares the experiences of other OSD services.This paper addresses the Army's implementation of the DoD 5000 series guidance that requires program managers to address SBA and M&S issues in acquisition planning.  A key tenet of SMART is the use of Modeling and Simulation to enable diverse communities to collaborate and coordinate efforts, thereby reducing duplication, accelerating product development, accounting for life cycle cost management and fielding more effective systems.  The SSP is recommended Army process for simulation support planning.  If implemented, the SSP will foster M&S collaboration and coordination very early in a product life cycle, from the operational requirements definition stage through disposal.2. BackgroundSimulation Support Plans have been required in the Army since 1996.  As the Army began adopting Simulation Based Acquisition, the “intent of a Simulation Support Plan [was] to provide the PM a tool to use in thinking through M&S requirements through the acquisition life cycle.”[]   SSP Guidelines (1997) were prepared to guide the PM through the planning process.  When the Army widened it’s M&S focus beyond the acquisition community by adopting SMART, a new guidance document, the SMART Planning Guidelines (2000) expanded the scope beyond the acquisition arena to include requirements determination (combat developments) and training.  The Guidelines included valuable lessons learned from the Army experience in SBA implementation. []Good simulation support planning is based on four basic principles:Associate project or program issues to M&S applications and ensure that appropriate verification and validation of these applications is in place. Coordinate planning efforts with organizations that provide or use inputs or outputs to models and simulations used to ensure data received or generated is acceptable for its intended purpose.Integrate modeling and simulation efforts into a strategy that specifies M&S activities and the rationale behind choices made.Develop and prioritize resource and funding estimates for M&S efforts.As the SMART initiative evolved in the Army, SSPs were more than just a tool for PMs.  Army oversight and coordination of M&S resources must focus on validation of good simulation support planning and effective coordination.  Coordination and planning for simulation support must occur between all M&S stakeholders to include combat developers, materiel developers, research and development engineers, testers, evaluators, data produces and consumers, intelligence analysts, as well as other programs.SMART places tremendous emphasis on early and continuous planning and coordination of M&S efforts throughout the lifecycle of a program.  The rationale behind requiring simulation support plans was to encourage the PM to use the plan as a tool to coordinate M&S efforts.  Planning does not come cheap.  The plan should not “create a burdensome responsibility on the PMs.”[ NOTEREF _Ref14232071 \f \h  \* MERGEFORMAT 1]  At the same time, in an environment where limited funding for implementation of  SMART efforts, PMs are expected to conduct tradeoffs to balance all program needs.[]  Simulation support planning competes with other program priorities in this environment.  A 2000 Army Audit Agency review of SBA in the Army found that of 10 programs selected, 9 had not fully planned for the use of M&S as reflected by their SSP.  In fact, 6 of the 10 did not even have an SSP.[]     On the other hand, a number of programs, particularly those in resource constrained environments have turned to modeling and simulation in order to meet program goals.  PM Javelin is an example of how simulation support planning leads to effective reuse of existing resources where possible and development of new resources designed as an investment for future efforts. [] The PM Aerial Common Sensor (ACS) simulation support plan details an innovative approach to evaluation of contractor proposals supported by M&S.[]  These efforts are supported by the PM and resulted in breakthroughs in SMART applications in the Army.  The inherent dilemma of increasing the use of M&S versus spending on other program needs strengthens the case for effective simulation support planning.  The Army has taken big steps in institutionalization of SMART concepts in Army policy.  The requirement for a simulation support plan is a key piece in achieving towards this objective.  The key challenge now is to ensure all programs consciously plan for a level of simulation support adequate for program goals.3. Where the Army is going with SSPs3.1 Modeling and Simulation in Army management processes:  SSPs in the HQDA Requirements to Solutions processThe Army formalized the requirement for SSPs in the acquisition community through a 1996 memorandum issued by the Army Materiel Command Commanding General and the Assistant Secretary of the Army for Acquisition, Logistics and Technology. [ NOTEREF _Ref14232511 \f \h 1]   In 1997, the Army institutionalized this requirement in AR 5-11. []  This requirement will incorporated into the next revision of AR 70-1, Materiel Acquisitions, expected in Q4 2002. []For SMART to work, simulation support planning must occur earlier in the system lifecycle.   Accordingly, TRADOC institutionalized SSPs for the combat development and requirements community when it established policy requiring that ORDs contain an SSP unless a waiver is granted. []  TRADOC PAM 71-9 established combat developers as the focal point for developing the initial SSPs that is provided to the materiel developer. []  Initial SSP development in coordination with the ORD creates the visibility required to program and fund for significant M&S investments necessary to support validated Army requirements early in the system life cycle.With the recent transition in March 2001 of requirements’ approval from TRADOC to HQDA, [] the same SSP documentation effectively being used in the Army Requirements to Solutions Process.  The requirements validation and approval process looks at four areas.  1.  Military Need and Risk2.  Synchronization with Army Modernization Plans3.  Program Affordability4.  Program Definition and Interoperability.M&S contributes to all four areas.  The Army Requirements to Solutions process is the comprehensive means by which the Army will match requirements and solutions to support the Warfighter.   In Apr 2002 HQDA published an external SOP that outlined the new HQDA requirements validation & approval process and prescribed responsibilities of those involved in it.  []  The Army Model and Simulation Office participates actively in this process. (Figure 2)The Army Model and Simulation office will also actively participate in the solutions process when it is implemented in September 2002.An opportunity exists to capitalize on these developments.  First, the process reinforces the need to conduct simulation support planning earlier in the life cycle development process.  Second, this process establishes establishes the combat developer community as “M&S custodians” before a PM is assigned.  This helps provides a vital link between the requirements and acquisition communities.  Third, visibility at the HQDA level for M&S issues creates significant a “pull” factor to encourage simulation support planning across the Army.  Processes and policies are being put in place to guide the SSP through the Requirements process and work is underway to embed SSPs in the Solutions process.  Detailed document preparation guidance needs to be developed and distributed throughout the M&S communities.  Policy on SSP processes and coordination should be implemented in AR 5-11.SSP expertise needs to be developed throughout the Army.  Education for simulation support planning and documentation must continue in acquisition communities and increase in the requirements and training communities.  The continuing evolution of SSPs in the Army reflects the theoretical framework of SBA Push and Pull suggested by Johnson, McKeon and Szanto. [ NOTEREF _Ref14232636 \f \h 3] However, with the pull factor comes a need to deliver results and measure effectiveness.The use of SSPs in high-visibility Army management processes raises a number of issues regarding efficacy of SSPs which need to be resolved.  Before we discuss this, it may be helpful to review the status of SSPs in the other DoD services.3.2  SBA “push and pull” and SSPsJohnson, McKeon and Szanto discuss SBA “push and pull” as a dynamic affecting SBA acceptance and implementation in the DoD.   SBA push is  “what programs are doing within their enterprise to implement SBA, given the existing state of the domain, infrastructure and need.”  SBA pull is “the expectation and demand for SBA from outside agencies” as they understand the benefits.[ NOTEREF _Ref14232224 \f \h 3]   Both factors must exist in order for SBA implementation.  The same holds true in the case of SMART and SSPs.The Army set a high vision, to “be a world leader in M&S to continuously improve Army effectiveness through a disciplined collaborative environment in partnership with industry, government, and academia.”[]  In SMART, the Army includes the requirements and training community along with the resource allocation community to institutionalize a change in business processes.  Cutting edge SMART applications of M&S in the Army have demonstrated substantial benefits of SMART, a big push factor.  Recently, the Army M&S community received significant “pull” factor as SMART efforts were aligned and synchronized with the Army Transformation Campaign. []   In fact, SMART is required to achieve the Army’s aggressive requirements and timelines with the Objective Force to achieve Transformation Objectives.  The effect of this pull factor has been dramatic.  Modeling and Simulation is now a factor considered at the Army Requirements Validation and Approval Process.  M&S will become a factor considered in the Army Solutions, POM, system reviews, and programming process.  The pull from SMART alignment with the Transformation Campaign Plan has created demand for SSPs from programs involved with the Transformation.   SSPs have traditionally been a tool to assist in planning for implementation of SMART but they are increasingly being viewed as management tools in overseeing Army implementation of SMART.  If sufficient planning and coordination for M&S needs has been done and effectively documented in a Simulation Support Plan, HQDA can effectively validate that SMART is being implemented in the Army.  The SSP brings “push and pull” together in support of SMART.4. SSPs and other services.4.1 Differences between Army and other servicesSMART is not just about the acquisition process.  Institutionally, the Army recognizes the benefits of SMART as it applies to the whole Army and also recognize that some of the roadblocks to implementing SMART must by solved across the whole Army.  High-level support for Army SMART generates leverage in encouraging good business practices.  The trigger to initiate a collaborative planning process for SMART begins early in the system life cycle with the combat development and requirements community responsible for simulation support planning as a part of the ORD process.  The benefits of SSP development and implementation along with high-level interest in the simulation support planning process makes the SSP a relevant document for the Army.  4.2 OSD and SBA PlanningDoD Directive 5000.59, DoD Modeling and Simulation Management, 1994, required the OSD components to provide for oversight of M&S activities.  OSD has no formal requirement for a separate SSP but DoD 5000.2R has a requirement to plan for and document M&S/SBA efforts. []   The addition of SBA related-guidance in the recent 5000.2 series revisions shows recognition of the importance of M&S and SBA planning in the DoD. 4.3 Air Force and SSPsThe Air Force Policy Directive 16-10 mandates M&S use in Acquisition processes.  Air Force Instruction 16-1002 states that the M&S strategy will be developed and included in the Single Acquisition Plan and documented in an SSP.  []   The requirement for the SSP is the decision of the Program Executive Officer or Designated Acquisition Commander.4.4 Navy and SSPsThe Navy currently does not require documentation of simulation support planning but a proposal to draft a Navy Instruction on SSPs and associated guidance is underway.4.5.  The Future of SSPs.Planning for M&S and SBA is recognized by the DoD 5000.2 series as a necessity.  The Air Force has required SSPs since 2000.  It is likely the Navy will soon require SSPs.  If the effectiveness of this requirement is contingent on effective oversight and the Army SSP experience is an example, one can expect that the next hurdle each service will face is developing oversight processes for SSPs, followed by inculcating the use of SSPs in management processes.  This means that the other services may very well face the issues the Army is currently addressing.  Some of these issues are discussed in the next section.5. Increasing the utility of SSPs:  IssuesThe problem the Army is facing in the short term regarding inclusion of M&S in Army management processes is that both new and existing programs demonstrate a varying degree of simulation support planning and many do not have simulation support plans at all.  In particular, mature programs that may not have had opportunities to benefit fully from SMART frequently do not reflect any simulation support planning.  Additionally, combat developers writing ORDs have a lack of experience in simulation support planning and documentation.This problem raises a number of issues regarding processes, guidance and policy to support SMART.  First, while the Army does require SSPs, very few processes exist to maintain oversight over SSPs.  Second, while guidance exists to help PMs think through simulation support issues, is also needed to assist combat developers and S&T programs in effectively planning for simulation support. Third, more guidance is needed on mandatory simulation support considerations for all M&S planners to weigh and document to maintain oversight and validate SMART implementation across the Army.   In order to do so, an attempt must be made to capture and inculcate best practices and lessons learned into Army SSP policy and guidance.  AMSO is currently working on a “Best Practices Guide” on M&S.Related to all three issues is the concept that the SSP is a living document that can evolve as a system moves from concept development through design and engineering to acquisition and to fielding.  Simulation support planning can be a thread that ties Army organizations together in a collaborative environment as the system concept moves from these organizations through its life cycle.  However, determining what an SSP looks like for a given system at a particular stage of its lifecycle is a highly subjective and difficult.  Additionally, identifying SSP “ownership” at any given point in time is difficult given the number of organizations an SSP passes through.  The dynamic, cross-cutting nature of simulation support planning creates both issues and opportunities for SMART.  The Army has considered the issues, but work to this date has generally been informal and geared to encourage thinking about the issues.  In some cases, the answers are not known.Increasing the utility of the SSP to other stakeholders beyond HQDA will require the Army to resolve SSP issues in a more formal manner.  The SSP provides insight for external stakeholders including HQDA into what a project or organization is planning.  This helps the M&S community understand and address SMART implementation.  The SSP can be a tool to:Promote peer reviewCatch duplicationIdentify investments in this areaAdherence to best practicesIdentify models used as well as upgrades needed Identify adherence to approved standards or to help identify places where new standards would be of useAssist with cross domain coordinationAllow for peer review/incorporation of lessons learnedInsure adequate VV&AInsure effective use of Army Insure S&T (and other efforts) have data/model generation as part of their outputIn order for the Army to increase the utility of SSPs to support SMART, the Army must lay out what kinds of programs require SSPs, what needs to be in SSPs given type of program and stage of life cycle, how to implement simulation support planning, and the Army management processes pertaining to simulation support planning.  Guidance should be in layman’s terms targeted towards the combat developer, materiel developers and training developers.The Director, AMSO initiated a Simulation Support Tiger Team in June 2002 to address these and other related issues.  The objectives of the team are to:Capture simulation support planning and SSP issuesRevise the SMART Planning GuidelinesIdentify how SSPs are relevant to Army management processes Develop a long term Army strategy for simulation planning that includes SSP education, guidance and policyAdvise on the need for a SSP related repositoryIdentify methods and tools that support SSP development and implementation.The SSTT is made up of organizations including:Army G-3 Army Model and Simulation Office (AMSO), chairArmy G3, ACR Domain ManagerArmy G-2, IntelligenceArmy Materiel Command, Deputy Chief of Staff for Research, Development and Acquisition (DCSRDA)TRADOC Deputy Chief of Staff for Simulations and Analysis (DCSSA)TRADOC Deputy Chief of Staff for Development (DCSDEV)TRADOC Army Training Support Center (ATSC)TRADOC National Simulation Center (NSC)Army Materiel Systems Analysis Activity (AMSAA)Army Test and Evaluation Command (ATEC)The SSTT will work until June 2003, at which time it will make recommendations as to whether or not another standing body is required to address future Army simulation support issues.  6.  SummaryThere are many benefits to simulation support planning.   SSPs have a much larger role in the Army than simply being a tool for the PM.  The process of thinking through the issues of M&S application and then documenting previous as well as planned efforts is a necessity in all organizations that use M&S.  If the benefits and ideas presented in this paper are embraced by the Army then SSPs could have a much larger role than they currently have in the Army.  There are roadblocks to be overcome in order to make the SSP viable for the Army—and the Army is taking steps to  resolve roadblocks and indoctrinate the principles of simulation support planning.7. References Modeling and Simulation Support Plans (MSSP) are known simply as Simulation Support Plans (SSP) in the Army.  The acronym SSP is used to refer to both MSSP and SSP in this article.  By the same token, SMART is the Army’s version of SBA and SMART is used to refer to both SBA and SMART in this article.PAGE  PAGE  7[]	 “Modeling and Simulation in Support of the Army Acquisition Process,” Department of the Army Memorandum, 20 September, 1996 [] Planning Guidelines for SMART, 15 September, 2000[] Johnson, LTC Michael V. R., USA, McKeon, LTC Mark F., USMC, Szanto, LTC Terence R., USAF, “Expanding the SBA Envelope,” Simulation Based Acquisition:  A New Approach, Defense Systems Management College Press, December 1998.[]	“Simulation Based Acquisition Program, ” U.S. Army Agency Audit, 8 November 2000[]	Perry, Robert B., Kissell, Ann H., Bates, Charles F., “Implementing SMART within PEO Tactical Missiles,” Army AL&T Magazine, HQDA PB-10-01-03, May-June 2001. [] Aerial Common Sensor Simulation Support Plan version 7.1d, PM Aerial Common Sensor, 23 April 2001[] AR 5-11, Management of Army Models and Simulation, 1997[] AR 70-1, Materiel Acquisition, Draft Revision, January 2002. [] TRADOC PAM 71-9, Requirements Determination,  Draft Revision, November 2001[]  “Development and Approval of Warfighting Headquarters TRADOC Memorandum, 31 May 02[]  “Approval of Army Warfighting Requirements” Department of the Army Memorandum, 19 March 2001 [] Army Requirements Validation and Approval Standard Operating Procedures, Headquarters, Department of the Army,  April 2002.[] SMART Execution Plan, 6 November 2000[] SMART Execution Plan Task Synchronization to Transformation Campaign Plan Lines of Operation, internal Army Model and Simulation Office document, February 2001[] DoD 5000.2R, Mandatory Procedures for Major Defense Acquisition Programs (MDAPs) and Major Automated Information System (MAIS) Acquisition Programs, 5 April 2002[] Air Force Instruction 16-1002, Modeling and Simulation Support to Acquisition, 1 June 2000Author BiographyTONY LEE is a military analyst for the Illinois Institute for Technology Research Institute, Army Programs Division in the area of Simulation Based Acquisition.  He currently supports the Army Model and Simulation Office with the Simulation and Modeling for Acquisition, Requirements and Technology  (SMART) initiative.  Previously, he supported the Director for Assessment and Evaluation in the Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Army for Acquisition, Logistics and Technology with the Research, Development and Acquisition (RDA) Modeling and Simulation Domain management program.  Tony Lee has an MA degree in International Relations from the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies.Figure 1: Army Requirements to Solutions process.Figure 2: Army Requirements to Approval Process