Possibilities with Simulation Assisted LearningPhilomena M. ZimmermanDefense Modeling and Simulation Office1901 N. Beauregard St.Suite 500Alexandria, VA   22311703-998-0660 HYPERLINK "mailto:pzimmerman@dmso.mil" pzimmerman@dmso.milPhilip DoddsAdvanced Distributed Learning ADL Co-Lab9 Randall CourtAnnapolis, MD   21401410-757-5004 HYPERLINK "mailto:pdodds@rhassociates.com" pdodds@rhassociates.comABSTRACT: The DoD Modeling and Simulation (M&S) community is already very comfortable with the ability to connect models and simulations, and live entities together, using a standard architecture, in an environment to enhance the problem demonstration space.  In fact, in November 2000, the Services declared, through a memorandum of agreement, that the High Level Architecture (HLA) is the technical means for simulation interoperability.  Likewise, the Services look to Advanced Distributed Learning (ADL) to provide both education and training on everything from new concepts, to refreshment of old skills.  Within the training community in general, learning AND doing is highly desirable.  Both of those concepts are possible today, and in fact, will be demonstrated in a series of prototype experiments this year.  It is expected that this prototype capability will become a standard mechanism to enhance the learning, and training experience of the student.  By merging the HLA and ADL communities, there is virtually no limit to the ways in which ADL can be employed within the M&S community, and likewise, for the use of M&S within the ADL community.  While the interface between the two seems trivial, the uses are not.  This paper will explore some of the realizable possibilities for both training, and modeling and simulation, when the two communities can communicate in an effective manner.Background: The “Standards” SpaceThe DoD Modeling and Simulation community has been able to connect models and simulations to each other, and with live entities (C4I devices, range assets, etc.), using a standard architecture, in an environment to enhance the problem demonstration space.  In reality, a wealth of experience resides behind the capability to connect various M&S components together with non-M&S components to solve a problem.  Most recently, this is being done with the High Level Architecture (HLA), which is a formalized architecture, that draws on the past successes of Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) standards and processes, and the Aggregate Level Simulation Protocol (ALSP), as well as custom interfaces.  It has been formalized by the Simulation Interoperability Standards Committee (SISC), using the Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) standards process.  In addition, in Nov 2000, a memorandum of agreement was put in place between the Services that declared the HLA as the technical means for simulation interoperability.  With this capability and experience in place, there is virtually no end to the uses that models and simulations can be put to.  This implies increasing reuse, and a growing customer base, for models, simulations, and tools (both for the HLA, and for the DoD M&S community in general).Further the HLA, while developed for M&S, does not specify the uses for which it can be employed.  The data that gets transmitted, the way in which the data is specified, and even the manner in which it gets transmitted is up to the HLA user.  This allows for customization of components, including selection of an appropriate implementation (RunTime Infrastructure, or RTI) to fully support the HLA user.  In fact, even though the development history of the HLA is rooted in the M&S community, the use of HLA does not necessarily need to apply solely to M&S applications.  However, it is logical to assume that there may be implicit assumptions from the M&S community within the HLA’s specifications.  Until the HLA is applied in ways that seem logical with its specifications, but are applications for which it was not intended, we would not be able to ascertain the level of M&S dependencies and attempt to mitigate them.  This is a critical component for furthering the current architecture, and architecture standards.  In addition, greater demand for HLA tools will theoretically create a demand, and possibly a larger supply of tools, with varying capabilities for use within the M&S community.Advanced Distributed Learning (ADL) is another architecture concept that is receiving a lot of positive attention from the DoD, and elsewhere.  Service components look to ADL to provide both education and training on everything from new concepts, to refreshment of old skills.  In a research assessment, done in 1999, the Deputy, Under Secretary of Defense for Science and Technology (DUSD(S&T)) outlined six functional characteristics to significantly increase learning, for the future forces:“Accessibility: access instructional components from one remote location and deliver them to many others;Interoperability: use instructional components delivered in one location with one set of tools or platform in another location with a different set of tools or platform Adaptability: tailor instruction to individual or situational needs;Reusability: incorporate instructional components into multiple applications;Durability: operate instructional components when base technology changes, without redesign or recoding; andAffordability: increase learning effectiveness significantly while reducing time and costs.”[1]With this direction, and others, the ADL community is undertaking the development formalization of the specifications, called the Shareable Content Object Reference Model (SCORM).  This specification, is both being prototyped by, and being use by commercial learning management systems to deliver the course content in both standard and novel ways.  This formalization is also occurring within the IEEE, by the Learning Technologies Standards Committee (LTSC). Therefore, the specifications that result are the learning community’s view of what is needed.2.  Why Bridge the Two Standards?Within the education community in general, and specifically within ADL, learning AND doing is highly desirable.  In general, people retain more by being able to practice their acquired skill.  Also, the ability to automatically, and in an unbiased fashion, assess the amount of learning that was retained through the demonstration by whatever means will ensure that the ADL student receives as much as possible from the learning experience, before moving on to employment of learned skills.  Both of those concepts are theoretically possible today, using both the developments in ADL, and the standards of HLA.However, the two do not immediately interact with each other.  What is needed is a standard, technical way to bridge between the learning environments and the simulation world, to leverage the capabilities of both areas, for everyone who has a need or desire to learn, or teach.  By enabling this bridge:The Services directly benefit from tying two critical components of their Transformation together to supply better education AND training;The entire learning community benefits from having additional instructional assets with which to enhance the educational experience of the user;The HLA community benefits by having additional users evaluate the applicability of the architecture for M&S in a different environment; The commercial industries benefit from having additional users, requirements, and customers for their tools; andThe investments made by both the users and the developers of the respective technologies remain intact because it is the right thing to do, not because it is the politically correct thing to do.The bridge to be built between the M&S and ADL worlds is more than just a technical challenge.  While similar at a high level, the HLA and SCORM are very different architectures, which is appropriate because they address different domains.  HLA enables a multiplicity of processes to connect and transfer information about their process, often in real time.  SCORM, on the other hand, supports directed learning experiences that can be based on specific skill or competency models.  Within SCORM there is the means to track the learner’s mastery level in order to provide an appropriate program of instruction.  In HLA there is the means to deliver simple or complex experiences that develop and refine those skills and competencies as required.The really exciting part of blending these architectures is the prospect of connecting the “teaching” and the “doing” part of skill acquisition in one seamless (to the learner) environment.  This will entail the mapping of specific skills and competencies to actual demonstrated results in a simulation environment.  For example, one can imagine a program of instruction that introduces the learner to a set of concepts and then sends the learner into a simulation.  At this point, the learner has now been oriented to a particular set of specific learning objectives.  In the ideal, as the learner navigates through the simulation, data should be gathered that monitors the degree of mastery of the various learning objectives.  If mastery isn’t observed, the learner ideally would be automatically directed to appropriate remedial material.  Use cases of this kind have been identified throughout the military services, but so far have proved difficult to implement except as custom, one-off solutions.The mapping of state or performance information from within a simulation to the acquisition of particular skills or competencies is non trivial, but feasible.  The construction of competency models that can be expressed in terms of simulation behavior are developing rapidly.  Among the simplest examples is the administration of a tutorial that describes to the learner an objective followed by a simulation.  At the end of the simulation, if the end state reaches a particular defined condition, it can be said the learner has mastered that objective.  A successful landing of an aircraft constitutes mastery of a set of competencies.  A successful landing of an aircraft on an aircraft carrier reliably using the second arrester cable is a higher measure of a variety of competencies.  The prospect of communicating the data from a simulation to a directed learning environment in a form that relates to specific competencies holds great promise.  More sophisticated versions of state/data-to-competency mappings are expected  to evolve and could well change the nature of many types of education and training.  For this to occur, standard communications and mapping standards must evolve to merge the learning (SCORM) part and the doing (HLA/RTI) environments.It is often held that standardization inhibits, or prevents creativity.  But standardization often takes care of creating a solid infrastructure, allowing energy to be spent on creativity and ingenuity.  Such is the case with linking simulations to learning management systems, and vice versa.  By performing this linkage using open standards, the environment created by simulations and course content can be used to the advantage of all; and the uses appear endless. Further it opens up the products of one community to be used by the other.Currently, the cost of creating simulation environments is decreasing, as users discover the power of reuse of both the technical architecture, and the simulations themselves.  However, embedded simulations in directed learning experiences are currently difficult and expensive to create, and are not readily reusable, due to the proprietary nature of the embedding.  Additionally, the ability to deliver sufficiently engaging content through a learning management system is costly.  What is needed is:Reusable libraries of simulation components that can support a wide range of learning use cases;Content objects that can be built to operate stand-alone, or in concert with models or simulations;The ability to configure simulations to meet real-world configurations (e.g. ship-specific equipment or systems; aircraft tail-number specific avionics configuration, etc.);The ability to deliver specific information about the present needs of the student in a given situation to the model or simulation, as initialization data;The ability to get to “adaptive learning” where simulations might be federated on the fly for specific scenario-based teaching; andThe ability to provide information from the student’s interaction with the model or simulation back to the learning management system (LMS).3. Some PossibilitiesAssuming the needs can be met, either in full, or in part, we can begin to explore the possibilities of this new learning environment.  We are all familiar with DoD, and the training capabilities which exist today, and which are postulated for the future. Have we  reached the end of military training innovation?  We don’t think so.  The simulation-ADL linkage can bring about incredible efficiencies in current training and education processes, taking advantage of the best knowledge available, at the appropriate times.  For example, consider vehicular trainers.  Often, the builders of the vehicle simulators (either complete or part-task trainers) are not the same as the builders of the original vehicle.  Yet, being able to take advantage of their implicit knowledge would be of great help to the student.  This simulation-ADL linkage can make course content, developed by the original vehicle manufacturer, to be used in trainers built by a third party, simply by using standard interfaces, and standard delivery mechanisms.  Further, with the power of computers as they are today (and no one questions that they are going to get more, not less powerful in the future), the student no longer has to close a book (or a LMS), walk down the hall to the vehicle trainer, or switch CDs or computer applications to get at the vehicle simulation; and vice versa on their return to the course material.Further, military use of M&S is almost pervasive, and along the way to this state, the military community has built up an incredible inventory of models, simulations, simulators, and stimulators that are available for use by a LMS.  Most of these assets have, by virtue of the HLA MOA, an HLA interface; which usually implies that they have an object model describing what data it can accept and produce.  While it is more likely than not, the case that these assets do not produce remediation data to be used by the LMS, if they have an interface, they can federate with a tool that can monitor the asset use by the student, and provide the feedback if the asset itself cannot be modified.  Once this data is obtained, the next step is to provide the ability to determine the correct spot in the learning content to return the student to.  This is a current research topic within the ADL community; and it can be facilitated by an automatic return of student responses from model, simulation, or simulator interaction.  Now, the military student can practice with the same model, simulation, and/or simulator that they may eventually use in another application area.  This creates confidence in the student, and a greater demand for the asset.What about non-DOD?  (more examples can be found in Reference 2) One beneficiary of this simulation – ADL linkage would the community which must be trained to perform a task, but the ability to practice that task in a realistic setting is not practical, e.g., space.  While it may not be currently possible to fully simulate the operational space environment today, linking to a simulation as part of their instruction would be a first step.  This way, the training can be accomplished either in small steps, or in a continuous stream, depending on the needs of the students.  The initialization of the simulation can be focused on areas within the procedure where the student is having difficulty.  The simulation can be a simplification of the simulator that the astronaut will eventually use.  The same learning content can be used to teach the student by recitation, initialize the simulation to assist, and initialize the simulator for practice.Another beneficiary would be a community for which safety is a concern.  Consider the medical community.  Safety is a concern for both the medical community member, and the patient.  We are all grateful for the requirement for medical students to rehearse their skills on cadavers, before using live subjects.  However, cadavers do not produce any responses.  The students can practice procedures, and learn about possible reactions to procedures from course material, but they have no way to concretely put the two together, until they encounter a live subject.  Wouldn’t you feel better if they could get more realistic training before they take up sharp objects?Have you ever tried to get a training procedure certified, when there is a hazardous material involved?  Well, a few determined individuals have; but common sense, and a wealth of guidelines and legalities prevent the actual use of hazardous materials in training situations.  Mishandling hazardous material can have serious consequences, not all of which can be predicted (and therefore, can’t be discussed in learning content).  Currently, those known consequences can at best be described in learning content.  For example, dispersion can be predicted, over and over again, with different results, depending on the environment, and discussions of impact on the population can be discussed.  Training can allow the student to practice handling the material, and can possibly speculate on a few of the emergencies that can arise.  But as with the medical community, there is little ability to tie the actual experience to the discussions in the learning content.One final example is YOU!  Along the way to your present position, it is almost a certainty that you have been involved as a student yourself, in either a formal education situation, or a training situation.  Have you ever had the feeling that you could have gotten more out of the educational or training experience than you did, if it had been presented a different way?  Have you ever wished for the ability to repeat certain lessons?  Have you ever wished you didn’t have to go through certain lessons?  Have you ever wished there was an ability to immediately practice what you had learned?  Have you ever encountered a grading situation that was biased?  We’re assuming the answers to most of these questions are “yes”.  ADL and SCORM by itself will go part of the way to making the education or training experience more significant for the student.  The addition of models, simulations, or simulators to the instructional assets available, will improve the experience.  The ability to use these assets in an apparently (to the student) seamless manner will further enhance the continuous learning experiences of any community.4. Aren’t YOU Excited by This? – But We’re Not Totally There Yet!The scenarios discussed above are easily within reach of the students today.  However, they are neither immediate, nor automatic; but neither are they technically or procedurally difficult.  During the initial phases of providing this opportunity to both the M&S and ADL community, more difficulties will be encountered.  As with their history, it is likely that the majority of these difficulties will come from the cultural aspect.  That notwithstanding, there are a number of issues that will need to be solved for the immediately available standards and technologies to be fully used by either community.  In order to make full use of the capabilities of simulations, within ADL, and ADL tools in M&S, a series of problems must be overcome.  Among them:Lack of standard methods of linking teaching strategies and assessments to simulation data;Lack of standard construction techniques to tie specific skill/competencies that can be assessed, to simulation-based learning experiences;Lack of reusable simulation components which can be assembled to meet varying learning objectives;Lack of simulations that can stimulate all the senses to make the learning environment as realistic as possible; Lack of simulations for replicating human behavior; and Lack of knowledge on how to author learning content with embedded simulations.These problems are seemingly large, but are not insurmountable.  Groundwork is being laid this year to perform proof of concept demonstrations to make a federate look like a Content Module to the ADL community, and to make a Content Module look like a federate to the HLA community.  In addition, assessment of simulations, with the intent of creating a pedigree template will also be initiated this year.  While the intent is not for use in the ADL community, there is no reason that these templates cannot accommodate the information necessary for the ADL community.  Further, work is being done to allow faster, simpler, and more composable simulation tools for use in all domains.Ultimately, we believe that HLA can be the standard mechanism for the interoperability of simulation and learning content/modules.  This may require additional concepts to be introduced into the HLA and SCORM worlds, but it is our belief that work already done and approved in both the HLA and SCORM standards will not need to be modified.  This combination opens the full power of modeling and simulation to the instructors using ADL concepts; and provides a powerful training tool in LMS and courseware authoring, to the M&S community to take advantage of their models and simulations already in use.References:[1]  The DoD Continuous Learning System for 2012: An Advanced Distributed Learning Research Assessment, 21 Dec 1999[2]  Dirienzo, V., Borah, J., Morse, K. “Integrating the HLA and SCORM”, Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, 9 Apr 2001Author Biographies:PHILOMENA (PHIL) ZIMMERMAN received her BS in Mathematics from St. John Fisher College.  She has worked over 15 years in the development and testing of software for the DoD, and additionally, over 4 years in program management.  Of that total, in the last 10 years, she has worked in the area of simulation software development and management, and the creation and execution of federations, largely for the Test and Evaluation community (to include JADS EW, and JTTCA).   She is currently employed by the Naval Research Labs, in the Advanced Information Technology Department, and detailed to the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) as the Associate Director for Joint Programs, and more recently, Associate Director for Transformation Initiatives.  Previously, at DMSO, she was the High Level Architecture (HLA) Program Manager., and has been involved with HLA development since the beginning. Philip Dodds is 