The Fixed Tactical Internet—Key Enabler for Training Network Centric WarfareJohn W. DiemChiefBattle Command Training DivisionU. S. Army III Corps HeadquartersFort Hood, TX 76544(254) 287-1910 HYPERLINK "mailto:john.diem@hood.army.mil" john.diem@hood.army.milDarran T. AndersonMAJ, FACorps G3 Simulations OfficerIII Corps Training and SupportFort Hood, TX 76544(254) 287-8727 HYPERLINK "mailto:darran.anderson@hood.army.mil" darran.anderson@hood.army.milDouglas R. BabbMAJ, SCS3 124th Signal Battalion4th Infantry DivisionFort Hood, TX 76544(254) 288-2832HYPERLINK "mailto:douglas.babb@hood.army.mil"douglas.babb@hood.army.milLisa FanelliMAJ, SCTeam Signal Officer III Corps G6 U. S. Army III Corps Headquarters Fort Hood, TX 76544(254) 288-9611HYPERLINK "mailto:Lisa.fanelli@hood.army.mil"lisa.fanelli@hood.army.milGeorgie McAteerDirectorBattle Command Training CenterU. S. Army III Corps Headquarters Fort Hood, TX 76544(254) 288-6715HYPERLINK "mailto:georgie.mcateer@hood.army.mil"georgie.mcateer@hood.army.milThomas A. ChristophersonDigital Training Systems Integration Manager/IITRIBattle Command Training DivisionU. S. Army III Corps Headquarters Fort Hood, TX 76544(254) 288-1807HYPERLINK "mailto:tom.christopherson@hood.army.mil"tom.christopherson@hood.army.milThomas R. (Randy) RuhlDigital Integration Manager/IITRIBattle Command Training DivisionU. S. Army III Corps Headquarters Fort Hood, TX 76544(254) 287-8886 HYPERLINK "mailto:Thomas.ruhl@hood.army.mil" thomas.ruhl@hood.army.milNorman L. (Lane) AllredSenior Military Analyst/IITRIBattle Command Training DivisionU. S. Army III Corps HeadquartersFort Hood, TX 76544(254) 532-8321 x2295 HYPERLINK "mailto:lane.allred@hood.army.mil" lane.allred@hood.army.milNecessity is the mother of invention - even when training the Army’s First Digitized Corps as it moves toward Network Centric Warfare where one of the most essential war-fighting tasks is the movement of information around the battlefield.  This information - whether as messages, databases, imagery, or video teleconferences - must travel on the Tactical Internet (TI).  Units that have been fielded digital systems have quickly recognized that the type and amount of Signal assets available to support war time tasks are not sufficient to support multiple, concurrent unit training schedules.  Thus the Fixed Tactical Internet (FTI) was born from this necessity to support digital training by simulating and, where possible, emulating the TI.The TI is comprised of data transfer at and below brigade level (normally referred to as the "lower TI") and data transfer at and above brigade level (entitled the Warfighter Information Network - Terrestrial (WIN-T) - or "upper TI").  Currently, the FTI is designed to allow for replication of lower TI capabilities without the use of the Network Control Station (NCS) normally required in establishing the TI.  Instead of the NCS controlling the TI, software normally only used by the TI/radio designers is used to manage the overall network. This software, currently only available for the lower TI, is called the Enhanced Position Location Radio Set (EPLRS) Network Manager (ENM).  Using this software and only three EPLRS radios, a lower TI can be established that can be operated with only one engineer rather than a Signal platoon or company.  The software and systems that can fully replicate the WIN-T signal assets for training is still in the design phase, but current interim solutions are being used.Within the III Corps training architecture, the FTI will be the critical link between the newly constructed Battle Command Training Center (BCTC) and the wealth of other training facilities and areas throughout the installation.  The BCTC will be linked via the FTI to the Close Combat Tactical Trainer, the Digital Multi Purpose Range Complex, the Battle Simulation Center and, most important, to any unit desiring to link live training with constructive and/or virtual training systems.This paper will outline the concepts, design, demonstrated uses to date, and future expectations of the Fixed Tactical Internet - for both III Corps and the United States Army.1.  IntroductionThe U. S. Army is exploiting modern information technology to maintain its dominant posture across the spectrum of military operations.  The quest continues to define and develop the best information tools.  The impact of this evolution challenges the already fully committed standing force as they are called on to participate in experiments and exercises of several varieties.  These efforts to measure tools and networked capabilities against soldiers, units and missions are critical to properly validate, improve, redirect or reject technical developments and operational concepts.  However, these developmental events are conducted while the unit is simultaneously being fielded new information technologies, undergoing new equipment training to support that fielding, and conducting sustainment training to insure they are ready for military operations.  These operational missions and tasks, as well as multiple simultaneous training commitments, for the units and their supporting signals organizations have grown to the impossible over the last decade – in some cases, projected field time for some communication assets exceed 500 days a year.  The solution to this problem required new approaches to providing fielding and training support – and thus the Fixed Tactical Internet (FTI) was born.  This paper will outline the concepts, design, demonstrated uses to date, and future expectations of the FTI for Fort Hood, Texas and the U. S. Army.2.  Network Centric Warfare and its Training ChallengesA recent work by David S. Alberts, John J. Garstka and Frederick P. Stein developed the concept of Network Centric Warfare (NCW).  NCW “is the best term developed to date to describe the way we will organize and fight in the Information Age. The Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Jay Johnson (at the time of the writing), has called it ‘a fundamental shift from platform-centric warfare.’  We define NCW as an information superiority-enabled concept of operations that generates increased combat power by networking sensors, decision makers, and shooters to achieve shared awareness, increased speed of command, higher tempo of operations, greater lethality, increased survivability, and a degree of self-synchronization.  In essence, NCW translates information superiority into combat power by effectively linking knowledgeable entities in the battlespace.” [2]This complex, evolving environment challenges the best of minds to capture the technical solutions and then find the right military applications.  Alberts, Garstka, and Stein further stated; “To reach its full potential, Network Centric Warfare must be deeply rooted in operational art. As such, we cannot simply apply new technologies to the current platforms, organizations, and doctrine of warfare.” [3]Major Linda Jantzen, in Military Review, March/April 2001, said; “Unlike past innovations, which tended to bestow an enduring competitive advantage on the innovator, many information-age technologies are equally accessible to all competitors.  The discriminator among competitors is not who possesses the technology but who uses it best.  The pace of change is necessarily accelerated as each player attempts to stay ahead of the competition by retaining either the newest systems or the best doctrine and procedures to optimize the effectiveness of existing systems.  For the military, this concept is called information dominance: the ability to collect, process, and disseminate an uninterrupted flow of information while exploiting or denying an adversary's ability to do the same.” [4]Within the U. S. Army, the organization and distillation of the myriad of information systems is centered in the Army Battle Command Systems (ABCS).  Information automation systems from the various Battlefield Functional Areas (BFAs) have been adapted from their parochial “stovepipe” focus to interactive, mutually supportive systems that provide linkages not only across Army networks and information sources but as part of a broader, Joint services C4ISR architecture. The integration and management of the larger ABCS is worked at the Central Technical and Support Facility at Fort Hood, Texas.  The Army’s first and second digitally equipped divisions, the 4th Infantry Division and the 1st Cavalry Division of the Army III Corps, are also at Fort Hood.  Accordingly, most of the Army’s ABCS experimentation and testing has been centered at Fort Hood or on Fort Hood units as they deployed to training and operational environments.   While the initial objectives of many of these events were focused on assessing the technical issues associated with placing sophisticated computing assets in tactical platforms and command posts, the Army also derived numerous insights into the problems associated with gaining and sustaining proficiency on training operators, maintainers, and leaders on the system of systems represented by ABCS.  The magnitude of the training challenge associated with this huge shift to digitally equipped forces is acknowledged in the fact that the Army is just now publishing its first digital training strategy after over 10 years of fielding ABCS components to the field [5].One of the greatest training challenges associated with ABCS systems is derived from their ability to depict forces arrayed on the battlefield, both friendly and enemy.  To train on this capability, those forces need to either be there - live - on the training battlefield or be represented in supporting simulation systems.  If not the soldiers and leaders and their sophisticated automation systems cannot be effectively exercised in employing or managing the “grids” associated with network centric warfare [6]:-- Information grid: the fundamental building block of Information Superiority consisting of communications links, computational nodsnodes, and information management applications that enable network centric computing and communications across the battlespace-- Sensor grid: provides the operational capabilities necessary for achieving awareness across the battlespace-- Shooter grid: provides the operational capabilities necessary to conduct precision engagement, dominant maneuver, and full-dimensional protection.3.  The Tactical Internet – Enabler for Network Centric WarfareThe Army’s tactical communications network is called the Tactical Internet (TI).  The TI is the most critical element for successful employment of the ABCS to enhance the lethality of the committed forces.  The TI is built of tactical radios, routers and switches. This complex, high capacity network supports the exchange of data among the deployed units and associated Tactical Operations Centers (TOCs).  That continuous sharing of data results in a common operating picture (COP) and increased situation awareness (SA).The TI is defined at two separate levels, Lower and Upper TI.  The Lower TI is comprised of tactical radios, the Enhanced Position Locating Reporting System (EPLRS)and, the Single Channel Ground and Airborne Radio System (SINGARS), and associated networking components.  The Lower TI supports Brigades or Battalions and below command and control and SA.  The Lower TI also supports the interaction to and from the Force XXI Battle Command Battalion/Brigade and Below (FBCB2) systems that are deployed down to the individual vehicle level--tanks and armored personnel carriers, trucks, etc.  The associated TOCs are critical components because the FBCB2 is integrated into the TOC architecture.  The Near-term Tactical Data Radio (NTDR), an interim capability anticipating the Joint Tactical Radio System (JTRS), is also used to provide a higher bandwidth linkage between battalion, brigade, and selected divisional command posts.  The Upper TI focuses on support to Brigade and above and allows TOC to TOC messaging across all ABCS boxes.  It is comprised primarily of the Mobile Subscriber Equipment (MSE) and the WIN-T communications.  Other linkages from joint, operational, and national sources also from form part of this information grid.  Those links will vary based upon mission conditions, but could include linkages from sensor systems such as Joint Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance System (Joint-STARS) and Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), tactical satellite capabilities, and joint or national command and control systems.4.  Training the “Grids”Key to both III Corps and Army digital battle command system training strategies are the focus on training at both the individual and collective levels.  While a variety of multi-tiered training models have been crafted, and a variety of descriptors for those individuals and units participating in the training have also been proposed, they primarily include these sequential building blocks:Training Levels-- Individual Training: task-based training provided to operators, maintainers, and leaders, which is tailored to the echelon and job of the individual.  These tasks may be focused on system operations (entering and extracting information); systems management and administration; information integration from multiple battlefield systems, and battle command/battle staff skills required to direct staff sections, command posts, or units equipped with ABCS.  In some cases, such as a battalion commander operating from an ABCS-equipped tank, that individual must be trained on a specific set of skills to operate their ABCS device as well as the battle command skills required to integrate information from across their battalion and adjacent and higher units.-- Section or Small Unit Training: typically, two or more users within a staff section or unit employing the same ABCS component.-- Unit and Staff Integration Training: training focused on the integration of information derived from or required by dissimilar battle command systems and platforms.-- Command Post or Unit Functional Training: events focused on specific tactical or technical training objectives that typically employ controlled, vignette-driven training drivers.  -- Field or Command Post Training Exercises: events conducted against a dynamic opposing force.The boundaries between these levels are difficulty to define and frequently get clouded based on training objectives, time and resources available for training, and the varying levels of training proficiency within a unit or staff section prior to the event.The level of simulation and communications support for each training level is also often difficult to precisely and consistently define.  Normally, the lowest training levels are task based where canned scenarios or vignettes can be used to establish the training situational environment.  The task focus progresses though a crawl-walk-run continuum with increasing overhead requirements up to command post training where training is best done with dynamic interactive free play.  The same staff tools that soldiers were trained on more basically in the lower levels can then be applied more abstractly to support mission rehearsal, course of action analysis and support to ongoing military operations.Providing the associated signals support requirement with each level of training has been a major challenge.  The operators of the signal and communications components of ABCS must be trained and sustained just as much as the operators of fire support, maneuver control, or logistics components of ABCS.  Unfortunately – and this is where the major challenges are presented to commands – those same signal soldiers are required to create the communications backbone (“information grid”) that are required to employ and execute ABCS training in other functional areas. The other training challenge is presented by the desire of units to train using different scenarios and environments simultaneously.  For example, 1st Platoon may be doing communications checks in the motor pool while it is being simulated as part of the battalion’s training using an integrated live-virtual-constructive training environment.  To do this, two discrete communications backbones are required in order that the virtual simulation portray of 1st Platoon is not confused with positions being reported by the platoon in its motor pool.  Unfortunately, only one tactical network is fielded to the unit; this was based on the assumption that the whole unit would be operational and focused on the same mission at the same time.As a result of competing, conflicting demands for signal resources, there are the three major training challenges associated with implementing training for Network Centric Warfare:-- The need to portray realistic operational environments at all levels of training-- The need to provide initial and sustainment training for the operators of the tactical networks-- The need to have multiple, discrete tactical networks to support training at multiple levels and with multiple scenarios.From these challenges - really critical needs - FTI was born.  Without a robust FTI capability, Network Centric Warfare can never be fully implemented or affordably trained.Tactical units at all echelons need a continuing program where the soldiers are trained with their full complement of tools - this is the bottom line of “train as you fight”.  This training must include tasks associated with establishing, connecting to, and/or employing the variety of networks, communications devices, and systems that would be present during the spectrum of military operations.  The Army Signal units are not staffed or equipped to support simultaneous operational commitments and multiple training activities of varying scales that must happen to hone and refine warfighting skills.  A training-focused FTI must provide the capability to replicate the full TI for training at any level.  Additionally, the FTI must include the capability to inject simulation of the “wrap around”, the interactive view of the expected battlefield picture and all of the activities that are not a part of the live training force.5.  Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Implications for the FTIM&S systems and federations of systems have been developed to support the evolution to digitally equipped forces.  These M&S systems are continually under review and development to keep pace with the spiral development of the ABCS.  These M&S tools are also critical components to provide the needed simulation and emulation.The use of M&S is not optional.  M&S tools serve best when the live players looking at their screens or receiving other inputs cannot differentiate between the live forces and the simulated forces.  When the M&S support is less, the quality of the training opportunity suffers.M&S may be used to model sensor assets that support training of the “sensor grid”.  Example: the detection and/or monitoring of simulated tactical military units, friendly or enemy, via the Joint-STARS is frequently done to train maneuver control and intelligence systems users on the tasking and control of the sensor asset as well as on the analysis and distribution of information when it is received.The “shooter grid” is replicated by the portrayal of direct and indirect fire assets that are queued, managed, monitored and reported via a variety of tactical and operational networks.  Example: a frequent simulation-driven exercise at Fort Hood includes the modeling of artillery systems in Fire Support Simulation XXI (FIRESIM XXI).  This simulation not only models firing and target acquisition (friendly and enemy), it generates the appropriate tactical messages in the correct format and protocol for transmission to fire support command and control (C2) systems.M&S may also simulate or emulate communications and network systems capabilities.  Three frequent examples are experienced.  Example 1:  in the case of the FIRESIM XXI example described above, a second device – the enhanced protocol interface unit (ePIU) – is used to link FIRESIM XXI to radios or radio interface devices.  The user of the fire support C2 system configures their system just as if it were linked to a full support network – but the ePIU is replicating one or more radio nodes on the distant end.  Example 2:  M&S replication of components of the Lower TI provide appropriate modeling of bandwidth and operational characteristics. One of the more frequent examples at Fort Hood is the use of the Tactical Internet Model (TIM) from the Simulation, Testing, and Operations Research Model (STORM) test federation during the conduct of training employing the Digital Battlestaff Sustainment Trainer (DBST).  The TIM serves as the bridge between live, virtual, and constructive entities to insure that they communicate only as well – or poorly – as their status on the battlefield would dictate.  Example 3: the use of simulated combat net radios (CNR) to link the Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT) virtual radio communications to live CNR networks in the field.A second M&S impact on the FTI – in addition to provide providing the replication of information, sensor, and shooter grids, to include placing traffic on the real and emulated communications networks – is driven by the need to have a capability to link live, virtual, and constructive simulation tools and operations facilities.  Due typically to security, bandwidth, or protocol considerations, this traffic is not normally compatible with the routine administrative support provided by the installation LAN managed by the garrison’s Directorate of Information Management (DOIM).   Representative traffic over this portion of the FTI may include packet radio units (PRUs) between simulations, simulation-unique traffic, or information that mimics battlefield information systems but does not fully integrate with tactical information systems.   Data collected from tactical systems to support After Action Reviews (AARs) and real-time monitoring via instrumentation of tactical communications linkages is also relayed to exercise support via this method.The M&S communications component of III Corps’ training environment has therefore also been assigned to the FTI as a means of highlighting its importance to the training of Network Centric Warfare and insuring that its unique requirements are monitored as part of the overall network operations necessary to sustain our readiness.  M&S impacts on the FTI - whether as a user of FTI capabilities, as components of the FTI (e.g., TIM, ePIU, CCTT CNR radios), or as a contributor to training via the FTI - will likely greatly increase in the near-term. 6.  FTI NowCurrent ongoing activities at Fort Hood, include Unit Set Fielding (USF) of 1st Cavalry Division and preparation to support 4th Infantry Division train-up for the Force XXI Battle Command Brigade and Below (FBCB2)/Maneuver Control System (MCS)/All Source Analysis System-Remote Work Station (ASAS-RWS)/Integrated System Control (ISYSCON) Initial Operational Test and Evaluation (IOTE).  Also, the opening of the first Digital Multi-Purpose Range Complex (DMPRC) is scheduled for January 2004 and III Corps now has a continuing requirement to support two divisions and slice units with lower Tactical Internet (training) support.  In addition to these operational and unit training sustainment efforts, III Corps is also home to the Army’s Operational Test Command, who frequently employs III Corps training areas, ranges and simulation assets to conduct operational testing of ABCS and related systems as they are fielded to the Army.  A fully established FTI is critical to for all of these commands and their major events and sustaining activities. The FTI as it exists now at Fort Hood provides for limited replication of the lower TI (EPLRS only) and some M&S and Upper TI replication (primarily simulation connectivity and Internet protocol ((IP))-based traffic only).  The lower TI capability is provided via Lower FTI, consisting currently of 10 EPLRS on 7 towers (1 each) and 3 in a centralized control site at CCTT to support EPLRS Network Management (ENM) operations.  An 8th tower is projected for the east side of post, pending funding for tower construction and acquisition of the 11th EPLRS radio.  The Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM) and the Electronic Proving Grounds (EPG) engineered this solution as an interim, quick reaction capability to support the fielding and training of the 4th Infantry Division’s 1st Brigade in 1999.There are two primary user communities for current Lower FTI capabilities.  The first are FBCB2 installation activities, run by the material development community, and by unit maintenance activities that are conducting systems checks.  In both cases, the Lower FTI allows them to check ABCS and communications components without deploying their 70-man EPLRS platoon. The second set of users are is unit trainers conducting training either in motor pools or local training areas; again, the FTI negates the requirement to deploy their EPLRS platoon just to do small unit exercises.  A third use of the Lower FTI capability is planned towas brought on line in August 2002 when CCTT virtual radio and FBCB2 message traffic was linked via CNR linkages and STORM components to command posts tactically deployed.  The FTI will provide translation and communications backbone assets to accomplish this task.  This FTI service will continue to be used frequently across III Corps.The initial version of the Upper FTI includes fiber optics linkages to 7 command post training areas distributed across Fort Hood’s ranges, fiber optics linkages between simulation and training facilities, and PRUs that can be employed to provide feeds to command posts so they are not tethered to either simulation facilities or the tactical fiber optic sites.  Even though just a proof-of principle for future capabilities, these assets are already a key component of III Corps training.  The fiber and PRUs are used during each command post exercise to provide video feeds (to replicate Joint-STARS and UAV assets that are simulated and whose communications systems are available only when deployed to theater) and to provide critical simulation and AAR data collection linkages.  Fiber and PRUs will also be used to provide simulation-driven training to local training areas and motor pools when the III Corps Battle Command Training Center (BCTC) is fully operational in late 2002.As the fielding of FBCB2 and Lower TI assets across III Corps increases, and as commanders move from the fielding of ABCS to the conduct of sustainment training, it is rapidly becoming evident that current FTI capabilities at Fort Hood are inadequately resourced or staffed.  The number of EPLRS nets and radios are too limited for supporting multiple, discrete training events that may be conducted around the clock. The Upper TI is inadequately replicated, there are too few tactical fiber optic drops to support the 79 ABCS-equipped command posts that III Corps will have by 2004, and the staff to operate PRUs is borrowed from TRADOC.  Some of the challenges faced by the FTI staff are problems born from III Corps’ initial successes in implementing the Army’s first FTI.  III Corps will likely continue to expand its FTI usage and look for other interim means to provide robust training capabilities at affordable costs.  The ability to replicate a 70-soldier EPLRS platoon with a 3-civilian FTI staff and 7 towers is indicative of future cost-savings.7.  FTI PlannedUltimately, the FTI could be emplaced in as many as 24 different Army installations to support digital training for homestation, institution, and combat training center applications.  While much of the initial discussion with Army Transformation agencies has focused on the replication of EPLRS capabilities, Army Installation Information Infrastructure Architecture (I3A), along with the Army’s training systems combat and material development agencies, have also recognized the validity of Fort Hood’s vision to expand the FTI to become a much more encompassing capability.For the Lower FTI, required enhancements include the need for at least one additional radio tower, additional channels allocated for the establishment of discrete radio networks, 10 additional EPLRS radios, and the communications security equipment required to establish the new networks.  The additional networks will also require the hiring of a minimum of four additional operators to support the use by two Army Divisions (7 brigades total) by 2004.For the Upper FTI, improved network operations center (NOC) capabilities will be required to insure network planning and monitoring for simulation, tactical, and FTI networks is accomplished.  The ability to better replicate the NTDR/JTRS/MSE is also critical and includes the need to support voice, data and video teleconferencing.  The communications capability represented in the Upper FTI should include communications degradation that would be expected in tactical deployments and not portray sterile perfect signals.Additional fiber drops and PRUs – with the appropriate interfaces and translators to support many different protocols – are also required to handle the projected training workload increase derived from going from one digitized brigade in 2001 to 7 digitized brigades, 2 digitized division headquarters, and digitized Corps headquarters and major subordinate commands in 2004.Guidelines must be established that would set the norm for when tactical signal forces and equipment would be deployed and when the use of the FTI is more appropriate.  Guidelines should also be developed to direct when the FTI would reflect degraded communications.8.  Documenting Fort Hood Current and Projected FTI RequirementsWhile installation of the current FTI capabilities at Fort Hood was done as a quick reaction capability, it is important that the broader and longer range requirements for the FTI are formally documented to support both resourcing and systems fielding decisions.  The Training and Doctrine Command’s (TRADOC) Army Training Support Center (ATSC) at Fort Eustis, Virginia is currently documenting requirements for the FTI that will support resourcing driven by the Army Digital Training Strategy for fiscal years 2004 and beyond.  STRICOM [7] is providing program management support across the Army and is also working, via its Common Training Information Architecture (CTIA) efforts to include current FTI lessons-learned as well as provide an over-arching architecture for long-term support.9.  IssuesA number of issues confront III Corps and the Army as they attempt to implement FTI capabilities for homestation, institution, deployed, and combat training center applications.The first of this is limited EPLRS availability.  EPLRS has a production cap (to reflect out-year transition to JTRS) and a fielding plan limiting it to only selected tactical units–none were projected for the use in training architectures.  (Authors’ note:  This is just one of many examples where the training method for ABCS and TI systems was not anticipated or resourced.  Units currently have to pay license feeds to operate ABCS on surrogate hardware systems so they can train on software skills without having to set up and configure command posts or tactical vehicles.)  STRICOM is working diligently to find EPLRS radios that were manufactured over and above systems fielding plans that can be procured.The lack of EPLRS radios due to a production cap limiting total numbers of radios produced is part of a broader systemic problem in that there are not training devices or emulators fielded to fully replicate the tactical communications systems.  In these cases the training device is the fielded system – and its density of fielding must be anticipated based on total life-cycle support (fielding, training, and tactical operations).Funding support by both equipment fielding and training program execution groups (PEGs) at the Army-level has also been a challenge.  While experience – and usage data – demonstrate that the FTI is a critical component for installing and maintaining ABCS and TI systems, material development and fielding proponents have not been willing to contribute to FTI procurement and sustainment. The Training PEG –recently funded to a much lower percentage of its total requirements than the Equip PEG – has been forced to bear the total burden of FTI research and development, fielding, operations and maintenance.Finally, the establishment of a reasonable security and classification guideline that can be implemented must occur.  Current Security Classification Guides only consider the employment of ABCS and the TI in real-world operational environments and do not reflect individual and collective training at homestation, the integration of M&S and AAR components, or the execution of routine installation and maintenance activities.  Current draft policies that describe all activity and operations of ABCS and the TI – and thus the FTI – will prevent the commander from conducting readiness training routinely or economically.10.  SummaryThe most recent report on Network Centric Warfare to Congress amplifies the need to have a robust FTI:“ NCW represents a powerful set of warfighting concepts and associated military capabilities that allow warfighters to take full advantage of all available information and bring all available assets to bear in a rapid and flexible manner.  The tenets of NCW are:A robustly networked force improves information sharingInformation sharing enhances the quality of information and shared situational awarenessShared situational awareness enables collaboration and self-synchronization, and enhances sustainability and speed of commandThese, in turn, dramatically increase mission effectiveness”[8]Fort Hood and III Corps will continue to work with the Army and other services to derive lessons-learned from the FTI and to expand their awareness of what the FTI must be able to do at end-state.  Where possible, the employers and managers of the FTI will work with Army staff and training system combat and material developers to document requirements, develop formal solutions, and then test and field those solutions.  III Corps will also continue to explore multiple approaches to providing interim solutions and capabilities.  The need to fully, robustly and affordably replicate the Tactical Internet and enable the training of all three grids of Network Centric Warfare exists now, not next year or thereafter.  To pursue interim and long-term solutions any less aggressively would frustrate orderly implementation of new digital advancements for tactical forces and would do great disservice to the men and women of III Corps.11.  References[1] Cited in Department of Defense (DOD),  HYPERLINK "http://www.dodccrp.org/NCW/NCW_report/flash.htm" \t "_blank" Network Centric Warfare Report to Congress., July 2001, Executive Summary, p. i. [2] Network Centric Warfare: Developing and Leveraging Information Superiority; David S. Alberts, John J. Garstka, Frederick P. Stein, (CCRP publication series) 2nd Edition (Revised) August 1999/Second printing February 2000, p. 2.[3] Alberts, Garstka, Stein, p. 3.[4] Taking Charge of Technology, Linda C. Jantzen, Major U. S. Army, Military Review, March/April 2001, p. 65.[5] U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command, Army Digital Training Strategy, submitted to Department of Army staff May 2002.[6] Observations on the Emergence of Network Centric Warfare; Fred P. Stein, ICCRTS Proceedings, June 1998[7] The Fixed Tactical Internet Features and Functions, An ITC Group White Paper, James R. Taylor, ITC Group, Inc., 11315 Corporate Blvd, Suite 319, Orlando FL, March 2002.[8] DOD, Network Centric Report to Congress, p. i.12.  BiographiesJohn W. Diem is Chief, G-3 Battle Command Training Division, U. S. Army III Corps Headquarters, Fort Hood, Texas.  Prior to 26 March 2001, he was Chief of the National Simulation Center Digital Integration Office, Fort Hood, Texas and was also the AMSO C4I Integration Standards Coordinator where he supported Army-wide simulation-C4I integration for test, training, and experimentation.  During his past 20 years as an Army Officer, defense contractor, and government civilian, he has been involved in the testing and training of automated command and control systems.  To perform these test and training activities, he has employed, developed, or managed a broad variety of simulation-C4I integration efforts to provide test and training environments, data collection and after action reporting, and scenario database development.  He earned a BA and MS from Texas A&M University and served 14 years in the U.S. Army on active and reserve duty as a Military Intelligence Officer in command and staff tactical and signals intelligence positions.Major Darran T. Anderson is the Simulations Officer for the III (US) Corps and is assigned to the Battle Command Training Division, U.S. Army III Corps Headquarters, Fort Hood, Texas.  In June 2001, he was assigned to the Army’s Functional Area 57 program, as a simulation operations specialist.  He supported the integration of simulations, ABCS and FTI in several events ranging from brigade and below training to the Division Capstone Exercise (DCX) II and the Corps Warfighter Exercise;.  Iin the previous thirteen years as a field artillery officer he held a variety of command and staff positions, most recently as a member of the 4th Infantry Division’s Fire Support Element participating in the Division Capstone Exercise,DCX phase 1, at Fort Irwin, CA.  He holds a Bachelors degree from the University of Texas and is currently completing the Army Command and General Staff College.Major Douglas R. Babb is currently the S3 for the 124th Signal Battalion, 4th Infantry Division, at Fort Hood, Texas.  Previously he was assigned as the Signal Officer (S6) for 2d Brigade, 4th Infantry Division where he installed and operated both voice and data networks in support of various training exercises within the Army’s first digitized Division.  He also worked to incorporate the Fixed Tactical Internet into the training plan for each battalion within the Brigade to support multiple training and operational requirements for all assigned Lower Tactical Internet associated equipment.Major Lisa Fanelli is the Team Signal Officer for the III (US) Corps and is assigned to the III (US) Corps G-6 office.   Prior to this assignment, she was the S-3 (Operations Officer) for the 13th Signal Battalion, 1st Cavalry Division.  She has a broad range of staff and command experience in tactical signal units employing the communications assets replicated by the FTI.   Major Fanelli serves as co-chair of the Installation Information Infrastructure (I3) Integrated Process Team (IPT) and is leading the effort to establish a common network operations center (NOC) process for tactical, training, simulations and learning networks employed in garrison and tactically by III Corps.Georgie McAteer is the Director, Battle Command Training Center (BCTC), Fort Hood, Texas.  She was part of the initial planning and management cadre to solidify the concept for and manage the start-up of the BCTC.  She is a career U. S. Army civilian focused on education and training.  Her previous assignment was as the project officer for the new Fort Hood Soldier Development Center where Army professional and university education is conducted.  She earned a BA in English from the University of the Incarnate Word in San Antonio, Texas and is teaching certified at the secondary level in English.Thomas R. (Randy) Ruhl is a Senior Military Analyst with Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute (IITRI) and is the Digital Integration Manager for the U. S. Army III Corps Battle Command Training Division, Fort Hood, Texas.  He served over 20 years in the U.S. Army in a variety of infantry command and staff positions, to include battalion command of one of the Army’s first digitized units.  His final active duty assignment was as the Deputy G-3 for Training and Support, III Corps, Fort Hood, Texas, where he oversaw the key planning elements of what will be the Army’s first Battle Command Training Center.  He earned a BS from the University of Toledo, a Masters from the Syracuse Comptroller’s Program and is a graduate of the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College. Thomas A. Christopherson is the Digital Training Support Systems Manager for III Corps at Ft. Hood, Texas. He is a retired Army officer with over 15 years in simulation and interface design and development.  He was Program Manager for both a Corps Battle Simulation Center and the development of the Simulation, Testing, Operations, Rehearsal Model (STORM) and was designer/trainer of the initial Army Janus simulation training program at I Corps, Ft Lewis, Washington.  He was also the simulation concept lead for Force XXI Battle Command Battalion/Brigade and Below (FBCB2) tests leading to the Initial Operational Test and Evaluation (IOTE).Norman L. (Lane) Allred is a Senior Military Analyst with Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute (IITRI), supporting U. S. Army III Corps Battle Command Training Center, Fort Hood, Texas.  He has worked the last six years in U.S. Army simulation support for testing and training and recently completed a U. S. Army Study titled “Standard C4I Components for M&S/C4I Interoperability Support.”  He served 27 years in the U.S. Air Force in intelligence and space related activities.  He earned a BS in communications from Brigham Young University, a MBA from the University of Montana and a Masters Of Military Arts and Science from the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College."We must build forces that draw upon the revolutionary advances in the technology of war…one that relies more heavily on stealth, precision weaponry, and information technologies."  George W. Bush, Commander in Chief [1]