An HLA-Based System of Systems Approach To Operations AnalysisKenneth W. ZellersMichael KamrowskiHenry W. EmbletonJames J. NutaroRaytheon Missile SystemsP. O. Box 11337Tucson, Arizona USA 85734-1337520.794.3651kenneth_w_zellers@raytheon.comKeywords:Federation, HLA, middleware, RTI, system of systems, testbed, operations analysisABSTRACT: This paper addresses the Raytheon Mission Analysis System Testbed (RMAST) Federation of Testbeds  which provides distributed real-time interoperability between various digital and Hardware In the Loop simulation areas. The driving purpose for this concept is to be able to develop an integrated simulation environment for the evaluation of various Raytheon products in a system-of-systems context. The System of Systems Test Bed utilizes the RMAST as the core integrating Federation which provides interoperable connectivity with other testbeds via a common architecture, tool set, services, and interfaces. The RMAST Simulation Interoperability Toolkit provides a common API for accessing simulation middleware including message passing via a publish/subscribe system, time management for constructive and real-time simulation of discrete event models and unique ID generation. External testbeds are connected to the RMAST via the TCP/IP based Federation Bridge. The Bridge provides for the linking of disparate middleware tools and provides for message translation between federations. For those testbeds that require a high performance message passing capability, the embedded RTI is used in concert with the federation bridge. The RMAST utilizes the Department of Defense mandated High Level Architecture (HLA), an object oriented architecture for distributed computing. Raytheon Mission Analysis Testbed  -IntroductionThe Raytheon Mission Analysis System Testbed is operated by the Operations Research Department of the Systems Engineering Center of Raytheon Missile Systems in Tucson, Arizona. The RMAST resides in the Wargaming Laboratory (WGL) which performs activities including top level weapon system requirements definition and analysis, mission/operations requirements & analysis, concept of operations, mission planning, COEA/AoA’s, survivability, vulnerability, munitions effectiveness lethality, and human factors engineering.The RMAST is the core integrating Federation providing the interoperability for various testbeds that may be employed in a system of systems context. This paper addresses the motivation for the development of the RMAST, the interoperable architecture objectives, the legacy of distributed testbed technologies and the tools used to facilitate interoperability. The interoperability is implemented by the Defense Modeling & Simulation Office (DMSO) High Level Architecture (HLA-IEEE 1516) standard,  wherein the data distribution functions are performed via the Run-Time Infrastructure (RTI) implementation of the HLA specification. RMAST - The Motivation The Department of Defense is increasingly relying upon the use of modeling and simulation in the system acquisition process. The utilization of models and simulations in the acquisition lifecycle process has been embodied in the Simulation Based Acquisition paradigm. The goals of SBA are to:"Substantially reduce time, resources, and risk associated with the entire acquisition process;Increase the quality, military worth, and supportability of fielded systems while reducing total ownership costs throughout the total life cycle;Enable Integrated Product and Process Development (IPPD) across the entire acquisition life cycle.” [1]Figure 1-System of Systems Testbed Conceptual DesignIn response to this philosophy, the RMAST provides a common simulation framework permitting the distributed execution of simulations from different domains.  This also provides for the reuse of models implemented in. different domains in a single simulation that is unified by the RMAST Interoperable Testbed Architectures - The ObjectivesThe current emphasis on System of System (SOS) modeling has stimulated much thought and discussion within the Raytheon engineering community.  The focus has been on how to increase the quality of products and maintain competitive advantage as we transition from our existing technology base.  Emphasis has been on approaches that exploit the value of our legacy simulators, increase the reuse of models across development phases, and reduce the cost and time expense traditionally needed to develop M&S tools.  In recent years, Raytheon has invested considerable resources in an effort to develop and implement system testbed technology yielding the RMAST architecture and infrastructure described in this paper.  RMAST supports a wide range of mission testbeds during the range of acquisition phases from initial CONOPS through system flight test.    The focus of the RMAST development effort was to provide the simulation tools necessary to perform the systems engineering tasks assigned to the Operations Research and System Performance Department at Tucson Arizona.   We chose to build upon the legacy tools developed over time in support of the Raytheon Missile Systems (RMS) Wargaming Laboratory (WGL). The initial Independent Research and Development (IRAD) studies focused on exploiting increased processing power of new platforms and the usage of customer and Commercial off the Shelf (COTS) simulation tools. These studies also suggested the need for a distributed simulation environment to cover the breadth of Raytheon's mission areas (Strike, Land Combat, Surface Navy, Air Superiority, and Missile Defense) while reducing redundancy in “common” model and simulation tasks.  The emphasis further broadened with the increase focus of SOS throughout the acquisition process, the emergence and evolution of HLA, and the SBA studies and initiatives have all been topics of primary interest to the RMSC engineering community.  To further understand these trends, the RMAST was expanded to define and conduct some experiments with the following objectives:Gain an understanding of the difficulty and effectiveness of using an HLA based model to support a “real life” business requirement;Establish the tools and an experienced staff as necessary to support current and projected HLA related customer requirements.Specific elements of these objectives are:Analyze the application of the emerging HLA technology to an existing Raytheon legacy model;Gain an understanding of the detailed technical impact and operational effectiveness;Identify and install tools necessary to support development and HLA based infrastructures;Establish an approach for developing object based designs and integrating them with legacy M&S resources;Evaluate/evolve current state and performance parameters of existing HLA tools and design components;Establish environment for collaboration of HLA technology and expertise between Raytheon business segments.The Wargaming Laboratory experiments projected the impact of these M&S trends, and identified the tools and training needed to adapt/support mission systems analysis, engineering trade studies, and T&E applications.  This experiment formed the basis of the risk reduction activity to evaluate HLA as the basis of a network centric system testbed. Subsequent study results substantiated the design as the Standard Missile-3 System Testbed (SM-3 STB)[3,4], integrating all weapon system elements together as they perform the following roles/activities:  End to End Test Demonstrations and analysisIntegration CapabilitiesOperations AnalysisSystem EngineeringFlight Test SupportThe SM-3 missile system requirements evolved to include WGL support of mission effectiveness studies, systems engineering trade studies, and flight test risk abatement activities.  While typically these activities are performed using separate tools, the WGL evolved tools that supported parts of all three activities, with significant reusability..  Figure 2 depicts the Federation of Testbeds concept showing the SM-3 STB as one of the participating testbeds. An SBA focus yielded an approach which evolved to form the nucleus of the RMAST System Testbed Architecture..  The vision of the RMAST has evolved to sustain a standing infrastructure providing:A synthetic environment of increasing rigor in which to immerse evolving system/subsystem designs throughout the “cradle to grave” development cycle.A set of Systems Engineering services which :Allow for a continuity of evaluation across design phases.Provides a venue for investigating design alternatives.Supports total system integration via ‘End-to-End’ virtual engagements.Provides live flight test telemetry and visualization for situational awareness and performance assessment.Supports a multi-site interactive simulations between government ranges/laboratories and intra-Raytheon laboratories.A demonstrated improvement in Return On Investment via:An increase in overall quality due to the increased rigor/realism in design/operational trade studies, and with a focus on the “as built” evaluation.A decrease in development costs due to the re-use of the synthetic test environment and early identification of risks and/or improvements in systems engineering process areas.Mitigation of schedule risk due to early error detection either in requirements definition, design assessment or implementation details and overall adaptability to evolving operational needs.The next section will now address the evolution of the concepts that contributed to the current developmental stage of the RMAST. Distributed Testbed Technologies- The LegacySimulation Based Acquisition (SBA) including System of Systems (SOS) modeling has evolved into a key customer requirement for new business development in order to abate risks and to demonstrate weapon system utility.  To meet this need, Raytheon Missile Systems (RMS) has been on an effort to develop an integrated simulation infrastructure, leveraging off of current simulation capabilities, to demonstrate operational utility of RMS weapons within a SoS environment.  Deliverables are RMS Mission Analysis System Testbed (RMAST) architectures, tools and support requirements. Table 1 depicts some of the RMAST Development Legacy YearSourceTask DescriptionKey take-aways1984-88SIMNET R&DDistributed real-time simulation of operational environmentsInteroperability Protocol, Non homogeneous interoperability techniques1987-91USAF Human Resources LabMulti-site distributed network research using SIMNET and DIS protocolsDemonstration of high performance loosely coupled simulation architecture; Role of  Network Interface Unit;  Long-haul real-time secure nets:  Digitized data and  voice interaction (T-1)1992-94USAF Simulator for Air-Air Combat (SAAC)Common system interface between multiple high fidelity weapon system models & simulation environmentsDemonstration of MITL Operational Capability; Scalable for mission & engagement level  1994-96Raytheon (HQ  Hughes Aircraft Company) Studies and Analysis  Integration of legacy analytic/engineering models via DIS ( ITADS, HAREM, ACEM and air-air radar 6DOF)Demonstrated effective integration of legacy “workhorse” models for joint interoperability1996-98Raytheon Missile Systems (RMS)Risk reduction prototypes ITADS digitalHWIL facilitiesRanges & remote sitesTools & Techniques to perform real-time interactive engineering level simulation1998-20xxRaytheon Missile Systems (RMS) Operations Research and Systems Performance Department Develop and Conduct exercises to assess CONOPS & operational effects of projected weapon system changes or new features. Range from conceptual to realistic Operational Capability   SM-3 System Testbed Strike TestbedAir Superiority Testbed Testbed technologies Testbed toolsTestbed Infrastructure 1999-2001DD-21 OPSIMDemonstrated CONOPS and candidate ship architectures by use of  high fidelity key subsystems supplemented by representative operational environmentLarge scale integration of enterprise wide models illustrating Operational Capability;  Techniques to transform disparate design representations2000-20xxCooperative Research IRAD – Univ of Arizona & RMS Apply concepts/techniques  from the CATS consortium network centric computing initiatives to RMAST application environment Usage of  DEVS based models integrated with legacy systems.  Application of Agent based models to an HLA federation1999-2000Raytheon Integrated System Testbed (ISTB) IRADCross corporate research (15+ Raytheon M&S organizations) to identify, characterize, and develop a common infrastructure to support intrasite multiple mission distributed system testbeds.  Implemented two virtual testbeds ( high fidelity  engagement,  system mission level).  Analyzed wide variety of applications across the Raytheon business domain.  Identified key infrastructure requirements, associated toolsets and the initial design descriptions for key infrastructure elements.  2001-20xxCruise Missile Defense (CMD) Enterprise Cross corporate M&S testbed which integrates sensor, C3ISR, and missile systems simulation assets into an interactive multisite distributed simulation.Integration of mission simulations, 6DOF, and HWIL simulators to evaluate candidate CONOPS and system performance of remote sensor cueing value and operational capability added by  weapons.  2002-20xxMissile Defense Architecture and Simulation (MDAS)Cross corporate M&S testbed which integrates kill chain components to determine theater support effectiveness and NMD CONOPS  and architectures.  Integration of legacy high resolution sensor and missile models – 6DOFs and HWIL based – to assess the effectiveness of the weapons system design in achieving the TMD and NMD missions.  Table 1- RMAST Current and Legacy Developmentslegacy activities (both DOD and RMS) that have contributed to the RMAST.The first step in this process was an Internal Research and Development  (IRAD) project, begun in 1999-2000. Leveraging from previous work, which supported the RMS SM-3 System Testbed (SM-3 STB)[2,3] and the Raytheon-wide Integrated System Test Bed (ISTB) [7,8] IRAD from the two prior years (as well as other ongoing efforts), the RMS IRAD focused on determining the testbed technologies required to establish a core simulation infrastructure with common architecture, tools, services and interfaces.  The RMS IRAD researched ongoing efforts and capabilities of various universities and national labatories,  available government models such as CASTFOREM and Extended Air Defense TestBed (EADTB)[6], as well as internal Raytheon efforts such as the ISTB, and the Operational Simulation being developed as a component of the DD-21 Gold Team proposal. This research focused on the development of a core testbed development capability that would provide a distributed simulation environment utilizing HLA, standard interface services, common visualization software for situational awareness, and the capability for analysis and engineering performance evaluations, integrating Hardware in the Loop (HIL) and Computer in the Loop (CIL) simulations.  Initial application of the results of this IRAD project were simulation testbeds supporting numerous RMS mission areas including  Cruise Missile Defense, Strike and Land Combat.One particular highlight of this IRAD project was the development of a collaborative arrangement with the University of Arizona, Center for Advanced Telesysmatics (CATS)[5].  This arrangement allowed for the evaluation of the Discrete Event Simulation (DEVS)[9], and UA Agent Based technologies, as well as network security issues and UML as a testbed design modeling language.  This team developed a joint distributed Raytheon/UA federation and demonstrated the use of agent technologies in an Exercise Management System. [4]The 1999-2000 RMS IRAD recommended that the following capabilities be developed: A group of FOM development tools such as a FOM Mapper, and a Federation Bridging Tool to connect varying federations; An Exercise Management capability [4]to include agent based technologies and network monitoring tools; A standard scenario generator  and threat source;An HLA based data collection/reduction capability;A robust, high resolution, 3D terrain visualization capability.It was further recommended that RMS leverage the Raytheon Reference FOM, and FOM Development Tools (i.e. FOM Mapper) used by the ISTB, as well as the ISTB Tailored FEDEP Process, SDP (software development plan), and SSDD (system/segment design description).  From the SM3 System Testbed, it was recommended that their distributed simulation architecture, exercise management system, HWIL and SWIL configurations, and visualization software be used as the starting point for RMAST development.Acting on the recommendations of the RMS IRAD,  RMS Engineering then initiated a year-long special project to develop the required capabilities and utilize those capabilities in a mission area testbed.  This project resulted in the development of the RMAST FOM; a Simulation Interoperability Toolkit (SIT), and the acquisition of a High Resolution 3D terrain visualization capability.  The project further resulted in the development of a testbed for the Strike mission area.  This testbed utilized the federation bridge developed as a component of the SIT, and the DMSO RTI-NG, to join the Extended Air Defense Testbed (EADTB) with the Interactive Theater Air Defense Simulation (ITADS), and the common visualization software.  EADTB provided the scenario development capability to include target movement and sensors.  ITADS provided a 3 degree of freedom (DOF) missile server capability.  Utilizing these assets, we were able to provide a demonstration of a proposed new weapon for the Strike mission area, the Advanced Land Attack Missile (ALAM).  Continuing development of the Strike testbed includes the integration of the Joint Standoff Weapon (JSOW), the Land Attack Standard Missile (LASM), Tactical Tomahawk simulations and 6 DOF engineering models where appropriate.Additionally, development of test beds in support of other mission areas continues, with a Guided Projectile and Cruise Missile Defense testbed scheduled for completion this year, and other mission area test beds in the following years. Figure 2 depicts the progression from the research and development arenas to the SOS testbed application areas.The next section discusses the tools that are required in order for the RMAST to be interoperable. Figure 2-Distributed Testbed Technology Development RoadmapRMAST - The ToolkitThe Simulation Interoperability Toolkit (SIT) is a collection of tools that assist in the development of live and virtual simulation exercises.  The toolkit consists of three distinct tools.  These are an embedded RTI designed for use in real-time environments, a FOM independent application programmers interface wrapped around basic RTI services, and a FOM interface tool for generating C++ classes to represent object and interaction classes described in an OMD file.The Embedded RTI (ERTI) is a small footprint, high throughput implementation of the basic HLA object management, federation management, and declaration management services.  It provides services for joining and leaving a federation, creating and deleting HLA objects, basic publish and subscribe services, and the ability to send and receive object updates and interactions.  Table 2 provides a complete list of the HLA services implemented by the ERTI.  These services were selected on the basis of observed RTI usage in existing real-time testbeds developed at Raytheon.Table 2: ERTI HLA Serviceslevelcompliant federate actionsFederation ManagementcreateFederationExecution()destroyFederationExecution()joinFederationExecution()resignFederationExecution()Declaration ManagementpublishInteractionClass()publishObjectClass()subscribeInteractionClass()subscribeObjectClassAttributes()unpublishInteractionClass()unpublishObjectClass()unsubscribeInteractionClass()unsubscribeObjectClass()Object ManagementdeleteObjectInstance()registerObjectInstance()sendInteraction()updateAttributeValues()The Testbed Application Programmer Interface to the RTI (TAPIR) is a FOM independent, standard API that is built on top of a subset of the standard HLA services.  The API provides a concise interface to the HLA federation management services and object management services, as well as access to a real-time system clock.  TAPIR has a modular architecture built around a kernel that encapsulates the low-level RTI services.  The kernel module insulates other TAPIR based services and applications from differences in RTI implementations.  For example, the transition from the 1.3 HLA draft standard to the approved 1516 standard and non-standard variants can be easily managed by a TAPIR based application.Table 3 summarizes the basic TAPIR services. These services provide wrappers around common usage patterns associated with the Federation Management, Declaration Management, Object Management, and Time Management services of an HLA RTI.Table 3: TAPIR Kernel API ServicesService GroupSpecific ServicesFederate Managementjoin – Join a distributed federationresign – Resign from a previously joined federationMessagingsend – Send a typed, parameterized message.  Messages may be associated with a unique ID (UID).  Sent messages are broadcast to all federates.receive – Receive a typed, parameterized message and its associated UID, if defined.UIDcreate UID – Create a globally unique identifier.destroy UID – Destroy a globally unique identifier (i.e. free it for reuse)Timeenable time management – Participate in a time management scheme.  Supported types are scaled real time and algorithmic (i.e. logical time).Disable time management – Stop participating in a time management scheme.Request local time – Request that the local clock for this federate be advanced to a particular time.Commit local time – Commit this federate to a particular local time.Interest ManagementSubscribe – Express interest in messages with a particular type and parameter set.Publish – Indicate that the federate will be sending messages with a particular type and parameter set.Unpublish – Revoke a publicationUnsubscribe – Revoke a subscriptionThe TAPIR kernel services can be used directly by an application, or indirectly via modules or frameworks constructed around the TAPIR kernel.  Figure 3 depicts an exploded view of the TAPIR kernel, its relationship to the RTI, and several TAPIR based services and frameworks that can be employed by a federate developer.The FOM Interface Tool (FIT) is an HLA OMT compiler that accepts as input a DIF formatted OMT file and produces C++ class files. Each C++ class corresponds to an individual object or interaction class within the HLA object model. The automatically generated classes have type-safe methods for getting and setting parameter and attribute values, querying the object or interaction class, and constructors that can initial an object or interactionApplicationSimulation ManagementObject ManagementKernelRTI      Figure 3 TAPIR Kernal Relationshipsdata set from a basic TAPIR message. The FIT generated classes can be used directly with the TAPIR kernel and other TAPIR based services. The federation bridge provides federation to federation data connectivity.  In particular, it allows two federations to transparently exchange FOM data.  The bridge transports HLA interactions and object updates.  It does not transport user tags or time stamps.  The bridge contains an ‘architectural’ slot for inserting end-user defined FOM maps.  These can be linked with the bridge software prior to a federation execution.The bridge specification includes an application to application protocol for transmitting object updates and interactions that operate outside of the HLA RTI.  This capability has been used, for example, to inject into a federation telemetry data gathered by a real-time application running on an RTOS that is not supported by current HLA RTI implementations.SummaryThe RMAST has evolved into a powerful tool with the contributions of numerous legacy Raytheon and non-Raytheon efforts. With the SBA as a motivator, the step by step progression of the various experiments and projects outlined in this paper have resulted in a standing infrastructure capable of satisfying the system of systems objectives. The leveraging of lessons learned from these projects and the introduction of the necessary tools to facilitate interoperability has further extended the potential capabilities of the RMAST.References“SBA Functional Description Document”,   version 1.1, 24 February 1999,  HYPERLINK http://www.msosa.mil.inter.net/sia-sba/default.asp http://www.msiac.dmso.mil/sba/Andrew Vandivort,et al ,”Design and Development of the Standard Missile-3 System Testbed Using HLA",  unpublished internal technical memorandum, June 1998Robert S. Manthy, “Navy Theater Wide Hardware-in-the-Loop End-to-End Simulation Using Raytheon’s HLA Based Standard Missile-3 System Testbed", 99F-SIW-196,  Proceedings of the Fall 1999 SIWMoul, Phil: "Exercise Management System for Testbed Federation Control", 01E-SIW-045, Proceedings of the EURO SIW, June 25, 2001Center for Advanced Telesysmatics (CATS) –   HYPERLINK http://www.ece.arizona.edu/~hpdc/cat www.ece.arizona.edu/~hpdc/catExtended Air Defense TestBed (EADTB) –  HYPERLINK http://www.EADTB.com www.EADTB.comISTB-Raytheon Reference Federation Object Model (Raytheon RFOM), Rationale Document, (Draft) October 20, 1999Raytheon Unified Federation Development Updated Process , A User’s Guide to High Level Architecture Federation Development,  Version 0.21 Draft, November 19, 1999Theory of Modeling and Simulation, 2nd Edition, Academic Press By Bernard P. Zeigler, Herbert Praehofer , Tag Gon Kim ,[ 2000 ]Author BiographyKENNETH W. ZELLERS is a Principal Systems Engineer at the Operations Research and System Performance Department of Raytheon Missile Systems in Tucson, Arizona where he is involved in HLA support of legacy simulations and federation of federations connectivity projects. He has a bachelor's of science degree in mathematics from the University of Nevada, Las Vegas. He has more than 30 years of software development and engineering management experience in technologies ranging from real-time embedded simulations to distributed, network-centric simulation applications.Michael KamrowskI is a Senior Principle Engineer with Raytheon Missile Systems in Tucson Arizona. His current task is development of system testbed technology integrating legacy engineering simulations/labs to satisfy "virtual battlefield" objectives.  Mike joined Raytheon 8 years ago upon retiring from the USAF.  He has 25 years of systems and software engineering experience in support of major weapon system development and maintenance.  Area of specialty:  modeling and simulation,  HWIL Laboratories.  Mike has presented papers at Raytheon symposiums, SISO HLA conferences, and Tri-Ada conferences.  Subjects included: software reuse lessons learned, SBA-like system testbeds, and real-time integration of live and virtual simulation components.Henry W. Embleton is a Senior Systems Engineer with 11 years experience in operations research. Recently the Principal Investigator for the System of Systems Simulations IRAD, he is currently leading the SoS Simulation Special Project for RMS.  He is assigned to the Testbeds/Advanced Simulations team of the Operations Research Department at RMSC, Tucson, AZ.  He received his BS in Engineering from the United States Military Academy, at West Point NY.James J. Nutaro is a systems engineer supporting the development and application of distributed simulation technology for the Operations Research Department of RMS.  He has completed a Masters Degree in Computer Engineering at the University of Arizona, and is nearing completion of his PHD studies.DMSO RTI-NGEmbedded RTITAPIRFIT