STRYKER – Digital DataSharon ChaseProgram Manager Brigade Combat Team (BCT)U. S. Army Tank-automotive and Armaments Command, MI 48397-5000586-753-2138chases@tacom.army.milJohn M. BrabbsScott AubuchonEDS5505 Corporate, Suite 105Troy, MI 48098248-696-1779, 248-696-1745john.brabbs@eds.com   HYPERLINK "mailto:Scott.aubuchon@eds.com" scott.aubuchon@eds.comKeywords:CAD/CAM, Virtual Reality, Brigade Combat TeamABSTRACT: The Stryker Brigade Combat Team (BCT) family of vehicles is a fast track program using an off-the-shelf acquisition approach that has moved very quickly into the Milestone C decision phase. Modeling and Simulation (M&S) is very important to helping solve problems quickly and to speed up the testing phase of the program, with 10 variants/configurations of this vehicle M&S will help to discover and resolve issues quickly.  The contract has requested the submission of digital vehicle information as a deliverable that includes digital CAD/CAM data, digital vehicle and system descriptions and other data suitable for M&S use.  The data is being used to support multiple efforts from virtual prototype reviews of the multiple configurations, to supporting the live fire testing, to supporting transportability issues. The Stryker has two main variants the Infantry Carrier Vehicle (ICV) and the Mobile Gun System (MGS). The Stryker family of vehicles is centered on the ICV which has eight configurations: Anti Tank Guided Missile Vehicle (ATGM); Reconnaissance Vehicle (RV); Commander’s Vehicle (CV); Mortar Carrier (MC); Engineer Support Vehicle (ESV); Fire Support Vehicle (FSV); Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical Reconnaissance Vehicle (NBCRV); and, Medical Evacuation Vehicle (MEV).  This paper describes the digital data needed to support the Stryker program, the lessons learned in acquiring the digital data and how this data is being used to acquire, field, and sustain a family of armored vehicles as rapidly as possible.1.  INTRODUCTIONThe Stryker Brigade Combat Team (BCT) family of vehicles is a fast track program using an off-the shelf acquisition approach that has moved very quickly into the Milestone C decision phase.  The Program Management (PM) office for the Stryker Brigade Combat team is located at the U.S. Army Tank-automotive and Armaments Command (TACOM), Warren Michigan.  The contractors for the Stryker family of vehicles are General Motors (GM) and General Dynamics Land Systems (GDLS) (i.e. Joint Venture).   Modeling and Simulation (M&S) is very important to helping solve problems quickly and to speed up the testing phase of the program, with 10 variants/configurations of this vehicle M&S will help to discover and resolve issues quickly. The contract has requested the submission of digital vehicle information as a deliverable that includes digital CAD/CAM data.  This paper describes the different formats of the CAD data needed to support the Stryker program, the lessons learned in acquiring the data and how it is being used to field the Stryker family of vehicles.  In addition, the lessons learned in translating the CAD data are discussed.2.  DESCRIPTIONIn October 1999, the Army leadership announced its vision for the future.  The vision includes an immediate and urgent need for an air transportable Brigade Combat Team (BCT), capable of deployment anywhere on the globe in a combat ready configuration.  This force is essential to providing the strategic responsiveness and full spectrum versatility demanded by the National Military Strategy.  This self-contained organization enhances strategic responsiveness by providing a base unit that is fully mobile and completely air deployable by C-130 tactical lift aircraft.  The force is packaged at the Aerial Port of Embarkation (APOE) to be fully operational and ready for immediate commitment upon landing.  Split-based support operations will be employed to minimize the logistics footprint. Rapid movement will achieve operational mobility across the depth and breadth of the area of responsibility that may include complex, urban, and open and rolling terrain.  The Army will function as an integral member of the joint team and will be a major factor in executing joint strategic concepts, with quick response by a lethal, versatile, tactically agile joint force.  Full spectrum U.S. military operations in the 21st century will be conducted in a joint, multinational and interagency environment.The Stryker Brigade Combat Team (BCT) is part of the family of Interim Armored Vehicles (IAV).  The Stryker family of vehicles is a limited number of variants/configurations that maximize commonality, see Figure 1.  The two variants are the Infantry Carrier Vehicle (ICV) and the Mobile Gun System (MGS). The family of vehicles is centered on the ICV which has eight configurations: Anti Tank Guided Missile Vehicle (ATGM); Reconnaissance Vehicle (RV); Commander’s Vehicle (CV); Mortar Carrier (MC); Engineer Support Vehicle (ESV); Fire Support Vehicle (FSV); Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical Reconnaissance Vehicle (NBCRV); and, Medical Evacuation Vehicle (MEV) (See Figure 1). The BCT will provide the operational and tactical agility to execute fast paced, distributed, non-contiguous operations, as envisioned in Joint Vision 2010/2020, and as described in the Stryker Operational Requirements Document (ORD), the Organizational and Operational Concept (O&O), and the performance specifications for the family of Stryker vehicles. Figure 1: Stryker variants3.  DIGITAL DATA REQUIREMENTS The original Contract Data Requirements (CDRL) stated that the contractor should deliver three-dimensional drawings (i.e. CAD Data) in Initial Graphics Exchange Specification (IGES) format.  In addition, the CDRL also stated that the three dimensional drawings would be delivered only once.  However, the CDRL has since been modified to state that the CAD data will be delivered in Unigraphics (UG) or Pro/ENGINEER( (Pro/E).  UG is a three dimensional solid modeling package that allows fast and efficient design of solid objects. UG has both a Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG) interface and a parametric interface.  Pro/E is a 3D parametric solid modeling CAD package. The parametric features make modeling flexible, as models are able to change based on the modification of their parent parts and assemblies2.    GM delivers the CAD data for the ICV, RV, CV, ATGM, FSV and ESV in Unigraphics. GDLS delivers the CAD data in Pro/E for the MEV, MGS, MC and NBCRV.  The number of submissions on the CDRL has been changed to six times per variant.  CAD Data provided is the complete vehicle model.  The model contains the required information to build the vehicle.  The provided model may contain more information than is required by supporting agencies to do their analysis.  4.  FORMATS OF DATAAs mentioned earlier, the CAD data is delivered to the program office in Unigraphics or Pro/ENGINEER. However, the Stryker Brigade Combat Team has received request from the various agencies that are supporting the modeling and simulation effort to translate the data to various formats.  The following is a list of these formats that are described below: VRML, 3D Studio Max, Elysium neutral format, STEP, IGES, STL, DXF, Parasolid and JT. VRML (Virtual Reality Modeling Language) is an open format, used by almost every CAD package. 3D Studio Max is a 3D modeling package and uses its own file type max. Elysium, which is a 3rd party company, uses its own neutral file format armo. The armo format is being used to support the Army Research Laboratory. STEP, which is the standard for the exchange of product model data, is an open format that is available in most CAD packages.  IGES, initial graphics exchange standard, is the industry standard for data exchange between CAD systems. STL, stereo lithography, is an ASCII or binary file used in manufacturing. STL is a list of the triangular surfaces that describe a computer generated solid model. DXF, data exchange format, is one of the most widely supported vector graphics formats in the world today. DXF is the native file format of AutoDesk’s AutoCAD program. Parasolid is an exact boundary-representation geometric modeler supporting solid modeling, generalized cellular modeling and integrated freeform surface/sheet modeling.  JT is an EDS Product Vision native format and is used in the EDS product JACK.  US Army’s Human Research and Engineering Directorate in support of the Stryker is using JACK. All of the formats can be translated out of either Unigraphics or Pro/E (see Figure 2) with standard plug-ins except Elysium’s neutral format and 3D Studio Max. Each format has its own set of issues when being translated and will be discussed in further detail later in the paper.  Figure 2: Data Translation Process5.  USES OF DATAThe paragraphs below discuss how the different formats of the CAD data are used to support the Stryker program.A. Conducting Virtual Reality Design/Engineering ReviewsThe Advanced Collaborative Environments (ACE) laboratory is located at the U.S. Army’s Tank-Automotive Research, Development and Engineering Center (TARDEC).  Utilizing the ACE CAVE( (CAVE Automated Virtual Environment) in Figure 3 and Power Wall in Figure 4 high-resolution (3D video and audio) immersive virtual environments, the various BCT Integrated Product teams (IPTs) have evaluated design tradeoff studies, space claims (form-fit-and-function), safety and training/maintenance issues.  With the aid of the CAVE and Power Wall, members of the various BCT IPT teams can visualize and interact with a full vehicle system’s models, assemblies, sub-assemblies, and components in a real-time 3D environment while simultaneously maintaining natural human communication dialogue.  Prior to putting the vehicle models into the CAVE( or Power Wall, the CAD data is converted to DIVISION™ MockUp. (DVMockup 6.02)Figure 3:  Stryker design review using the ACE CAVE at US ARMY TACOM-TARDEC.Each of the applications involved placing soldiers, engineers, and/or project managers into a common virtual environment with a virtual representation of a vehicle system and its operational environment.  Rather than the traditional review process using briefing charts and text descriptions, these participants were immersed inside the design alternatives and observed the functional behaviors of the systems.  The improved communication facilitated by the Virtual Environments (VE) technology significantly reduced the time to reach a common understanding of the proposed alternatives and the time to come to a consensus on many of the evaluation results.Figure 4: ACE PowerWall at US ARMY TACOM-TARDEC.B.  Performing Transportability/Deployability AnalysisC-130 transportability is one of four key performance parameters for the Stryker program.  The key issues associated with C-130 transportability are axle loads and physical clearance.  The C-130 ramp has a published maximum allowable axle load of 13,000 lb.  The ICV vehicle weighs roughly 40,000 lbs and has four axles.  When cresting the ramp, the center axles can generate loads that approach and/or exceed this maximum.  In addition, the C-130 cargo bay can accommodate a published maximum vehicle height of 102 inches and width of 105 inches.  Also, a safety aisle must be maintained so that the aircraft crew can traverse from front to rear of the aircraft.  The ICV system challenges these limitations as well.  To facilitate meeting these requirements, the program office has contracted with Mechanical Simulation International to simulate loading of the vehicles into the aircraft while the system is still in the design phase.  Figure 5: Vehicle loading from C-130The aircraft loading process is simulated using two types of computer aided design tools: 3D solid modeling and 3D motion simulation.  First, a highly detailed 3D geometry model of the vehicle is imported into 3D Studio MAX along with a detailed model of the aircraft cargo-bay.  In this environment, the vehicle is configured inside the aircraft just as it will be in real life.  This involves locating the vehicle at the correct position inside the aircraft and setting the vehicle height and orientation such that it reflects the intended transport configuration.  In this case, the Stryker variant is loaded rear-first into the aircraft and the suspension “squats” for transport with the rear end lower than the front (See Figure 5).  In addition, many exterior items are removed and/or relocated so that the vehicle fits.  Lastly, tie-down chains are applied according to Air-Force procedures.  The result is a high-resolution 3D representation of the vehicle stowed in the aircraft.  This model is then used to measure clearances and interferences, identify and recommend design improvements, as well as evaluate the adequacy of the crew safety-aisle.  The model is easy to navigate and interrogate in 3D space.Motion simulation, or 3D multibody dynamics, is used to simulate the vehicle suspension system as it interacts with the aircraft ramp and floor see Figure 6.  Physical characteristics describing the suspension, tires, drive-train, and vehicle are integrated into a physics-based dynamic model implemented in the Dynamic Analysis and Design System (DADS) software.   The model calculates motion and forces between each component in the system, including axle loads versus time.  The results are compared to the aircraft limitations.  In addition, solid geometry described previously is attached to each component in the dynamic simulation allowing us to animate the predicted motion and evaluate clearances during the dynamic loading process.  The vehicle suspension settings and tire characteristics can be adjusted easily in the model to optimize the loading process.  Currently, the model is undergoing verification and validation.Figure 6:  Simulation of vehicle suspension.Human figure modeling tools were used to examine the feasibility of transporting a 9-person infantry squad in candidate Stryker variants in support of the source selection process. In addition, the Army Research Lab (ARL) is currently supporting the Program Manager Brigade Combat Team (PM-BCT) with human figure modeling to look at C-130 transportability issues for the Stryker variants, a key requirement for the program.  The modeling effort is specifically focused on the ability of the C-130 Loadmaster to traverse each vehicle when loaded inside the cargo area as well as investigate the maintainability of defined safety aisles.The Jack human figure modeling software is being used for this effort and in addition to the human figures, any applicable life support or mission equipment and gear that would be worn by the loadmaster, vehicle crew or infantry squad are also modeled and fitted to the figures as well.  The 3D CAD files for each vehicle are being supplied by the developers and are translated from their original format into a .JT format that can then be read directly into Jack.  For the loadmaster analysis, once the vehicle has been read into Jack, it is then positioned inside the modeled cargo area of a C-130 at the correct location where possible traversal paths over the vehicle can be examined and evaluated (See Figure 7).    Figure 7: Human Figure Model Representing C-130 Loadmaster Traversing Infantry Carrier VehicleC. Performing Ballistic Survivability/Vulnerability Test and EvaluationBallistic vulnerability modeling and simulation begins with the preparation of a Ballistic Research Lab – Computer Aided Design (BRL-CADTM) target description for each Stryker variant and configuration.  These target descriptions will be based on the Stryker Technical Data Package and associated system, component, and material design data.  These models are prepared and validated through comparison with the technical data, inspections of the actual vehicles, and data collected from Armor Coupon Testing and controlled damage experiments, so that they accurately represent the Stryker platforms and components of interest.  These models are then used in combination within the Modular UNIX-based Vulnerability Estimation Suite (MUVES) S2 model environment to predict the survivability/vulnerability of each variant and configuration under a given set of conditions.  These models are used to prepare the preshot predictions required by DA PAM 73-6 (Live Fire Test and Evaluation Guidelines) to support Stryker Live Fire Test and Evaluation.The BRL-CADTM  Package is a powerful Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG) based solid modeling system.  BRL-CADTM  includes an interactive geometry editor, a ray tracing library, two ray-tracing based lighting models, a generic frame buffer library, a network-distributed image-processing and signal-processing capability, and a large collection of related tools and utilities.  Release 6.0 is the latest version of software that has been undergoing continuous development since 1979.  The Army Research Lab (ARL) converts the CAD data into BRL-CADTM.  ARL already had the necessary translators in place to go from PRO/E to BRL-CADTM, however a new approach had to be developed to go from Unigraphics to BRL-CADTM.  The PM and ARL performed a market survey to identify a promising commercial product to translate from Unigraphics to BRL-CADTM.  As a result of the market survey, a translator developed by a company called Elysium was purchased by ARL. D.  Creating Camouflage PatternsSTRYKER CAD data is sent to Radian Inc for the development of Standardized Camouflage Pattern Painting (SCAPP).  Radian converts the ProE files to AutoCAD( for the development of the SCAPP pattern.  The finalized SCAPP pattern files are then returned to Program Office in an AutoCAD( format.  Since Radin does not have Unigraphics, the Unigraphics files are first converted into flat 2D line drawings.  Then the 2D line drawings are converted into AutoCAD(  format (i.e. DXF or .DWG) and sent to Radian Inc.  When Radian receives the CAD data in DXF or DWG format, SCAPP pattern design starts immediately and the CAD data is returned to the Program Office in an AutoCAD( format. E. Creating Fire Suppression ModelThe following is the process that the U.S. Army Communications-Electronics Command (CECOM) went through to run the fire suppression model for PM BCT, regarding the Infantry Carrier Vehicle. The Unigraphics CAD data was converted to Parasolid format and subsequently viewed with SolidWorks. In SolidWorks, the CAD was simplified to the pertinent geometry. The armored vehicle interior air volume, enclosed by the simplified CAD was then discretized into 660,000 computational cells using the computational fluid dynamics pre-processor called ICEM-CFD. This accomplished the discretization of the mathematical domain. Boundary conditions for fan flows, fuel spray, suppressant spray, interior walls, crew manikins, etc.  were then assigned to the outside surface of the mathematical domain.  Then discretized, three dimensional, transient, partial differential equations were solved for the physics of the fire and fire suppression phenomenon. Specifically, discretized forms of the equations for the conservation of mass, momentum, energy along with chemical species and combustion were solved using a iterative, linear, matrix solver. The discretized non-linear, momentum equations were linearized using an inner loop of iteration. The equations of physics were solved in each of the 660,000 cells for every millisecond up to 400 milliseconds, yielding the solutions of over a trillion equations. Every millisecond, the resulting matrix solution yielded 660,000 temperatures, enthalpies, 3D components of velocities, concentrations of oxygen, hydrofluoric acid, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, turbulent energy, turbulent dissipation, soot, fuel/air mixture fractions, particle distributions, sizes and velocities of the suppressant and fuel particles and several other variables. These values were then visualized in three dimensions using color to indicate high or low values for the variables, like red, to represent the hottest temperatures and dark blue to represent the coolest temperatures. It was not practical to analyze the graphics for each of the 400-millisecond time steps, one at a time, hence, digital videos of the flame propagation, suppression and toxic chemical concentration were created in mpg format to run on Windows Media Player. Windows Media Player comes with Microsoft Windows.  Finally, digital videos of the fire suppression event were designed to show the three engineering views, (top, side and front) and an isometric view, all simultaneously in one display window.  The final digital videos, in mpg format, were inserted into Power Point format for briefings. 6.  ISSUESAll of the formats used have had their unique sets of issues. For example, exporting VRML out of Unigraphics does not yield the same results that it does out of Pro/E. The tessellation is much different in both packages.  The Stryker Brigade Combat Team has had better results with the output from UG verses Pro/E. Because of these types of issues, the team has developed a work around for not only VRML but other formats as well. This compounds the complexity of bringing data from one package to another. IGES and STEP, which are widely accepted as a standard in data translation, have their flaws as well. The biggest issue with both is file size. Every attempt on large assemblies using either STEP or IGES was unsuccessful. Support on both of these formats is hard to get. The Stryker Brigade Combat Team is still unsure if the issues were due to hardware or software. There are issues with every piece of data the team translates, and every solution is different. Issues, like the ones described above, are the tip of the iceberg and will require more attention in the future.One of the major issues that has been faced by the Stryker program, is having the vehicle developed using two different CAD software packages (UG and Pro/E).  This has required additional effort in translating the data. One translation path that works from UG to the desired format may not work from Pro/E to that same desired format.  This has also created additional problems for the Army agencies that are supporting Stryker.  They may have the infrastructure to handle Pro/E data, but not to handle UG data.Another major issue has been the size of the data and the number of variants.  The ICV CAD Data is about 2 gigabytes in size. This causes problems in being able to load the entire vehicle at once without having a simplified representation.  The large size also means it takes a long time to translate the vehicle from one format to another format.Another problem is the fact that there is not one common operating system or computer platform being used by the contractors or the other agencies utilizing the Stryker CAD Data.  This means time has been spent verifying system configurations, so the data can be utilized successfully. An additional issue is making sure that a document is included as part of the deliverable that describes the different assemblies and the top level assembly file for the CAD Data.7.  SOLUTIONSThere is no simple solution because there are no set processes. Each variant received starts off with the same process that has worked with previous models. Standard import/export plug-ins within the different CAD packages are used. If those do not work, the model is broken down further to the sub assembly level to find trouble assemblies. After that is complete, continued effort is put in to break the model down even further, until all parts are complete. Each problem assembly may require several steps to translate.  The model may go from one package to another for clean-up.  It then goes to an outside translator before being sent to the final CAD package.   There can be several steps in this process, with the biggest problem being that it is different every time. There needs to be standardization in place at the design level to insure that data is easily translated.  Accompanied with that, there needs to be a standard set of formats that everyone needs to agree upon. Over the past year, the CAD Industry has gotten closer to a common data format standardization, but it is still a work in progress.An example of these issues was going from UG to BRL CAD.  Unfortunately there is no direct translator, so the team sought out another method. The current solution consists of exporting out of UG using the Elysium translator that creates a neutral format, which is similar to a STEP or IGES file. The model then gets sent through another Elysium translator that tessellates the model. From that, ARL is able to translate the model into BRL CAD using another translator developed by ARL. This entire process can take up to 48 hours to complete for one model.When dealing with ARL for the human figure modeling, the requests were for JT files, from Pro/E and UG. Because there is a direct translator for both UG and Pro/E, the steps needed to translate the models were greatly reduced. Translating out of both did not pose a problem when it came to getting the data out of each package. The bigger issues were the file sizes it produced. The solution was taking the exported assemblies into VisMockup, thinning out the unwanted parts in the model, and then resaving the model. This could also have been done in either UG or Pro/E, but  VisMockup was used to save time. As for the transportability analysis, the request was for 3D Studio Max. The best results were found by thinning out the model in Pro/E or UG and then exporting to VRML. The next step was to import the model into 3D Studio Max and reduce the polygon count for visualization. After each assembly is complete the vehicle is reassembled. The result was taking the polygon count from three million to under thirty thousand. It was found that the VRML output of Pro/E was not the same as UG which made the process twice as long. The time it took to complete one entire vehicle was five full working days. 8.  LESSONS LEARNEDThe following is a list of lessons learned in acquiring and translating the CAD data for the Stryker family of vehicles.1) Before putting the contract out, ask the supporting agencies how they plan to use the CAD data, what software packages they will use, and what data preferences they have.  This information will help determine the required CAD Data formats. 2) Determine what neutral formats maybe available to translate data to.3) Provide the correct wording in the contract to allow the data to be requested multiple times.4) Allow enough time for contractor or third party to convert data into the multiple formats that maybe required.  Provide some extra time for the unknown problems when converting data from one format to another.5) Also keep in mind, that the speed, memory and graphics card in the computer being used, can effect how quick the CAD data can be visualized and translated.6) Verify that the CAD data includes a description of the assemblies and the top level assembly file for the entire vehicle and sub-assemblies.9.  FUTURE DIRECTIONSome of the areas that will be investigated are developing automated procedures for handling data, incorporating the use of the Stryker’s Integrated Data Environment (IDE) to handle the data, developing better translators, looking at the different visualization packages available to view the data.10.  CONCLUSIONThe digital vehicle information as a deliverable on the Stryker program has been very important in helping solve problems quickly and to speed up the testing phase of the program. At the same time with the data being used to support multiple efforts from virtual prototype reviews to live fire testing, a lot of lessons have been learned on how to handle the different data formats required.  The digital data will continue to be useful as the family of vehicles are fielded, modified and sustained into the future.11.  REFERENCEBCT Simulation Support Planhttp://dmoz.org/Computers/CAD/desc.htmlAuthor BiographiesJohn M. Brabbs is a Senior Virtual Reality Specialist with Electronic Data System’s (EDS) Modeling Simulation and Collaborative Solutions in Troy, Michigan where he has been employed since September 2000.  Prior to his current position he worked as a Senior Project Engineer at the US Army’s Tank – Automotive Research, Development and Engineering Center, from 1987-2000, as the VETRONICS Simulation Facility (VSF) Team Leader.  His research interests are in distributed simulation, virtual reality and software engineering.  Mr. Brabbs holds a B.S.E degree in Computer Engineering and a Master’s of Science in Computer Science both from Oakland University in Rochester, Michigan.Sharon Chase is a Computer Engineer at the US Army’s Tank-Automotive Command (TACOM).  She currently is the Modeling and Simulation Manager for the Brigade Combat Team.  She holds a Bachelors degree in Computer Science and Engineering from the Milwaukee School of Engineering, and a Masters Degree in Software Engineering from Monmouth College in New Jersey.Scott M. Aubuchon is a Virtual Reality Associate with Electronic Data System’s (EDS) in Troy, Michigan where he has been employed since May 1998.  Over the past year Scott has headed up the data translation efforts for the Brigade Combat Team.  He is currently enrolled at the University of Michigan majoring in Business, with a minor in Operational Management. 