United States Air Force Distributed Mission Training (DMT)Grover LollarHQ USAF/XOOT (STI)1700 N. Moore Street Suite 1650Arlington, Virginia 22209[1] 703 841-4660 x244 HYPERLINK mailto:grover.lollar@pentagon.af.mil grover.lollar@pentagon.af.milKey Words:Simulation, Distributed, TrainingAbstractContemporary military leaders are faced with numerous obstacles to effective training. High costs, increased OPTEMPO/PERSTEMPO, limited airspace availability, aircrew safety, and security issues are just some of the factors that hinder a commander’s ability to train his forces.  In response to these challenges, the US Air Force is in the process of fielding the Distributed Mission Training (DMT) system of systems.  DMT is designed to meet individual, team, and inter-team training requirements by linking live, virtual (human-in-the-loop), and constructive (computer generated) entities in a common synthetic environment.   DMT satisfies a commander’s requirement to train mission essential competencies by providing the warfighter readily available, in garrison access to multiple, simultaneous, and large training or rehearsal events.  DMT’s primary objective is to enable warfighters to train as they would expect to fight.  Its team training and inter-team training capabilities will give operational units the ability to practice high-end cooperative combat skills on a daily basis.  In addition, its mission rehearsal capabilities will enable Aerospace Expeditionary Force (AEF) or joint force commanders to prepare and assess their forces for real-world missions.  The primary component of the initial DMT environment is the unit-level mission training center (MTC).  MTCs are primarily composed of linked, real-time, high fidelity simulators that accurately depict opposing forces, weather, terrain, and other relevant environmental factors. Real-world mission planning and intelligence systems and products can be added to DMT when units need to train the entire mission process (mission planning through mission execution).  Department of Defense (DOD) and industry standards are used to establish interoperability among DMT systems and real world systems. This allows geographically separated participants to transmit, receive, and process information and share in a common simulation against a realistic, high density threat environment.  Time-critical information such as electronic emissions and/or visual cues of other entities is transmitted, received, and processed in near real-time to create an effective interactive training environment.  Realistic mission training includes the capability to train in theater-specific environments across the full spectrum of military operations.  The DMT trainers, training systems, and training operations will be acquired through a variety of means, using various types of resources.  The most revolutionary acquisition approach is the Commercial Training Simulation Services (CTSS) strategy.   CTSS is a new fee for service acquisition strategy in which the training systems are built and owned by the contractors who in turn provide services at a contracted rate. The contractor selected for a particular system owns all hardware and software, and is responsible for all trainer concurrency and technology upgrades to match the latest aircraft configuration.  Inherent in the service is the embedded cost of maintaining trainer concurrency.  However, CTSS is not the correct strategy for every situation.  Several users are employing more traditional acquisition methods and some have already invested significant resources towards acquiring and operating their own training systems. When new training systems are not required, legacy systems may be upgraded to participate in DMT activities.  Modifications to both hardware and software are typically required to integrate the legacy trainer into the new environment.  Legacy modifications, integration and sustainment will normally be paid for through traditional funding methods.  DMT is no longer just a concept – it is a reality.  Networked multi-ship fighter mission training has been tested and accepted by the community as a significant step forward in simulation training.  As we move through our second year of operational training, we will soon begin routine training by linking dissimilar aircraft platforms and will expand our ability to conduct mission rehearsals from the warfighters’ home stations. 1	IntroductionDistributed Mission Training (DMT) is an Air Force readiness preparation tool for contemporary military operations. It is not a single program, but a federation of integrated, complementary domains.  Each domain is focused on a specific set of warfighters and the Air Force tasks or missions they perform.  DMT will provide these warfighters with team training and mission rehearsal capabilities using advanced mission simulators, simulations, and real-world systems networked together to form a distributed synthetic battlefield.  DMT capitalizes on today’s emerging technologies to elevate training beyond fundamental skills to integrated aerospace operations training and mission rehearsals.  It will provide a path to mission success as well as help our air and space forces maintain their competitive advantage.  Establishing this readiness preparation capability is an ambitious enterprise.  Some of the technologies needed to execute DMT exist today, others are being refined, and a few will require significant additional effort.  Furthermore, the nature of contemporary warfare, both its policy and technical dimensions, is becoming increasingly complex.  As a result, the implementation of DMT must be mission-oriented from both a warfighting doctrine and a technology perspective.The 20th century has witnessed remarkable transformations in military power.  One transformation has been the technology applied to military weapons.  The range and lethality of weapons has extended the dimensions of battlefield.  Another transformation has been the expanded uses of military power.  Recent engagements in the Balkans, Southwest Asia and the Caribbean have demonstrated that the nation is willing to use its military power globally to pursue policies that extend well beyond the physical defense of the nation’s geographical borders.  The globalization of military engagement has produced a policy paradox between commitment and restraint.  While the nation is less constrained in the reasons for which it is willing to apply military power, it is much more constrained in the application of lethal force.  For example, the use of advanced technology weapons and media access to military operations create an expectation that America’s aerospace forces should conduct operations that achieve rapid results without collateral damage.  Information warfare, often “fought” in the commercial broadcast arena, is an increasingly important consideration.  No military operation is conducted without considering how tactical-level activity impacts the attainment of policy goals.  As a result, the tactics warfighters use in combat are often directly shaped by national or coalition policies, a complexity most current Air Force training programs cannot address. Technology has complicated the traditional concept of the battlefield.  Digital technologies have revolutionized nearly all combat and combat support weapons systems.  Aircraft, for example, can be given completely new capabilities just by updating their software.  Likewise, munitions have increased in range and accuracy.  The application of technology to combat, however, has not simplified the warfighters’ tasks but created the need for a complex set of skills.  The distinction between information and action has been blurred by the pervasive use of multi-spectral sensors and weapons.  Precision guided munitions and night operations, for example, both rely on technologies or systems that are also used for surveillance and reconnaissance.  The “battlefield” has been replaced by a “battlespace” where military power is applied to a diverse range of missions.  Increasingly, composite forces of integrated teams are used to execute these missionsContemporary military operations therefore require a warfighting team to employ complex weapons systems, to accomplish complex missions, as part of a complex force.  Training for these weapons and employment operations requires extensive airspace, large ranges, and more composite training opportunities.  Readiness training of aircrews in weapons system-specific operations should be conducted in conjunction with DMT.  “Aircrews do not have the capability to safely and affordably train the way they will be required to fight.  Safety considerations, mission complexity, airspace and range restrictions, real-world commitments and costs limit the ability of Combat Air Force (CAF) aircrews to effectively train across the spectrum of Air Force core competencies using aircraft sorties.” For these reasons, the Air Force is pursuing DMT to prepare combat and combat support teams for complex, contemporary military operations.  DMT and rehearsal events will be based primarily on the wartime missions of their units.  Secondary reasons for conducting DMT activities include aircraft emergency and instrument procedural training, weapons system proficiency training, tactics development, and exercise support.The Air Force DMT program is organized into five primary domains, each with specific proponents, users and focus.  The functional capabilities of the DMT domains are categorized by the tasks found in the Air Force task list.  Air Force doctrine defines the core competencies and functions of aerospace power.  These, in turn, establish the Air Force Task List, a “comprehensive framework that expresses all Air Force activities contributing to the defense of the nation and its national interests.”  Additional domains such as one for combat support (DMT-CS) may be established when appropriate and when resources are available.  A DMT-CS domain could provide valuable distributed training to our logistics, maintenance, medical and force protection personnel.Primary mission essential capabilities are those which describe the desired functionality of a DMT domain.  Secondary mission essential capabilities are those which result from attaining the primary capability.  For example, the ability of DMT-A to train aircrews in Global Attack would also provide a limited ability to perform Precision Engagement.  The same relationship exists between Air Superiority and Information Superiority with respect to attacking enemy air defenses.Mission essential competencies are the individual and collective skills needed to accomplish combat missions.  As discussed previously, the technology embedded in advanced weapons and sensors requires the development and maintenance of complex skills and knowledge focused on mission performance.  However, the weapons themselves are often too expensive to expend in frequent training events and are further restricted because of security and safety considerations.  DMT may be the only way that warfighters can acquire the knowledge and practice the skills necessary to effectively employ complex weapons and weapons systems.  Because of this mission performance orientation, the approach to DMT training and rehearsal is significantly different than the methods employed in initial training courses.  Initial training programs concentrate on teaching the individual skills needed to operate the system.  Such programs are oriented to novices learning weapons system operation.  For example, formal fighter aircraft and bomber training programs concentrate on applying basic flight skills to the characteristics of a specific weapons system.  Normally, formal training programs conducted by training units do not attempt to replicate the combat environment.  Operational units conduct combat qualification training known as “continuation training”.  This type of training is conducted at home bases and at deployed events such as Red Flag, Blue Flag, etc.  Operational units also have extensive programs for combat leadership training.  Flight lead upgrade (FLUG) is one example.  In FLUG training, young wingmen are taught combat leadership skills.  The following descriptions explain the categories of mission essential competencies in terms of a hierarchy of combat skills.2	Acquisition Approaches The DMT trainers, training systems, and training operations will be acquired through a variety of means, using various types of resources.  The most revolutionary acquisition approach is the Commercial Training Simulation Services (CTSS) strategy.   CTSS is a new fee for service acquisition strategy in which the training systems are built and owned by the contractors who in turn provide services at a contracted rate. The contractor selected for a particular system owns all hardware and software, and is responsible for all trainer concurrency and technology upgrades to match the latest aircraft configuration.  Inherent in the service is the embedded cost of maintaining trainer concurrency.  However, CTSS is not the correct strategy for every situation.  Several users are employing more traditional acquisition methods and some have already invested significant resources towards acquiring and operating their own training systems. When new training systems are not required, legacy systems may be upgraded to participate in DMT activities.  Modifications to both hardware and software are typically required to integrate the legacy trainer into the new environment.  Legacy modifications, integration and sustainment will normally be paid for through traditional funding methods.3	DMT Operations and Integration (O&I)	The DMT Operations and Integration (O&I) contractor provides the technical and management expertise, and support necessary to define and ensure the complete interoperability and interconnectivity of federate systems within the DMT Program. The DMT O&I program will provide the services required to integrate multiple federate systems in support of team training.  The DMT O&I contractor is the primary provider of integration services to accomplish inter-team training objectives and the architect for the DMT system to ensure the design fully supports system growth identified in the DMT Federate Systems Projection.  In a collaborative effort with the federate systems providers, the O&I contractor will identify and determine solutions for issues associated with DMT system architecture and integration requirements. The standards must be appropriate for all DMT domains and then used by all domains to insure compatibility among Federate Systems. The DMT O&I contractor establishes and maintains DMT system standards that provide for interoperability among federates.  The DMT system standards address interface, integration, and performance standards of DMT federations.  These standards will be established with the participation of DMT stakeholders.   As a result, the Major Commands (MAJCOMs) are assured of a level playing field when they are ready to participate in DMT.As the O&I contractor leads the requirements definition for synthetic environments/forces developed for DMT federations.  They also establish a process to implement system standards for DMT that conform to the policy/practices of Joint Technical Architecture and High Level Architecture (JTA/HLA). The respective federates accomplish their own design implementation based on the DMT system standards.  O&I provides federation management services required to integrate all federate systems within the DMT system.  O&I plans the evolution of the DMT system, and performs the efforts necessary to maintain, assess, and upgrade the capabilities of the system.  They also develop and maintain an integrated roadmap to introduce new or enhanced capabilities required to meet the training objectives for the DMT system.4	Research and Development (R&D)Research and Development (R&D) efforts under the DMT Technology Investment Strategy (TIS), refine original requirements.  They are performed as tasked by the government within the scope of synthetic environment, synthetic forces, HLA, communications, and visual systems in support of aerospace training.  These tasks may be in the form of demonstrations, experiments, studies, analyses, and tools development or application software development.DMT R&D is directed toward future requirements.  A coordinated and fully funded R&D program directed toward meeting these advanced requirements has potential for cost savings/cost avoidance in a number of areas.  It minimizes duplication of R&D efforts and should result in lower cost government acquisitions.  It may also lead to a reduced need for major simulation suppliers to recoup investment costs in challenging technical areas.  It increases the potential for standard commercial solutions that will meet stringent mission rehearsal requirements, and for military applications to the commercial market.  Integration costs may also be reduced due to enhanced simulation interoperability through standard approaches.  There are five major areas of R&D investment where efforts may significantly improve the near term implementation and operation of DMT as it evolves:4.1	Synthetic Forces	O&I is concerned with development of selected synthetic force models to allow direct insertion of those models into a DMT federation. There is a requirement for increased realism in reactive computer generated systems (blue, red and gray) as DMT moves from training to mission rehearsal.  There is also a need for increased integration of computer generated opposing forces to reflect realistic command structures and decision making.  Evolving requirements drive the need for intelligent opposing forces operating in integrated command and control structures representative of the projected operational theaters to provide a realistic, challenging training and, ultimately, mission rehearsal environment for aircrews prior to deployment.4.2	Synthetic Natural Environments		Evolving requirements drive the need for increasingly realistic representations of the expected natural environments in projected operational theaters to provide a high fidelity training (and ultimately mission rehearsal) environment for aircrews prior to deployment.  O&I is concerned with development and implementation of selected synthetic natural environment models to allow direct insertion into a DMT federation.  The DMT program includes a process that supports efforts by DMT contractors to address near term requirements.  Increased realism in environmental representations as DMT moves from training to mission rehearsal, which is an important aspect of near term R&D efforts.  Realistic limitations introduced by environmental conditions on tasks such as target detection, acquisition and identification are also of interest.4.3	High Level Architecture (HLA) Runtime InfrastructureThere is a requirement to implement HLA to meet the real time performance requirements of DMT and to develop specialized tools to rapidly implement, monitor and support HLA federations.  It will also be necessary to tailor a high performance HLA runtime infrastructure (RTI) to support DMT training requirements.  HLA was developed to meet the general need to link a broad range of applications simulations including analysis, test and evaluation, and training, not the stringent real-time requirements of DMT.   Although the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) developed HLA, it is not within their charter to tailor HLA to meet the specific needs of DMT.  Therefore R&D is necessary to provide a high fidelity training (and ultimately mission rehearsal) environment for aircrews prior to deployment to the operational theater.  The RTI software must be optimized for the specific needs of the real-time training community of DMT.  Of these needs, latency is one of the biggest concerns.  Without adequate R&D in low latency RTI techniques, close interactions of highly dynamic aircraft would not provide realistic training.  Aerial refueling training also requires a similar technical need for research into low latency RTIs.4.4	CommunicationsInterface with real world command and control systems is critical as DMT evolves from support of training to a realistic mission rehearsal capability.  New communication media may need to be implemented as the commercial infrastructure evolves.  Implementation of low latency multi-level security (MLS) capability is also required for mission rehearsal.  The primary communication infrastructure for DMT is commercially developed, but DMT must also meet additional specialized military requirement such as the JTA and MLS.  The rapidly changing nature of training requirements stressing real world links to the C2I infrastructure, and the need to implement some form of MLS, influence evolving user requirements to provide a high fidelity training and, ultimately, mission rehearsal environment for aircrews prior to deployment to the operational theater.  Coupled with the continuing commercial development of alternative communication media, this is a critical R&D area. Near term, the effort in this area will concentrate on evaluation of requirements for connectivity to real world systems and associated MLS requirements.  The implementation of the first DMT federation linking C2 and strike assets in this time frame provides a baseline for this evaluation. This R&D area will also address technology issues associated with the evolution of the infrastructure supporting DMT as it moves toward all optical networks. Mission rehearsal requires a high level of realism in the representation of real world command and control links.  Unless the capability is provided to represent C2 accurately and links are eventually provided to operational C2 systems, proper planning and execution of the mission within real world constraints will not be achievable.  MLS plays an important role in the accuracy and realism of the training because without it the operational data will be different from real world situations.4.5	Enhanced visual systems	Visual system technology is critical to obtaining maximum effectiveness from DMT training.  R&D is required to transition research based visual systems to development.  New visual system technologies must be demonstrated in operational environments and tested in their ability to meet training requirements.  Evolving requirements drive the need for increasingly realistic visual representations to provide a high fidelity training and, ultimately, mission rehearsal environment for aircrews prior to deployment.5	Technology Investment Strategy (TIS)The Technology Investment Strategy (TIS) represents a strategic, user-domain focused technology roadmap for investing in technology areas that can be mapped directly to mission essential capabilities.  The purpose of research and development (R&D) in the areas listed in the TIS is to enhance mission effectiveness, provide skills development and sustain proficiency in mission essential tasks. The goal of the TIS development process was to take into account critical DMT R&D technologies, but most importantly, provide a technology path that was centered around Air Force mission areas and tasks.  In addition, the TIS provided feedback to the user DMT domains as to their technology needs and as a tool for building the Air Force DMT POM processes.  In developing the TIS, there was both a bottom up review and a top down analysis where the following were considered: existing technologies available, acquisition strategies, mission essential task lists, joint task lists and the Training Implementation Plans (TIPs). Concurrently with the user-input side, there was a review of other DOD programs and laboratories to ensure there were no glaring cases of duplication of effort in the areas being selected.  The TIS assumes both developing new technologies and monitoring emerging technologies.  It is intended to serve as an umbrella that encompasses research and development efforts not only at the laboratory level, but efforts in industry and academia as well.  In addition, the TIS assumes that leveraging existing technologies and R&D efforts is part of the investment strategy.  While the TIS represent a complete list of desired technology attributes for DMT systems, it is not meant to imply that all of the areas and sub-areas are funded.The TIS will also be kept current with changing funding strategies at Air Force and MAJCOM levels, changing mission requirements at the user domain level, and changes in technology.  It will be reviewed semi-annually, at a minimum, to ensure that the roadmap is current from a technology standpoint and addresses current and changing mission requirements.  The TIS review will also serve as input to Air Force and MAJCOM level technology insertion boards whose charter will be to monitor technologies and recommend candidates for transition from  R&D programs into development.Establishing a DMT system that exhibits the attributes requires research in and the development of components built upon the integration of the five technology areas embodied in the TIS, which was developed as a part of the DMT Roadmap.  The five technology areas in the TIS are:Training Systems TechnologyInformation TechnologyInterconnection TechnologyVisual Systems TechnologyRepresentation Technology6	SecurityThe DMT Program has the potential of being a high-value, high-profile force-multiplier for the USAF and other Services’ operational weapon systems.   One of the many challenges in the DMT RDT&E and operational integration process is the implementation of highly effective and practical technical security management standards, procedures, and practices. Likewise, it is critical to the ultimate effectiveness of DMT that DOD staff agencies responsible for the planning, RDT&E, and operational integration of the DMT program identify DMT-related security issues and vulnerabilities early in the development and integration process.The importance of DMT to the warfighter's real-world training and mission rehearsal process assures that DMT will be a high priority target for foreign intelligence collection efforts. Ensuring protection of critical information will require the application of DOD’s most robust security technology coupled with effective security policy and meticulous adherence to good security practices. DMT systems and subsystems will require constant and detailed surveillance for vulnerabilities as they are initially tested, declared operational and technically reconfigured as additional components are added/replaced. 7	USAF DMT DOMAINSThe Air Force DMT program is organized into five primary domains, each with specific proponents, users and focus.  The functional capabilities of the DMT domains are categorized by the tasks found in the Air Force task list.  Air Force doctrine defines the core competencies and functions of aerospace power.  These, in turn, establish the Air Force Task List, a “comprehensive framework that expresses all Air Force activities contributing to the defense of the nation and its national interests.”  Additional domains such as one for combat support (DMT-CS) may be established when appropriate and when resources are available.  A DMT-CS domain could provide valuable distributed training to our logistics, maintenance, medical and force protection personnel.	7.1	DMT-A, AircrewAir Combat Command (ACC) is leading the DMT-A effort for the Air Force.  ACC, along with United States Air Forces, Europe (USAFE), and Pacific Air Forces (PACAF), the Air National Guard (ANG) and the Air Force Reserve Command (AFRC), are the primary using commands.  Air Education and Training Command (AETC) may also join the DMT-A effort in order to procure advanced simulator services for some fighter training units.  AETC fully supports ACC’s vision of DMT and will continue to train students based on current ACC graduation requirements.  This training focuses on combat skills (inter-team, team, and individual) that are limited by current resources.  AETC is interested in participating in DMT for permanent party continuation training and to support CAF training and mission rehearsal and will follow ACC’s lead as far as concurrency is concerned and have initiated the CTSS contract.  DMT-A is focused on the readiness needs of ACC, USAFE, PACAF, ANG, and AFRC combat aircrews.  The primary warfighters using DMT – A will be:Pilots, weapons systems officers, and navigators of primary combat aircraft (e.g., F-15C, F-16C, B-1)Weapons controllers and directors of combat support aircraft (e.g., AWACS, JSTARS, Rivet Joint)Weapons controllers assigned to Air Control Squadrons based with fighter wings7.2	DMT-M, MobilityAir Mobility Command (AMC) is the lead command for DMT-M.  AMC, USAFE, PACAF, Air Force Reserve Command (AFRC) and the Air National Guard (ANG) are the primary using commands.   As the lead command for mobility simulators, AMC will maintain HLA certification for mobility aircraft WSTs used by AETC.  AETC also fully supports AMC’s vision to upgrade simulators for C-130 and KC-135 FTUs.  Altus and Little Rock AFBs will continue to follow existing regulations for lead-command support of training systems through leveraging existing systems (where practical); providing cost effective concurrency engineering; and maintaining affordability in sustainment costs.The specific training audience will be mobility pilots and, for those aircraft where the crew position exists, flight engineers, navigators, and boom operators.  AMC does not expect to link loadmaster trainers.7.3	DMT-SO, Special OperationsAir Force Special Operations Command (AFSOC) is the lead command for DMT-SO.  AFSOC, its subordinate units, and AFRC are the primary users.  AFSOC is prepared to join any training/rehearsal Federation through HLA compliant simulators that fulfills an AFSOC training and mission rehearsal requirement.   AFSOC will support any initiative by Air Education and Training Command (AETC) to join the DMT-SO effort in order to provide additional capabilities to AFSOC aircrews training at AETC facilities.DMT-SO is focused on the readiness needs of AFSOC combat aircrews.  The primary warfighters using DMT-SO will be:Pilots, navigators, electronic warfare officers, fire control officers, flight engineers, and sensor operators of primary combat aircraft (AC130U, MC-130E/H, and CV-22).Loadmasters and scanners will be able to accomplish limited training.The Special Tactics Air Ground Interface Simulator (STAGIS) under development for the 720 STG will eventually be included in the baseline of HLA capable simulators used by AFSOC.7.4	DMT-S, SpaceAir Force Space Command (AFSPC) is the lead command for DMT-S.  AFSPC along with United States Space Command (USSPACECOM), North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD), and United States Strategic Command (USSTRATCOM) are the primary using commands.  DMT-S fills a gap in today's training for command and control (C2) tasks.  As such, DMT-S training tasks will be very comparable with those of the DMT-C2 domain, although serving a different training population.  In addition, DMT-S technologies and solutions will also benefit Air Education and Training Command (AETC) training for AFSPC, USSPACECOM, NORAD, and USSTRATCOM tasks.7.5	DMT-C2, Command and ControlHQ Air Combat Command (ACC) in conjunction with the Aerospace Command and Control, Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance Center (AC2ISRC) are leading the DMT-C2 effort for the Air Force.  HQ Air Combat Command (ACC), Air National Guard (ANG), United States Air Forces Europe (USAFE), Pacific Air Forces (PACAF), Air Force Reserve Command (AFRC), Air Forces Space Command (AFSPACE), and Air Force Special Operations Command (AFSOC) are the primary using commands. It is not envisioned that Air Mobility Command (AMC) and Air Education Training Command (AETC) will be significant users of the HQ ACC DMT-C2 capability until DMT-C2 has evolved to a state where mission rehearsal is feasible.DMT-C2 is primarily focused on the operational level of war to include execution of tactical level processes such as re-targeting, time critical targeting, close air support and cross cueing of ISR platforms for situational awareness mandated by operational directives required to meet strategic objectives.  As a result, DMT-C2 will embellish the combat readiness of C2 Warriors in HQ ACC, USAFE, PACAF, AFSPACE and AFSOC.8	Air Reserve Component DMTThe Air Reserve Component (ARC) is comprised of the Air National Guard (ANG) and Air Force Reserve Command (AFRC).  ARC units are following the leads of ACC, AETC and AMC in respect to their DMT efforts. ARC units typically need more familiarity training than event specific training due to their higher experience levels of the average aircrew.  The training challenges facing the ARC are different from those facing the active units.  The much higher number of training sites required by the ARC means that any training equipment would have a lower usage rate than the active counter-part.  Both the Guard and AF Reserve units must maintain training capability at the home unit to support the part-time aircrews.  Traveling to centralized training sites uses valuable training time.  In addition, the units have a diversified training requirement based on different experience levels and designated specific missions.  Any system should retain the flexibility required to allow the unit to tailor the training to the unit's individual needs.  These needs will have to be addressed on an individual basis, as each unit is equipped.  The rehearsal requirement should be very similar to the capability required by the active duty units.9	SummaryDMT is no longer just a concept – it is a reality.  Networked multi-ship fighter mission training has been tested and accepted by the community as a significant step forward in simulation training.  As we move through our second year of operational training, we will soon begin routine training linking dissimilar aircraft platforms and will expand our ability to conduct mission rehearsals from the warfighters’ home stations.  The USAF is dedicated to improving combat capabilities and making DMT the next generation in AF readiness training.10	References Operational Requirements Document (ORD), CAF (USAF) 009-93-I-A, for Distributed Mission Training, 8 Oct 97, p 22AFDD 1-1, Air Force Task List (AFTL), 12 August 1998, page 43 AFDD 1-1, Air Force Task List (AFTL), 12 August 1998, page 411	AcronymsACC				Air Combat Command (USAF)AEF				Aerospace Expeditionary Force (USAF)AETC			Air Education & Training Command (USAF)AFB				Air Force BaseAFRC			Air Force Reserve Command (USAF)AFSOC			Air Force Special Operations Command (USAF)AFSPC			Air Force Space Command (USAF)AMC			Air Mobility Command (USAF)ANG			Air National Guard  ARC				Air Reserve Component (USAF)AWACS			Air Warning and Control System (E-3A aircraft)CAF				Combat Air Force (USAF)C2				Command and ControlCTSS			Commercial Training Simulation ServicesDMT			Distributed Mission TrainingDOD			Department of Defense (US)DMSO			Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (US)FLUG			Flight Lead UpgradeHLA				High Level ArchitectureJSTARS			Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar SystemJTA				Joint Technical ArchitectureMAJCOM			Major Command (USAF)MLA			Multi-Level SecurityMTC			Mission Training Center (USAF)NORAD			North American Aerospace Defense Command (US)O&I				Operation & IntegrationPACAF			Pacific Command (USAF)R&D			Research and DevelopmentRTI				Runtime InfrastructureSTAGIS			Special Tactics Air Ground Interface SimulatorTIP				Training Implementation PlanTIS				Technology Investment StrategyUSSPACECOM	United States Space Command USSTRATCOM	United States Strategic CommandWST				Weapons System TrainerAuthor BiographyGrover Lollar				 Operational Requirements Document (ORD), CAF (USAF) 009-93-I-A, for Distributed Mission Training, 8 Oct 97, p 2. AFDD 1-1, page 4 AFDD 1-1, page 4