The SIMCI OIPT: A Systematic Approach to Solving C4I/M&S InteroperabilityMichael R. Hieb, Ph.D.IITRI/AB Technologies Group1901 N. Beauregard St.Alexandria, VA   22311-1705(703) 933-3376 HYPERLINK "mailto:mhieb@iitri.org" mhieb@iitri.orgRon SprinkleThe AEgis Technologies Group, Inc.12565 Research Parkway, Suite 390Orlando, Fl   32826(407) 380-5001 HYPERLINK "mailto:rsprinkle@AEgisTG.com" rsprinkle@AEgisTG.comWilliam SudnikovichAtlantic Consulting Services, Inc.167 Avenue at the CommonShrewsbury, NJ 07702(732) 460-9416 HYPERLINK "mailto:mhieb@iitri.org" wsudnikovich@acsinc-nj.comStephen R. WhitsonThe MITRE CorporationWhitfill Central Technical Support Facility53rd and North StreetFort Hood, TX 76544(254) 532-8321 x2063 HYPERLINK "mailto:swhitson@mitre.org" swhitson@mitre.orgThomas KelsoUS Army STRICOM12350 Research ParkwayOrlando, Florida  32826-3276(407) 384-3863 HYPERLINK "mailto:mhieb@iitri.org" Thomas_Kelso@stricom.army.milKeywords: Battle Management Language (BML), Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (C4ISR), Army Battle Command Systems (ABCS), Joint Common Data Base (JCDB), Land Command and Control Information Exchange Data Model (LC2IEDM), Future Combat Systems (FCS).ABSTRACT:  C4I to M&S interoperability is currently facilitated by software interfaces established between specific systems.  The development of C4I to M&S interfaces has not been considered one of the primary design requirements for either type of system.  This has led to systemic problems in using M&S systems to support C4I system testing, training & experimentation.The Army is addressing these interoperability issues through the Simulation-to-C4I Interoperability (SIMCI) Overarching Integrated Product Team (OIPT).  The SIMCI OIPT was established in November 1999 by the Deputy Under Secretary of the Army for Operations Research (DUSA(OR)) and the Director of Information Systems for Command, Control, Communications, and Computers (DISC4) to address the lack of interoperability between Army M&S and C4I Systems. The SIMCI OIPT is Co-Chaired by US Army Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM), PM Digitized Training and Program Executive Office, Command, Control and Communications Tactical (PEO-C3T) Readiness Engineering Office (REO), and has a formal charter signed by the DUSA(OR) & the DISC4 April 2000.  It reports to the Army Model and Simulation Executive Council (AMSEC).  This paper provides an overview of the OIPT’s Mission, Organization, Technical Vision and Programs.In addition to describing the SIMCI OIPT Organization, this paper also investigates the factors that led to the formation of such an organization.  These factors include the need to develop coordinated technical solutions that are acceptable to both the C4I & M&S communities.  However, other factors, not commonly acknowledged, are in the area of Policy & Procedure – such as Certification Procedures and Coordination of Requirements.  The number of systems involved is another factor, and one that the Army is attempting to deal with via such initiatives as Unit Set Fielding and Software Blocking.  While SIMCI deals primarily with the Army Tactical C4I Systems, the System-of Systems context is much broader, including Weapons Systems, Communications Systems and Army Enterprise Systems. In order to solve the problems identified above,  the SIMCI OIPT has developed a strategic plan for FY03-FY09, that is based on several Reference Models and Analyses.  The working assumption of the OIPT is that complete interoperability can only be addressed by consideration of several different aspects such as Standards, Architectures, Data Models and Processes.1. Introduction1.1 The ProblemMany Army Simulations need to interoperate with C4I Systems, such as the Army’s Tactical C4I Systems, the Army Battle Command Systems (ABCS).  Simulations are increasingly used to drive training and test events as well as being integrated into operational C4I systems for Embedded Training, Course of Action Analysis (COAA), and Mission Rehearsal applications. C4ISR to M&S interoperability is currently facilitated by software interfaces established between specific systems.  The development of C4ISR to M&S interfaces has not been considered one of the primary design requirements for either type of system.  Most of the existing C4ISR interfaces to M&S have been developed as a separate component, added on after initial M&S development.  Existing interfaces typically handle a small subset of the messages or data necessary for interoperability, requiring significant human intervention to achieve realism for the training audience in an exercise.  M&S systems, for instance, rarely handle free text messages or consider how a message is carried (communication effects).  C4ISR systems have been subject to different design constraints than M&S systems, resulting in different standards, message formats and protocols.  Since any interface between the systems must align these differences, the interface can become quite complex  Maintenance costs for these interfaces will rapidly escalate without common solutions.  Interoperability and Simulation Infrastructure must be improved to support the Army Transformation.The problems of interfacing Simulations to C4I systems are well documented [2,3,5,11,13,14,25] and are not unique to the Army.  Experience with the Defense Modeling Simulation Office’s Modular Reconfigurable C4I Interface [10] and Data Standards [9, 12, 30,31] led the Army Simulation Community to look at why it was so difficult to develop C4I/M&S Interfaces.  It was found that there are intractable problems that stem from a lack of awareness of the “other” communities’ approach.  For example, Simulations being developed, that would drive Army C4I Systems, were unaware of C4I Data Standards [9].  Other problems related to the lack of, or inconsistent, requirements.Thus, while the problem is manifested in software interfaces, it stems from a fundamental lack of interoperability, and can only be solved by approaching the problem in both the Simulation & C4I communitiesThis paper describes how the Army is dealing with this interoperability problem.  As will be described, a crucial aspect of the problem is how to determine what all of the factors are that need to be addressed to solve the problem.  Much of the rest of the paper is devoted to this effort.1.2 Why an Overarching Integrated Product Team?The problem described so far cannot be solved by developing better interfaces or software products.  It was recognized that there must be coordination and cooperation between the C4I and Simulation Communities, and between the various development organizations.  While the cooperation between organizations could be addressed by an Integrated Product Team, two factors led to a larger organization – an “Overarching Integrated Project Team”.  The first was that the organization would have to bring together groups from both the C4I and Simulation Communities.  The second was that the area was so broad that there might be IPTs working in conjunction with the OIPT that focused on only one aspect of interoperability.  One such IPT is the AMSO-chartered Environmental Data Base IPT working on issues relating to Terrain Data bases and Environmental Representations in M&S & C4I systems.In November of 1999 the DUSA(OR) & DISC4 signed an “Integration of Army M&S and C4I Systems” Memo that established the SIMCI OIPT.  That year, the SIMCI OIPT oversaw approximately 35 projects related to all aspects of interoperability.  This was the first organization of its kind in the Simulation Community, that brought together interface developers and the C4I development Community.  The unique SIMCI Organization is described later in Section 3.The Army has strongly supported the SIMCI OIPT since 1999 and has funded it each year at approximately the same level of resources.  The SIMCI OIPT has, in turn, progressively developed 3 year, 5 year and then 7 year plans that have enabled the SIMCI requirements to be considered for the Army Budget.1.3 Roadmap to the rest of the paperThe remainder of this paper is organized as follows:  Section 2 gives the Charter of the SIMCI OIPT.  Section 3 describes the SIMCI OIPT Organization. Section 4 discusses the strategic plans and technical vision of SIMCI OIPT; Section 5 has a brief status of selected SIMCI initiatives; and Section 6 concludes with a discussion of the challenges that the SIMCI Organization faces as well as opportunities that are appearing.2. The SIMCI OIPT CharterThe following three sections are from the SIMCI OIPT charter, giving the OIPT’s Mission, Objectives & Functions [19].2.1 MissionThe mission of the SIMCI OIPT is to provide recommendations on Army level policy to the Army Model and Simulation Executive Council (AMSEC) for improving interoperability between the Models and Simulations (M&S) and Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I) Domains.2.2 ObjectivesSeamless interoperability between M&S and C4I systems.Alignment of M&S and C4I standards, architectures, and common C4I components.Identification of requirements for simulations and C4I to support interoperability2.3  FunctionsThe SIMCI OIPT:1.  Oversees development of Army SIMCI policies, plans, programs, publications, and procedures.2.  Encourages improved communication and coordination among SIMCI activities.3.  Identifies investments that have high value return in fulfilling the Army’s interoperability requirements, or that fill gaps in current SIMCI capabilities.  Based upon this analysis, the OIPT recommends SIMCI goals, objectives, and an investment strategy and plan to achieve them.4.  Promotes joint and cooperative research, development, acquisition, and operation of SIMCI systems, technologies, and capabilities among Army components.5.  Recommends organizations for designation as SIMCI Development Agents for general use M&S or C4I applications, as needed.6.  Fosters programs to develop and, where applicable, implement SIMCI interoperability Architectures, Standards and Interface Products.7. Recommend Processes to Synchronize Requirements between Modeling and Simulation and C4I Systems.3. How the SIMCI OIPT is organizedWhen the SIMCI OIPT was established, it was recognized that the organization structure needed to address the need for involvement of two communities – C4I and M&S.  This is reflected in having two chairs of the OIPT, from both communities.  Both of the Chairs are from the Material Developers – STRICOM for Simulations & PEO-C3T for C4I.  There are approximately 20 member organizations from various Army Commands, primarily dealing with simulations.  This reflects the reality that C4I/M&S interoperability is currently more of an issue for the Simulation community.  The SIMCI Organizational Structure is shown in Figure 1.  As noted, the member organizations cover all of the different simulation domains – TEMO, RDA & ACR.There are two other essential components of the SIMCI OIPT organization.  The SIMCI Executive is the day-to-day manager of the SIMCI OIPT operations.  Since the SIMCI OIPT manages approximately 20 different projects, the Executive needs several staff positions, including a program manager and budget analyst.The Architect Team is the OIPT’s technical direction consisting of dedicated engineering experts.  They develop the strategic planning, technical vision and work with each project to ensure that SIMCI goals are being addressed.  The Architect Team functions as a working group of the OIPT reporting to the SIMCI Executive. When the SIMCI OIPT was first formulated there was a deliberate effort to balance short-term efforts with long-term R&D.  The result was that approximately two thirds of the SIMCI funding went to projects based on current interfaces and one third of the SIMCI funding went to R&D efforts.  While the SIMCI mission is to look forward, the current interfaces must be migrated to common components and standards in order to improve interoperability.  R&D efforts must be developed from an experience base, or they can easily go astray.Shortly thereafter, a third component was added – Process.  There is a recognition that if SIMCI was not involved in the on-going processes in the C4I domain, that any solutions developed would rapidly go out of synch.  Examples of this are requirements that need to be developed and then synchronized in various programs.  Certification procedures were identified as very important to the C4I Community.4. The SIMCI OIPT VisionMuch effort has been devoted to developing plans for achieving C4I/M&S interoperability.  There is general agreement on the Strategic level, but the development of a detailed Technical Vision to implement the Strategic plan has been an ongoing effort as detailed below.Figure 1:  SIMCI OIPT Organization Chart4.1 Strategic PlanFigure 2 shows how the SIMCI OIPT plans to transition to a seamless interface.  SIMCI has moved to the Mid-Term block of the plan.  The end goal may change to more of an embedded interface in the future.4.1.1 Software BlockingIn a broader context, the US Army is currently undergoing a Transformation to an Objective Force.  One of the key initiatives to achieve interoperability in the C4I Community is the Software Blocking Initiative.Achieving the goal of an integrated and interoperable warfighting capability is hampered by independent and disjointed process threads extending from requirements to fielding across individual System Developers‚ programs. The lack of cohesion is a result of  individual system requirements that are not integrated; cost benefit analysis, testing and evaluation that are system-specific; and system developments that are program-centric. This lack of cohesion across the acquisition process has fostered stovepipe system developments. The current acquisition process will not support the Transformation and acquisition of a synergistic warfighting capability for the Objective Force. A process that harmonizes requirements across individual systems is needed. These integrated requirements would feed a cost benefit analysis that looks at impact not from an individual systems perspective, but from an operational impact on Warfighter/Unit capability. A key element is the harmonization of contracts rather than synchronization to ensure that they can be adjusted to significant technical and programmatic factors that otherwise would result in costly delay, loss of functionality, etc. The Army will implement Software Blocking as a means to manage the dependencies between individual system programs. Software Blocking focuses on requirement determination/prioritization, development, certification, and evaluation of an integrated System of Systems capability increment. The software blocking process complements the Unit Set Fielding process. Software Blocking is charged with attaining schedule harmonization while ensuring interoperability among systems participating in the Block. Block 1 is comprised of 54 systems divided in three groups based upon the criteria established within the policy thus establishing the systems’ need for certification and evaluation.  The first group of 23 systems, Core Systems, requires interoperability testing and an operational evaluation. These systems are the focus of Block 1 management oversight during the execution phase. The 12 systems in the second group, Enabling Systems, are key to supporting interoperability of core systems.  They may or may not require certification or operational evaluation.  The third group of 19 Interfacing Systems provides significant capability and receives the same oversight as the core systems.  These systems are required to undergo certification, but are not required to undergo operational evaluation as a part of Block 1.4.1.2 Strategic ContextThe SIMCI OIPT exists in a context where interoperability is not only desired but required of future systems in the Army.  Thus SIMCI is participating in the Software Blocking Initiative described above.  However, there is an even larger context at the DOD & International level that is only being addressed by standards organizations such as SISO [19].  There needs to be more involvement by other “SIMCI-like” organizations in the other Services and at the Joint Level, in order for SIMCI to ultimately succeed.4.2 Technical VisionThe technical vision is based on several constructs including a Technical Reference Model [5] and a general “House Chart” giving the elements of interoperability in the SIMCI domain.Technical Reference ModelFigure 3 identifies three broad classes of information containing required elements that, if satisfied, would result in full data interoperability:Persistent Data refers to the class of information that is stored during the operation of the simulation.  Information in this class is typically initialized prior to execution and changes less frequently than Non-Persistent Data.Non-Persistent Data refers to the class of information that is transient, corresponding to interactions – during execution – between entities or objects in the simulation or C4ISR database, or updates to an entity’s state.A third class of information necessary for a complete interface is Exercise Control.  Simulations typically have a set of protocols that allow an operator to control their execution and synchronize their operation with other simulations.  Current C4ISR systems do not have protocols that correspond to these, however future C4ISR systems must have such protocols to enable them to be fully interoperable with simulations.This Technical Reference Model and other subsequent Models are more fully described in [5,8,15,18].House ChartThe SIMCI OIPT’s “House Chart” is a comprehensive view of a focused effort to achieve interoperability between C4ISR and M&S systems. Each of these blocks is comprised of ongoing projects that strive to solve interoperability issues between Modeling & Simulation programs and C4ISR tactical systems.4.2.2.1 The Processes for Alignment BlockThe SIMCI OIPT’s process for alignment include managing the operational activities of the SIMCI OIPT; providing technical direction in aligning data models, architectures, and policies to increase interoperability; providing the infrastructure for Modeling & Simulation to Army C4ISR interoperability integration; and ensuring SIMCI requirements are synchronized.4.2.2.2 The Architecture Alignment BlockThe SIMCI OIPT’s architecture alignment effort recognizes that interoperability among multiple systems and multiple system types will require common architecture methods and solutions. The C4ISR community has developed the DII COE Architectures. The simulation community has the HLA. These architectures directly impact the technical basis upon which C4ISR and simulation systems are built, but approach the issue from opposite directions.The DII COE provides a framework of components organized into a software layered architecture and seeks to standardize the use of common components among DII COE applications.The HLA acknowledges the disparity of existing simulation systems and approaches interoperability from an ad-hoch perspective.  Data and messaging exchange is built as part of the Federation Execution Process and includes semantic and syntactic translation software development for each federation.The SIMCI Component Architecture  builds upon the DII COE concept to combine the common components among simulation and C4I systems.  The success of the SIMCI Component Architecture depends on the success of the SIMCI and Army efforts focusing in the Common Data and Standards Blocks of the House Chart.  Building on such standards enables the concept of common applications and then demands an architecture within which to use those applications.The US Army following the lead of US businesses in using business process engineering by establishing the Operational Architecture.  The Operational Architecture is a business process view of the way the Army prosecutes combat operations.  Since computers and communications support business processes, the Operational Architecture establishes the basis for the computing infrastructure used by C4I systems.  Since the Army spends much more time preparing for and recovering from combat actions than executing them, SIMCI is initiating a thrust to incorporate activity models of M&S supported activities of the US Army at work daily in the ACR and RDA as well as the TEMO domain.  A holistic perspective of the Operational Architecture view incorporates activity models that support before, during and after combat operations.  Supporting the introduction of activity models of the Army at work for the entire spectrum of operations sets the stage for incorporating M&S as an intergral part of the Army’s information systems (IS) architecture.  M&S must become part of the Army’s IS architecture if it is ever to reach its’ full potential in providing the Army full spectrum support before, during and after combat operations.Consistent with the nature of architectures, executing the Alignment of Architectures block sets the stage for future M&S and C4I systems. In those future systems interoperability problems are no longer the issue.  Most effort will be expended increasing the power of C4I systems to harness information faster and with more lethality than all the enemies faced by US forces.4.2.2.3 The Common Data/Object Models BlockThe SIMCI OIPT’s vision of data representation strongly enforces common data representation with regard to data and object modeling.  The SIMCI OIPT’s oversight of this initiative allows M&S and C4ISR developers to use common reusable representations.  The SIMCI OIPT’s development oversight provides reference object models of units and material fully attributed and aligned with the data elements used by tactical C4ISR system developers.  Specifically, this initiative develops a (“battle management”) language and methodology for directly commanding and controlling simulations and future robotic Future Combat System elements utilizing a force’s organic C4I equipment.4.2.2.4 The Common Standards BlockThe SIMCI investment strategy identifies a broad range of products and services that are crucial to achieving the interoperability goals of the OIPT. Key to the success of the SIMCI OIPT’s long term vision is the standardization and enforcement of  it’s initiatives for widespread use across the Army and with the other services. In the current SIMCI Investment Strategy there are fifteen areas identified for standardization efforts. Some examples of the types of products and services that are planned for standardization efforts include:a UML Model for M&S Developers that is aligned to the C4I Standard Tactical Data Modelsa Battle Management Languagea Unit Order of Battle Data Interchange Format in ABCS 7.0a Naming Convention for Unit Names and Equipment for M&SData Collection in the COEM&S Elements for the Common Operating Picture (COP)a Communications Effect Methodology and Data Elementsa Common Scenario Generation MethodologySimulation Inputs to the Operational Architecturea Set of Simulation Services for the COECommon standards are critical to meeting the interoperability goals of the SIMCI OIPT and as such are explicitly identified as a block in the House Chart.  As can be seen from the sample efforts, the SIMCI OIPT will be executing standardization tasks in models, languages, methodologies, and services.  The tasks conducted within the common standards House Chart block will focus primarily on standardization of these results that will have been developed and prototyped under other SIMCI tasks.  Standardization tasks will bring consensus among the SIMCI community and foster sharing and adoption of the technical advances achieved.  Standardization efforts will be the glue that brings together the house chart components and enables shared solutions to be implemented by both the C4I and M&S communities. 4.2.2.5 The Reusable Component Interfaces BlockThe SIMCI OIPT sponsors the SIMCI Consortium as an ongoing collaborative effort by many simulation and simulation-C4ISR interface developers to develop and share common solutions for interoperability.  The SIMCI OIPT also sees the opportunity for this leveraging to foster ongoing simulation-C4ISR system program efforts in adapting, adopting, and developing simulation enhanced C4ISR Common Operating Environment based components.5. Status of Selected SIMCI InitiativesSIMCI’s has developed a SIMCI Component Architecture (SCA) and is continuing to refine this Architecture [21].  First, a single component of the SCA is to be explored with a project on common Scenario Generation for simulation and C4I systems.  Second the SCA will be further detailed with multiple analyses whose purpose is to define the uses, component interfaces and allocation of functionality of the constituent components.Scenario Generation is currently executed in C4I and simulations in support of training exercises throughout the US Army.  The difficulty in developing and implementing training plans lies in no small part with the tremendous amount of data manually entered, checked and corrected as part of training scenarios associated with multiple sets of simulations, interfaces and C4I systems.  Multiple data sets accompany different configurations, hampering the exchange of scenarios between training events.  SIMCI’s Scenario Generation project seeks to identify methods for synchronizing data in today’s training events as well as providing a perspective on how to homogenize the data between future simulation-enhanced C4I systems supporting Course of Action (COA) development.  FY 2002’s efforts will fix community direction on this subject to support FY2003 projects intended to define and prototype methods for developing single source data for both C4I and Simulation Systems.The SCA will be further developed to better guide future efforts in components common to both C4I and simulation systems.  This effort will utilize the Object-Oriented based analysis method developed in FY 2001 [21]. Once completed, the SCA will provide a basis for other components to be built that are needed to enable the simulation-enhanced C4I systems of the future.  The development of the SCA will support both embedded and umbilical simulation support of C4I systems. 6. ConclusionsWe conclude with a discussion of SIMCI’s Outreach efforts and identify some of the major challenges that SIMCI will face in the future.SIMCI OutreachSIMCI has made a conscious effort to widely publish it’s findings and influence other programs and organizations to adopt the standards it has developed.The majority of the papers in the References [Section 7] were sponsored by SIMCI.  Projects sponsored by SIMCI are requested to prepare reports on their programs, and publish their results when they have reached an appropriate point.  Publication is considered when evaluating programs for renewal.In addition to encouraging distribution of results by publication, SIMCI co-sponsors a Bi-Annual Technical Exchange to ensure current awareness of the work done by the SIMCI community.  These have proved to be very valuable in the Army Interface Community in both ensuring that programs stay current and also to motivate programs to adopt SIMCI standards.ChallengesSIMCI faces many challenges in the future.  Three are identified here.  The first is the problem of where to draw the line around.  This problem is related to the problem of Software Blocking.  SIMCI was established to deal with the problems of interfacing to Tactical Army C4I Systems.  But the problems in this area cannot be completely solved without working out interoperability issues with Weapons Systems, Communications Systems and others.  However, the SIMCI OIPT does not have the resources to deal with all of the Systems involved in Software Blocking.  An approach needs to be developed that clearly states what SIMCI ‘s responsibility is to avoid “mission creep”.  A second, related, problem is the problem of Joint operations.  While the SIMCI OIPT can solve the C4I/M&S problem in the Army Domain, it is not chartered to solve other Services’ or Joint Interoperability problems.  However, if the other Services do not have SIMCI-like organizations, it is very difficult for SIMCI to work with individual Service programs to develop coordinated solutions.  The DoD OSD sponsored Information Superiority M&S Master Plan may provide one mechanism for coordinating the services.A third challenge is the issue of changing programs and technologies.  The military sector is struggling to keep up with commercial Information Technologies.  The development plans for ABCS and FCS C4I systems are evolving rapidly.  Perhaps the main mission of the SIMCI OIPT is to ensure that these plans are communicated to the M&S community and that a flexible approach is taken to be able to adapt to new directions in the C4I Community.The SIMCI OIPT has been in existence for three years and has sponsored approximately 50 programs.  We have described why an OIPT is needed and how the OIPT operates, rather then focus on the accomplishments.  The results of the OIPT can be judged by referring to the papers in the following reference section.  This gives a review of some of the various programs sponsored by SIMCI.  We conclude with a call for more effort on developing a coordinated approach to solving C4I to Simulation interoperability within the US DoD and International Community.7. AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to express their appreciate to the US Army for having the vision and desire to establish the SIMCI OIPT. All of the authors are supported by the SIMCI OIPT.  Dr. Hieb was also supported by the Army’s Office of the Director for Information Systems for C4ISR, the Army Modeling and Simulation Office, and the SIMCI OIPT while writing this paper.  Dr. Hieb, Mr. Sprinkle, Mr. Sudnikovich and Mr. Whitson are SIMCI Architects.  Mr. Kelso is the SIMCI OIPT’s Executive Agent.  The authors gratefully acknowledge the encouragement and support given by the SIMCI OIPT in the development of the process and vision described in this paper.  Figure 4, the House Chart, was developed from work done by Dr. Andreas Tolk.  8. ReferencesAgile Commander Advanced Technology Demonstration, June 2001,  HYPERLINK "http://www.c2d.c3sys.army.mil:443/agile.htm" http://www.c2d.c3sys.army.mil:443/agile.htm.Black, C., Whitson, S.,  Kidwell, R.J., and Nurse, E.W.: “Breaking New Ground:  Simulation to C4I Intra-Army Interoperability Certification”,  Paper 02S-SIW-055, 2002 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, March 2002.Carey, S., Kleiner, M., Hieb, M. and Brown, R.: “Standardizing Battle Management Language –A Vital Move Towards the Army Transformation”, Paper 01F-SIW-067, 2001 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 2001.Carr, F.H. and Roberts, J.D.: “Incorporating Command and Control into the High Level Architecture:  An Architecture for Realistic Communication Effects,” Paper 97F-SIW-076, 1997 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 1997.Carr, F.H. and Hieb, M.R.:  “Issues and Requirements for Future C4ISR and M&S Interoperability,” 7th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation, Orlando, FL, 1998.Carr, F.H, and Hieb, M.R.: "M&S Interoperability within the DII COE: Building a Technical Requirements Specification", Paper 01S-SIW-133, 2001 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, March 2001.Diem, J., Black, C., Lane, N., Whitson, S.: “Certification of US Army Simulations Interfaces with C4I Systems”, Paper 01E-SIW-073, 2001 European Simulation Interoperability Workshop, London UK, June 2001.Furness, C.Z., Carr, F.H, and Hieb, M.R.: "A Generalized Unified Model (GUM) for C4ISR - Simulation Interoperability", Paper 01F-SIW-007, 2001 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, September 2001.Haugh, B.A., Wartik, S.P., Loaiza, F. and Hieb, M.R.: “A Comparison of the Land C2 Information Exchange Data Model and the WARSIM Object Model,” Paper 02S-SIW-053, 2002 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, March 2002.Hieb, M.R., Cosby, M., Griggs, L., McKenzie, F., Tiernan, T., and Zeswitz, S.:  “MRCI:  Transcending Barriers between Live Systems and Simulations,” Paper 97S-SIW-197, 1997 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 1997.Hieb, M.R., and Staver, M.J.: “The Army’s Approach to Modeling and Simulation Standards for C4I Interfaces”, Paper 98F-SIW-259, 1998 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1998.Hieb, M.R., and Blalock, J., “Data Alignment Between Army C4I Databases and Army Simulations”, Paper 99S-SIW-034, Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 1999.Hieb, M.R. and Timian, D.H.:  “Using Army Force-on-Force Simulations to Stimulate C4I Systems for Testing and Experimentation,” Paper 1999 Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium, 1999.Hieb, M.R., and Sprinkle, R.: “Simulation Infrastructure for the DII COE Architecture: The Army Vision”, Paper 00F-SIW-035, 2000 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 2000.Hieb, M.R., Brandt, K., Painchaud, L.J., Carr, F.H., Tolk, A, Ressler, R.L., Furness, C.Z., Daly, J., Jahren, T.N., Conrad, G.E., and Myers, L.D.: “Interim Report of C4I-Simulation Technical Reference Model Study Group”, Paper 01F-SIW-094, 2001 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, September 2001.Krusche, S. and Tolk, A.:  “A SHADE Approach for Coupling C4I-Systems and Simulation Systems,” Paper 99F-SIW-004, Fall 1999 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 1999.Layman, G.E. and Daly, J.: “C4I–Simulation Interoperability: Embedded Simulation Infrastructure” Briefing to the DII COE M&S TWG, WWW site, February 2000.Ressler, R., Hieb, M.R., and Sudnikovich, W.:  “M&S/C4ISR Conceptual Reference Model,” Paper 99F-SIW-060, 1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 1999.SIMCI WWW Site, Army Overarching Integrated Product Team for Simulation to C4ISR Interoperability, https://simci.army.mil, 2001.Simulations Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO): http://www.sisostds.org, June, 2002.Sprinkle, R.B., Sudnikovich, W.P. and Carr, F.H.: “Object-Oriented Analysis of a DII COE Simulation Product Line Architecture”, Paper 01F-SIW-026, 2001 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 2001.Sudnikovich, W. and Roberts, J.: “Implementation of a prototype C4I FOM: Continued Progress,” Paper 99F-SIW-077, 1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL,1999.Timian, D.H., Hieb, M.R., Glass, J., and Staver, M.J.:  “Using Standard C4I Components to Interface to Simulations,” Paper 98F-SIW-035, 1999 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 1999.Timian, D.H., Hicks, M.W., and Hieb, M.R., “An Approach for Using DII COE Components to Link Simulations and C4I Systems: A Case Study Using the CMP”, Paper 00F-SIW-011, 2000 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 2000.Timian, D.H., Hieb, M.R., Lacetera, J., Tolk, A., Wertman, C., and Brandt, K.: “Report Out of the C4I Study Group”, Paper 00F-SIW-005, 2000 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 2000.Tolk, A.:  “Requirements for Simulation Systems when being used as Decision Support Systems,” Paper 99F-SIW-002, 1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 1999.Tolk, A.:  “HLA-OMT versus Traditional Data and Object Modeling – Chance or Shoehorn?,” Paper 00S-SIW-024, Spring 2000 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 2000.Tolk, A., and Kunde, D.: "Decision Support Systems-Technical Prerequisites and Military Requirements", Proceedings of the 2000 Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium, June 2000Tolk, A.: “Integrating NATO M&S Efforts and the NATO C3 Technical Architecture”, Paper 01E-SIW-095, 2001 European SIW , London UK, June 2001.Wartik, S.P., Haugh, B.A., Loaiza, F., and Hieb, M.R.: “Building in Interoperability: A Comparison of C4I Data Models and Simulation Object Models”, Paper 01S-SIW-021, 2001 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 2001.Wartik, S.P., Haugh, B.H., Loaiza, F. and Hieb, M.R.: “A Methodology for Comparing C4I Data Models and Simulation Object Models”, Paper 01E-SIW-059, 2001 Euro Simulation Interoperability Workshop, London, UK, June 2001.Author BiographiesMICHAEL HIEB, Vice President of the IITRI/AB Technologies Group, is a core architect of the Army SIMCI OIPT and was the technical supervisor of the MRCI interface project while at SAIC.  He received his PhD in Information Technology at George Mason University (GMU) in 1996 and performed his doctoral research at the Center for Excellence in Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence at GMU.  He has published over 35 papers in the areas of learning agents, knowledge acquisition, interface technology and multistrategy learning.  Previously, he worked as a Nuclear Engineer for General Electric. Dr. Hieb received his Bachelor of Science degree in Nuclear Engineering from the University of California in Santa Barbara and received his Masters of Science degree in Engineering Management from George Washington University.Ron Sprinkle is a SIMCI OIPT core architect, the AEgis Orlando Director of Operations and the AEgis C4I Technology Lead. During his 14 years as a defense contractor, he has developed software and hardware systems on numerous programs to include the Line Of Sight Anti-Tank (LOSAT), the ARPA Reconfigurable Simulator Initiative (ARSI), Army Experiment 3 (AE3), the BattleLab Reconfigurable Simulator Initiative (BLRSI), Fire Support Combined Arms Tactical Trainer (FSCATT) and the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS). As a U.S. Army Reserve Officer, LTC Sprinkle has served 7 active duty years with reserve duty including Company Command, Battalion Operations and Battalion Executive Officer tours.  Mr. Sprinkle is a graduate of Oregon State University with a BS in General Engineering and of Southern Methodist University with a MS in Computer Science Engineering.William Sudnikovich is a Project Manager for Atlantic Consulting Services in Shrewsbury, NJ and is a core architect of the Army’s SIMCI OIPT.  He is responsible for planning, directing and consulting on simulation activities in support of the US Army Communications-Electronics Command (CECOM) and other Army activities.  Prior to joining ACS in 2000, Mr. Sudnikovich held various positions at the US Army CECOM RDEC, initiated development of the CECOM SINCGARS Radio Model (SRM), the Tactical Internet Model (TIM), and was influential in establishing M&S activities within the CECOM RDEC.  He was active contributor to the development of the IEEE 1278 DIS standards and is a former Chairperson of the C4I Forum of the SISO Simulation Interoperability Workshops.  Mr. Sudnikovich holds a BS degree in Computer Science from Rutgers University and a MS degree in Computer Science from Fairleigh Dickinson University.Stephen R. Whitson is a Senior Software Systems Engineer for the MITRE Corporation.  Mr. Whitson has been with the MITRE Corporation for five years and is a Core member of the SIMCI OIPT Council of Architects.   Prior to working with the SIMCI OIPT, Mr. Whitson worked at MITRE’s Fort Huachuca, Arizona facility developing and integrating the network architecture for the Army’s First Digitized Division, as well as Enterprise Management solutions for the U.S. Army Forces Command Headquarters and its subordinate Directorates of Information Management (DOIMs). He now directly supports the SIMCI OIPT and the Central Technical Support Facility (CTSF) at Fort Hood, Texas overseeing several M&S-to-C4I interoperability initiatives. Mr. Whitson is currently working on his Bachelor of Science degree in Information Systems from American College of Computer & Information Sciences.Thomas Kelso is the C4ISR Domain Manager for STRICOM, which includes responsibilities as the Executive Agent for the Army’s SIMCI OIPT and the System Developer for the C3 Driver. Mr. Kelso graduated from the United States Military Academy at West Point, New York with a Bachelors of Science degree in Mechanical Engineering.  Mr. Kelso has received two patents from the US Patent Office for his design work with the Navy at the Manned Flight Simulator facility.  Both patents are in the Modeling and Simulation Technology domain.  Mr. Kelso has also had 2 technical paper published, and has received numerous awards for his work, to include being named as the STRICOM Employee of the Quarter for the first quarter, FY99.02F-SIW-067 Submitted For Review – July 12, 2002Page  PAGE 11 of  NUMPAGES 11 Figure 4:  “House” Interoperability ChartFigure 3:  Technical Reference Model for C4ISR/M&S InteroperabilityFigure 2:  SIMCI OIPT Roadmap