NASMP: Standards Development in Support of Navy Aviation Simulator DevelopmentJonathan GlassDan PatersonNaval Air Systems Command Training Systems Division12350 Research Pkwy.Orlando, FL  32826-3275. U.S.A.William AndrewsAllison GriffinBradley SeagullDiSTI®11315 Corporate Blvd., Suite 115Orlando, FL 32817-8340. U.S.A.KeywordsNASMP, Network, Simulators, Standards, InteroperabilityAbstract: The Navy aviation community is developing the Navy Aviation Simulation Master Plan (NASMP) with the goal of improving Distributed Mission Training (DMT) in an initiative that seeks to update and integrate Navy simulation resources that deliver first-rate aviation training in a multi-platform environment. The NASMP program is conducting extensive reviews of existing simulation standards and tools compatible with the Navy DMT concept model which relies on the sharing of software resources, databases, the reuse of simulation toolkits, and the production of a suite of simulation resources for delivery to client facilities. In a departure to past practice, the development of the NASMP standards is taking place relatively early, concurrent with the technical analysis phase, as a means of providing a formal methodology for the documentation of technical requirements and of circulating the standards for community review. The NASMP standards project has two primary goals: (1) the definition of technical requirements for the Navy DMT, and (2) the development of technical standards to insure interoperability among Navy DMT simulators and support applications. The NASMP seeks to simplify the overall process of training procurement and to reduce cost, through a well defined set of standards. Technical requirements will be provided in the following documents:NASMP Standard for NetworksNASMP Standard for Visual System and DatabaseNASMP Standard for Tactical EnvironmentNASMP Standard for Performance Measurement and After Action ReviewNASMPThe Naval Air Systems Command, in support of OPNAV N789, developed the Navy Aviation Simulation Master Plan (NASMP) to launch future Navy distributed mission training (DMT) programs as well as to improve current Navy DMT programs.  The NASMP mission is "to lead the revolution in Navy aviation training simulation and ensure the war fighter’s ability to win in today’s network centric battlefield while minimizing total ownership cost.”  The NASMP vision is "the seamless integration and modernization of all Navy aviation simulation assets in a tactically relevant environment that will meet the fleet’s training requirements throughout the entire training continuum (undergraduate to post-Fleet Replacement Squadrons (FRS)) in a cost effective manner.”  The NASMP is an umbrella concept that includes maintenance trainers, aircrew undergraduate and fleet trainers as shown in Figure 1.  The Fleet Aircrew Simulator Trainer (FAST) Program is the Navy program that is executing the fleet trainer portion of the NASMP umbrella.Figure 1: NASMP Umbrella ProgramsThe Strike and the Anti-Sub Warfare (ASW) federations make up the two training simulation federations within the FAST program.  To achieve the NASMP vision, the NASMP Team formulated a clear set of goals, requirements, guidelines, and standards for Navy distributed simulation.  The NASMP IPT structure is shown in Figure 2.  As shown in the diagram, the standards document is being developed by the Operations & Integration (OPS & I) IPT.Figure 2: NASMP IPT StructureNASMP ConceptCurrently, Navy training uses a combination of simulators, local training sorties and live fly exercises to provide individual and team aircrew training.  Individual skill training focuses on aircraft proficiency training and basic flight maneuvers.  Team skills training focuses on division and section training.  The Navy does not currently have the capability to train at the Inter-Team skills level which includes campaign force and mission level training.  The FAST Program was undertaken to provide the Inter-Team skills training while also providing additional training for the Individual and Team skills levels. [1]FAST consists of individual aircraft simulators (new and selected legacy devices) linked in a common distributed synthetic environment.  The FAST Strike federation will provide training that is similar to the aviation missions currently flown in live training exercises at the Naval Strike Air Warfare Center (NSAWC) Fallon, NV.  NASMP training will include the entire operational cycle, similar to training at NSAWC, including mission planning, brief, execution, and debrief phases.  NASMP will also expand on this concept using distributed simulation to provide a richer, more controlled learning environment which will include individual and team performance measurement.In an effort to develop the best solution for FAST, NASMP engaged industry and government officials and sought to utilize experiences from previous work done in other service branches such as the Air Force DMT (AF DMT) and Marine Corps Aviation Simulator Master Plan (MCASMP).Building Blocks of NASMPA building block process was used to develop the NASMP distributed simulation requirements as shown in Figure 3.  This diagram indicates that the basic building block of NASMP, and the focus of NASMP, is to meet aircrew training objectives to improve aircrew performance.Figure 3: NASMP Building BlocksIn defining the Training Objectives, NASMP first analyzed the Training & Readiness (T&R) Matrix for all Navy Type/Model/Series communities.  NASMP then traced the requirement to the functional description and used the technical requirements to develop the criteria for analysis of existing DMT systems and tools.  NASMP will re-use existing and proven tools and work to avoid the development of new tools.  Frequent feedback from the OPS&I IPT's and System Engineering, to the Tools Analysis IPT's, and vice-versa, is, and continues to be, invaluable in the development of NASMP distributed simulation requirements.When determining the long-term operational cost of NASMP, several issues come into play such as determining system engineering support with cost/capabilities/trade-off analysis of the technical solutions under consideration.  NASMP also took into account the USAF DMT and MCASMP feasibility analysis and investigated the issue of leasing vs. buying components.NASMP Standards Development ProcessThe NASMP Interoperability Standard provides requirements and a set of guidelines to be used by commercial vendors, organizations, and persons involved in the development of simulators, simulator infrastructure, and other enabling technologies used to inter-connect system components in the Navy distributed simulation training environment.  As NASMP requirements were determined, they were documented in the NASMP Interoperability Standard.  The NASMP Interoperability Standard defines the NASMP distributed simulation environment and is divided into four main technical sections, 1) Networking, 2) Visual Systems & Databases, 3) Tactical Environments, and 4) Performance Measurement and After Action Review.SISO NASMP Study GroupThe NASMP Team determined that the best way to attain feedback from commercial vendors was to form a Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) Study Group (SG).  The SISO NASMP SG will be responsible for reviewing the NASMP requirements and determining if the requirements are feasible.  The group will review the current requirements and provide feedback to the NASMP IPT's.  The IPT's will review the comments that are submitted by this group and determine how to best disposition them and incorporate them into standard.  NASMP believes SISO will provide valuable feedback from the community.NAVMSMOThe Navy Modeling and Simulation Management Organization (NAVMSMO) provides the Navy’s oversight of approved Navy M&S Standards.[2]  The role of NAVMSMO is to provide centralized management of Navy M&S Standards and to coordinate M&S efforts across functional areas.  NAVMSMO also develops policies and procedures necessary for M&S standardization within the Navy.The NASMP Team determined early on in the process that the NASMP Interoperability Standard should be submitted to NAVMSMO for approval as the Navy’s first standard for FAST.  The best course of action from the NAVMSMO perspective was for the NAVMSMO Interoperability subgroup to set up a Special Interest Group (SIG) that would work alongside the NASMP Team during the development of the standard.  The NAVMSMO NASMP SIG would provide feedback to the NASMP Team to be considered for inclusion in the standard.NASMP Interoperability Standard Configuration Management PlanOne of the requirements for submitting the NASMP Interoperability Standard to NAVMSMO was that the document must be stable and in configuration management.  In response to this requirement, NASMP developed the NASMP Standard Configuration Management (CM) Plan, which was developed closely following ISO 10007: 1995 guidelines. [3] The NASMP Standard CM Plan, Figure 4, provides the definition of the NASMP organization, Figure 5, shows the process for approved releases of the standard and the tracking of changes to the document.Figure 4: NASMP Standard Configuration Management PlanFigure 5: NASMP Standard Life CycleNASMP Interoperability Standard OverviewAs stated previously, the NASMP Interoperability Standard provides the requirements and guidelines for the development of the Navy distributed simulation environment.  The NASMP Interoperability Standard contains four main technical sections that define the technical requirements for the 1) Network, 2) Visual Systems and Databases, 3) Tactical Environment, and 4) Performance Measurement and After Action Review.NASMP NetworkThe NASMP Network section of the NASMP Interoperability Standard provides the requirements and guidelines for the NASMP distributed simulation networking infrastructure and the requirements and guidelines for the networking interfaces used to interconnect simulator, simulation, and supporting applications.  The NASMP Network concept of operations is shown in Figure 6.The NASMP network will ensure the component connectivity and interoperability necessary to support team and inter-team training realism. The NASMP network section includes: 1) networking infrastructure in terms of NASMP enabling technologies, 2) network interfaces as required by the simulators and supporting NASMP applications, 3) network performance, 4) network testing, and 5) network configuration and control.NASMP network requirements define all aspects of federate system(s) Local Area Network (LAN) connections with the NASMP Wide Area Network (WAN) including physical environment, switches, encryption, etc. Transmission standards define aspects of sending and receiving data related to the virtual battlespace, latency, recovery, and addressing. Network management standards define how bandwidth, latency, dynamic requirements, etc are monitored, evaluated, and controlled. External U.S. Navy and industry standards in these categories are to be incorporated and modified as required based on external updates or impacts from the preliminary NASMP network design. Figure 7 provides a notional diagram of the NASMP network system. The network architecture is presented as a layered, component architecture and aggregates the Open System Interconnect (OSI) Reference Model’s peer-to-peer processes.Figure 6: NASMP Network System and Component BoundariesNASMP Tactical Environment (TE)NASMP exercises will be conducted in an interactive virtual battlespace environment where friendly, neutral, civilian, threat forces, weather, terrain, cultural features, weapons systems and weapons effects are depicted in real time.  The synthetic natural environment will represent various environmental conditions that result from natural phenomena, such as weather, or from interactions in the battlespace such as smoke from burning vehicles.The NASMP Tactical Environment (TE) generates the synthetic battlespace that is populated by virtual simulators and Computer Generated Forces (CGFs) that interact to accomplish their assigned missions.  NASMP TE will provide the capability to support training events of varying complexity ranging from a simple scenario to a multiple Carrier Battle Group scenario.  In a simple scenario, NASMP TE will support one-versus-one air intercept training.  For a multiple Carrier Battle Group scenario, NASMP TE will generate thousands of sophisticated air, surface, sub-surface, and ground entities including friendly forces, threat forces, neutral forces, and civilian forces that are present in the area of operations.NASMP Visual Systems and DatabaseThe purpose of NASMP Visual Systems and Database standardization is to lower the total life cycle cost as well as to assure interoperability and open architecture for NASMP devices.  In an effort to promote the use of multiple sources for database production throughout the life cycle of the program, NASMP databases will be standardized on the interfaces rather than the product.  The process for the development of the distributed simulation system is defined in the Visual Systems and Database section of the NASMP Interoperability Standard.Figure 7: Network Concept of OperationsUnlike many aspects of the NASMP distributed simulation environment, the development of correlated databases for the various simulation platforms involved in a distributed simulation exercise is produced off-line in a series of steps.  The steps include defining requirements, identifying database developers, collecting source data, production of the Refined Source Data (RSD), database development and utilization and finally the RSD finalized.  The final RSD is then distributed and the database enters into a maintenance process of incorporating feedback to the database and distribution of revisions.  The production of the initial database and its associated RSD, as well as the follow-on databases for other simulation platforms, may take several months to complete, verify and put into service.NASMP PM-AARThe NASMP Interoperability Standard provides a common infrastructure to promote interoperability, cost effectiveness, and instructional efficacy for Performance Measurement - After Action Review (PM-AAR).  The PM-AAR section of the NASMP Interoperability Standard defines the NASMP PM-AAR requirements including the interface requirements for any distributed simulation participating in a NASMP distributed simulation Federation.  All phases of the NASMP distributed simulation training continuum are described in this section, e.g., Learning Management, Planning, Brief, Debrief, After Action Review and Performance Measurement/Artificial Intelligent Instructors.  The NASMP PM-AAR concept of operations is shown in Figure 8.The NASMP PM-AAR architecture consists of Distributed Simulation Federates (DSF) and Operations Center Federates (OCF).  The intent is to provide a common infrastructure, standards, tools, and processes that facilitate interoperability among DSF’s.Each DSF will have a unique set of simulation systems, missions, tasks, training requirements and learning objectives that serve the focus and requirements of its organization.  Each DSF will have the capability to conduct planning, briefing, execution, and After Action Review (AAR) activities independently or in a distributed environment.  The OCF will function as the coordinator of an integrated, distributed federation and was designed to incorporate the capabilities of each federate into a collective training environment.Figure 8: Distributed Federate InteroperabilityThe NASMP PM-AAR system will use a Learning Management System (LMS) to integrate student Training Objectives (TOs) as they relate to Navy Mission Essential Task Lists (NMETL) and required Training and Readiness (T&R) Matrix qualifications.  The performance measurement planning system utilizes the information from the Scenario Planning system and the TO’s to generate the required data capture and trigger events to assist the instructor monitoring the exercise and preparing the after action review.Each federate will have the capability to develop Measures of Effectiveness/Measures of Performance (MOE/MOP), insert training event annotation, determine data collection requirements and utilize AAR tools which are all tied to specific NMETL objectives.  For distributed mission scenarios, a Common Tool Suite (CTS) will make it possible for the entire organization of distributed federates to simultaneously participate in all planning, execution and AAR phases of a distributed mission scenario.NASMP debriefing of a distributed mission training exercise will consist of a two-stage process.  The participants will debrief at a DSF level (element debrief) consisting of a student led debrief followed by an instructor debrief and evaluation.  Subsequently, the OCF will debrief the combined performance.  Additionally, debriefings may be conducted over a WAN in a distributed, collaborated fashion with all other DSF’s.ConclusionDuring FY02, the NASMP Team plans to deliver the Training Systems Functional Descriptions, NASMP Interoperability Standard and the Network Plan.  The NASMP Team is assisting with the F/A-18C DMT procurement and maintenance trainer requirements analysis.  NASMP will also begin implementation of the Network Plan and assist with new procurements and legacy upgrades and implement life-cycle support of NASMP common resources. The initial draft of the NASMP Interoperability Standard is complete and the NASMP Program is accepting comments on the standard from SISO and NAVMSMO.  These comments will be reviewed and dispositioned by the NASMP IPT's before the next revision of the document which will be released 15 December 2002.References[1] NASMP Interoperability Standard v0.2[2] NAVMSMO web site – http://navmsmo.hq.navy.mil/[2] ISO-10007:1995 – Quality management – Guidelines for configuration management.Author BiographiesDaniel J. Paterson is an electronics engineer with the Naval Air Systems Command, Training Systems Division, Simulation & Models Division, Modeling & Simulation Development Branch in Orlando, Florida. Dan is currently the technical leader of the NAWCTSD Interoperability Laboratory, with research papers on HLA Gateways and Data Distribution Management.  In 1992 he received his MSEE degree from the University of Central Florida. In 1976 he received his BA in Mathematics from Jacksonville University, Jacksonville Florida.  In 1977 he received his Naval Flight Officer Wings from the US Navy. He spent 8 years flying in Naval Patrol Aircraft, before transferring to the US Naval Reserves where he spent another 12 years flying as a Reserve Officer for the US Navy.JONATHAN GLASS is a systems engineer with the NAVAIR’s Training Systems Division, Systems Engineering Division, Aviation Systems Engineering Branch, in Orlando, Florida.  He is currently supporting the NASMP O&I IPT.  Mr. Glass has 12 years of experience in external systems engineering in both combat weapon systems and simulations. He is a graduate of the University of Central Florida (UCF) with a BS EE degree.  Previously, he worked as the WARSIM C4I Technical Lead and as an Inertial Navigation Systems Engineer for the Naval Undersea Warfare Center in Norfolk, VA.William Andrews, a founding partner in DiSTI, is responsible for the company's simulation architecture programs and leads the Simulation Professional Series training team. Bill graduated from the University of Illinois (Urbana) with degrees in Engineering Computer Science and Engineering Mechanics. Bill has held design positions at the Institute for Simulation and Training, Link Simulation, and Honeywell, in addition to consulting for numerous simulation companies. He has worked in the computer modeling field for the last fifteen years with a focus on the integration of simulation and modeling components into full scale, high-performance, simulation architectures.ALLISON GRIFFIN is currently employed as a Project Lead at Distributed Simulation Technology, Inc and has worked in the field of simulation for 7 years.  Ms. Griffin is currently serving as the standards development project lead on the Navy Aviation Simulation Master Plan (NASMP) program.  She previously worked as an Associate in Simulation at the Institute for Simulation and Training, University of Central Florida serving as the Project Lead on the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) Support project while participating in the HLABDS-D, Haptics and Interoperability projects.  Ms. Griffin also has over ten years experience in the field of nuclear power generation and the manufacture of nuclear fuel rods.  Ms. Griffin earned a B.S. in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Alabama at Birmingham in 1983 and a M.S. in Simulation Systems from the University of Central Florida in 1996.Bradley Seagull graduated from Utah State University with a degree in Computer Science, having focused the course of his studies in computer graphics. Upon graduation, Brad joined Evans & Sutherland, a pioneer in 3D real time flight simulation, where he worked in a Research & Development group which sought to advance the realism of simulation in visual database technology. During this tenure, Brad led a design team that developed the database prototype for CCTT (Close Combat Tactical Trainer), establishing the state of the art for database technology in networked ground simulation. After eight years with E&S, Brad has joined Distributed Simulation Technology to help develop visual database standards for the Naval Air Warfare Center Training Systems Division. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  