Joint Virtual Battlespace (JVB)Functional Decomposition of Future Combat Systems (FCS) for Modeling, Simulation and AnalysisThomas MathisRaytheon, C3I6225 Brandon AvenueSpringfield, VA 22150703-923-2252 HYPERLINK "mailto:swebster@xtendllc.com" tmathis@rayva.orgKeywords:C4ISR, Information Management, Future Combat Systems, Network Centric Warfare, Modeling and SimulationABSTRACT:   A key JVB capability is the modeling and simulation of a Network Centric Force (NCW) concept for force effectiveness analysis.  JVB is developing the capability to explicitly represent critical elements of an Operational Architecture (OA) in order to evaluate and optimize data and decision processes and the system of systems functionality that articulate a NCW concept.  Explicit and configurable representation of functional nodes, information flow, and communication nodes are key to modeling emerging NCW concepts.  Organizational and system effectiveness can be analyzed as a function of command-and-control and communications architectures.  While not ignoring the role that attrition plays in combat operations, these models provide a causal chain from organization structure and capability to system and component technologies to basic measures of operational effectiveness. This capability is complimented by a high-resolution data collection capability that is intrinsic to the distributed nature of the JVB architecture and allows for analysis of complex Measures of Effectiveness and Performance (MOE/MOPs).  The objective of this document is to provide a functional decomposition of the FCS problem to better appreciate JVB’s capability to address this problem space.1. IntroductionThe Army Vision, published October 1999, defined the path for the Army’s transformation towards the Objective Force (OF), a strategically responsive force, dominant across the full spectrum of operations [Vision, 1999].  The Objective Force is the Army’s future full spectrum force: organized, manned, equipped and trained to be more strategically responsive, deployable, agile, versatile, lethal, survivable, and sustainable across the entire spectrum of military operations from Major Theater Wars (MTW) through counter terrorism to Homeland Security [MNS, 2001]. The Future Combat Systems (FCS) is a networked System of Systems (SoS) that will serve as a core building block within the OF to develop the overmatching combat power, sustainability, agility, and versatility necessary for full spectrum military operations [SOLICITATION, 2000]. AAThe FCS must enable the OF to deploy a combat ready brigade size formation anywhere in the world within 96 hours, a division in 120 hours, and five divisions in 30 days.  These objectives require combined arms formations combat capable on arrival with unprecedented sustainability over extended ranges and with reduced logistical footprint then current Legacy Force formations [MNS, 2001].  The actual weight requirement of the emerging FCS platforms are approaching 16-tons, a considerable contrast compared to the 70-ton M1A1 Abrams Main Battle Tank (MBT) and the approximately 30-ton Bradley Infantry Fighting Vehicle (IFV)- both mainstays of the Legacy Force.  Within the Legacy Force, the mass of armor directly translates into platform and force survivability, a correlation not easily applicable to the 16-ton common chassis of the FCS.The study of warfare is both an art and science, in regards to developing and optimizing the FCS concept scientific means can be employed to facilitate the required analysis.  The development of the FCS is fundamentally an optimization problem.  Modeling and Simulation can be utilized to facilitate this analysis, however, one must appreciate the unique characteristics of the FCS in order to utilize and develop appropriate M&S tools for force effectiveness analysis.2. The FCS Problem Space2.1 Network Centric Warfare (NCW) Survivability is the long pole in the tent for the FCS given the superseding C-130 deployable operational constraint.  Operational survivability has two perspectives, the platform and the force.  Respective to the platform, survivability is achieved via design and methods of employment that eliminate or mitigate the threats ability to detect, engage, and if hit- not kill.  Platform survivability involves direct trades in component technologies that enable other platform functions, like lethality, sensing and mobility.  For a 16-ton platform, there is insufficient trade space given the stringent design restrictions for sufficient platform protection.Force survivability is enabled via maintaining the initiative over the threat.  This can be simply controlling the terms upon which decisive engagements occur.  It involves superior Situation Assessment (SA)- intelligence on friendly and threat forces composition, disposition and activities; understanding the threats intent; and having the requisite capability to leverage superior SA preventing the threat from achieving the initiative. A FY 1990 Army Science Board Summer Study, “Full-Spectrum Protection for 2025-Era Ground Combat Vehicles,” concluded that survivability for a lightweight platform is best achieved via a SoS approach [ASB, 1999].  The critical aspect of this SoS approach is simply to enable the FCS to See First, Understand First, Act First and Finish Decisively.  If threat systems never achieve the opportunity to engage friendly platforms, then platform survivability is achieved.  A SoS approach is required for the FCS because no single platform has sufficient trade space to achieve this capability and remain C-130 deployable.  In a SoS, a single platform is quite vulnerable, however, the objective is the aggregate capability of the FCS formation will achieve the desired capability and enable equal to greater survivability then the Legacy Force.  The capability for the FCS to achieve force survivability is similar to the SoS requirements for platform survivability.  For the FCS to achieve its objective, the key is understanding how the same critical information that enables platform and force survivability is uniquely handled and applied within the SoS.  In summary, the FCS hypothesis is that passive and active armor can be traded equally for information to achieve the requisite survivability.  Effective SoS M&S analysis should be focused on the information and decision processes that lends to desired force effectiveness.  2.2 Platform Centric versus Network CentricWhen discussing the FCS, it is important to appreciate the distinction between platform centric and network centric.  It is critical to understand that technology is the limiting factor that defines the perspective of the tactical formation and significantly contributes to the development of respective Tactic, Techniques, and Procedures (TTPs); Concepts of Operations (CONOPs); and Doctrine.  Historically, military formations and behaviors have been designed around the respective dominant platforms and component technologies.  The inaccurate musket lent to massed, disciplined and rehearsed formations organized to deliver high volumes of fires.  The advent of the accurate, breach-loaded rifle foreshadowed the demise of massed, “parade-like” formations and the machine gun finalized this evolution during the First World War.  In World War II, on land, the tank, airplane, and other motorized platforms revitalized mobile warfare, notably illustrated by the German Blitzkrieg and, at sea, the airplane and aircraft carrier redefined naval warfare.  Most recently, the U.S. “Air-land Battle” doctrine demonstrated in 100-hours of overwhelming decisive land operations against Iraq was developed around the inherent capabilities of the M1A1 MBT, Bradley, Apache, MLRS, Infantry Systems, etc.  These revolutions in military affairs were stimulated by the development of platform centric technologies.  The advent of the information age and supporting technologies supports the notion that future war will have network centric characteristics.  The dominance of the platform is superseded by the aggregate capability of the system which the platform fulfills a supporting role.  The system level capability is derived from relevant information that drives decisions that maximize the aggregate capability of the respective platform functions.  Land warfare formations can not be easily characterized by a single system function, in fact several critical functional systems exists which are generally related to sensing, effects, maneuver, sustainment and network survivability.  To achieve the desired force effectiveness the respective functional systems are completely interdependent.  The objective of the FCS is focused on maximizing the complimentary aspects of the respective systems- information flow between relevant systems enable the desired SoS capability.  TTPs, CONOPs, and even doctrine for a network centric concept will be focused on generating the decisive information that enable the SoS.  One of the challenging aspects of SoS M&S and analysis is that the respective systems can not be easily modeled or evaluated independently.  The SoS interdependencies have to represented or considered at some level.2.3 General FCS Force Effectiveness M&S RequirementsThe requisite M&S capabilities to address force effectiveness related to the FCS requires modeling standard force-on-force attrition mechanics respective to sensing and lethality / vulnerability combined with explicit representation of information flow, decision processes, data processing and ultimately some degree of communication effects.  At a minimum the resolution of the M&S environment must be at the platform entity level because the platform contain the functional nodes that enable the SoS capabilities.  Aggregate entity models can only represent the aggregate capability of a SoS organization, which would be a bold assumption without supporting empirical data to allow for this aggregate capability assessment.  The critical data elements to support the Data Collection and Analysis (DCA) are focused on detection and engagement ranges and related timing issues, e.g. time from initial detection to targetable information to first munition fired and ultimately resolving of threat target to the desired effect.  Also critical, is DCA respective to tracking message flow, loading per functional node, and tasking associated with detections and engagements.3. “Understand First”3.1 The FCS KeystoneThe most critical aspect of the FCS is the decision processes that enable the capabilities to See First, Act First and Finish Decisively.  Decision processes supporting the respective functional systems (sensing, effects, maneuver, sustainment, and network survivability) enable system level functionality and the objective SoS capability.  Within the SoS there are information requirements and processes focused on enabling a platform function and enabling operational capability.  The latter requirement ultimately results in the decisive capability desired from a SoS concept.3.2 Decision ProcessesThe decision processes respective to platform, system, and echelon functions are the defining aspects and starting point for designing, modeling, and conducting analysis for a SoS concept.  As discussed, the objective is ultimately trading armor for information.  The desired operational capability for the FCS is realized via the operational staff.  The staff can be decomposed into several Battlefield Functional Areas (BFA) generically decomposed to support the primary system functions of sensing, effects, maneuver, sustainment, and network survivability.  The respective BFAs can be characterized as functional nodes that enable the aggregate capability.  Respective functional nodes are characterized by decision logic, data fusion and information subscription and publication requirements.  Defining the relevant Decision Processes respective to BFA is a top down approach and is required for designing and optimizing a SoS concept.  As a SoS concept is refined, information trades have to be made that ultimately effects operational capability- if a holistic perspective is not appreciated the opportunity costs of not satisfying an information requirement cannot be readily ascertained.Decision processes can be a human-in-the-loop (HITL), automatic or aided.  Decision processes are respective to a specific function and / or echelon.  For example, an indirect fire platform may contain decision processes to deliver effects of a specific type, volume, and rate to a designated location or target.  The scope of the decision-making may simply involve accepting or denying fire directives- if “busy” or lacking the requested munition, the node may simply communicate this information to a system level functional node.  This system level functional node role may be networked fires adjudication.  This node evaluates a target’s composition, disposition, and activity and potentially consults a priority of fires table, priority target list, and consults attack guidance matrix to ultimately assess potential effects assets and their states prior to publishing a fired directive to a given asset.  In order for this system level functional node to fire, it may require information from another system level functional nodes that has a responsibility of evaluating targetable information. A SoS functional node defines and manages the relationships between system level functional nodes that publishes targetable information, adjudicates effects on this targetable information, ensures the respective system level decision nodes and the sensing and effects platforms executing functional tasks are sustained and manages the overall network connectivity to enable the complimentary nodes to exchange requisite information sustaining the aggregate capability.It is important to appreciate that the fundamental data elements that enable the discussed SoS capability may be the same for all the respective functions.  The driving difference is what data processing occurs to these fundamental data elements respective to functional, system, echelon, and SoS nodes.  Therefore for the design and resulting analysis of a network centric concept it is critical to define all of the required decision processes within the concept, in order to understand the information topologies that enables the critical nodes.  In a network centric concept these critical functional nodes are not necessarily associated to a specific platform, the residency of these nodes may not be static and their location within the concept may not parallel historical notions.  M&S tools must have the capability to simulate these decision processes, their respective relationships and also manipulate their residency within the concept to address related force effectiveness issues.3.3 The Application LayerThe application layer is the interface that enables HITL decision-making and ideally is centric to all the critical SoS decision processes.  Given that the warfighter will ultimately manage a respective BFA an application must exist to enable the warfighter’s functionality or multi-functionality.  The application layer is simply a presentation media for the critical information that enables decision-making.  This application includes generating data queries, data manipulation, organization, and processing and collaborative planning with other functional nodes.  The respective applications for the Army Battle Command Systems (ABCS) are current examples of the application layer.  In ABCS the applications are aligned with BFAs.  The BFAs defined for ABCS may not be similarly aligned for the FCS requirements.  However no definition has been forwarded for the FCS decision-making applications.  This creates a significant obstacle in modeling and conducting analysis for the FCS, because no published hypothesis exists concerning the explicit decision processes that are the keystone of a network centric concept.  It is interesting how significant levels of effort revolve around sensor and data fusion without the appreciation that given the definition of respective decision processes, the specific requirement and “location” of fusion can be readily ascertained and are dependent on this definition.M&S and Analytical Implications for the FCS  As discussed the decision process and application layer are decisive for successful modeling, simulation and analysis for network centric concepts- not to mention the design of the concept.    Representing the application layer and / or supporting decision processes are mandatory for relevant force effectiveness analysis.  Representing the information flow to respective decision nodes and the flow of published information to other decision nodes is also critical for this analysis.  For example, if 100 data points are defined as critical to support a respective decision node and is modeled adequately, the resulting analysis is possible:  If the resulting simulation runs reveal that the 100 required data points can not be generated by the designated publishers, a short coming in the envisioned concept at a system or platform functional level exists.  Perhaps, the TTPs and CONOPs for Reconnaissance, Surveillance, Targeting, and Acquisition (RSTA) operations does not efficiently enable the resolution of acquisitions to targetable information.  On the other hand, if the 100 data points are satisfied, then the envision concept is working as desired.  However, the final force effectiveness evaluation indicates that given the satisfaction of the 100 data points the desired operational objectives aren’t achieved.  The concept designers now appreciate that the critical 100 data points originally defined, may not be that critical after all.  The analysis to evaluate the platform functions, systems functionality, and SoS functionality for a network centric concept revolves around the critical decision processes and applications.  M&S tools must be able to represent the fundamental components discussed above in order to begin to appreciate the “understand first” requirement for the FCS M&S and analysis.4. “See First”4.1. GeneralOne of the fundamental objectives of the FCS is detecting the threat first or, at a minimum, beyond the ranges where the threat can act.  At the platform level this may simply mean detecting a threat beyond the horizon or immediate terrain before the threat detects the friendly platform or detecting the threat at a range where the respective threat weapon systems cannot engage the friendly platform.  At a force level, this may entail the simple detection of threat forces to support operational situational awareness, but ideally this includes detecting the threats tactical or operational center of gravity.   For legacy force structures the center of gravity for tactical formations revolve around armor and critical systems related to an operational activity, like engineering assets, etc.  The operational center of gravity is often related to long-range artillery, rocket artillery and C2 Systems.  Seeing first, respective to platforms directly translates in tactical survivability, however, to enable decisive maneuver the FCS must be able to detect the threats tactical and operational center of gravity.  Seeing first also includes leveraging Joint and National sensing assets to develop the requisite Intelligence Preparation of the Battlefield (IPB).  External information feeds enable the economical deployment of the FCS sensing assets to achieve a higher resolution “picture” of the battle space.  Lacking relevant IPB from higher echelons, the FCS must then dedicate significant resources to filter the respective battle space.  This can be an exhaustive, slow, and an expensive process that the OF cannot afford. Seeing first can be decomposed into observable characteristics, sensors, sensing platforms, sensing systems, RSTA management, and Situational Awareness.4.2 Observable CharacteristicsAll platforms have observable characteristics from distinguishing profiles / silhouettes, activity, acoustics, characteristics respective to the electromagnetic spectrum and active sensors like radar, etc.In warfare, camouflage involves eliminating and or mitigating observable characteristics related to a platform.  Camouflage may entail tactical color schemes; special electro/signal absorbent treatments; chemical obscuration; attaching foliage; chassis design (low profile, etc.); hiding antennas; utilizing terrain, weather, available light and active signature management.  Deception is “camouflage” at a force level- activities and actions that have the objective of influencing the threats perspective of friendly forces and operations.  The FCS platform will utilize a variety of methods to mitigate the threats capability to “see first.” The FCS platforms will be designed to mitigate all observables and ideally allow for signature management of respective observables to significantly minimize, ideally eliminate, the probability of initial detection and if detected complicate achieving a hit.    The FCS platform observable mitigation strategies contribute to the capability of deception for the force.  Deception for the force is enabled by the ability of the FCS to “see first.”  Extended detections enable the requisite maneuver for evasion of the threats reconnaissance efforts against critical friendly forces and potentially allowing detection of forces intended to deceive the threats operational perspective.For the FCS force effectiveness modeling high-resolution platform observable characteristics, propagation, signal attenuation and loss, etc. are less significant, then simply having the appropriate data.  If the data does not exist, then separate high-resolution modeling of observable characteristics to generate performance curves or tables to provide empirical data for respective lower resolution force-on-force models is desirable.  The focus of the M&S is appropriate fidelity for the generation of the critical data for the decision processes.4.3 SensorsThe FCS will host wide variety of sensors: Electro Optical (EO), Infra Red (IR), Radar, Signal, Acoustic, Magnetic, Microwave, etc.  Sensors are best characterized as the sensing payload on a sensing platform.  Some sensing platforms can contain multiple sensors or exchange sensor payloads dependent on design and operational requirements.Respective to Platforms, threat-warning sensors may be employed for Active Protective Systems (APS) against ballistic, missile and chemical threats.  Platform sensors include state monitoring systems employed to support sustainment- sensors to monitor Petroleum, Oil, and Lubricants (POL), munitions, battery charge and even critical component technology states.  For the FCS force effectiveness, modeling high-resolution sensors is less significant, then simply having appropriate sensor performance data.  As for observable characteristics, if the data does not exist, then separate high-resolution modeling of respective sensors to generate performance curves or tables to provide empirical data for respective lower-resolution force-on-force models is appropriate.  If higher resolution and fidelity can be achieved for sensors without significant operational overhead, then obviously this would be desired.  As stated, the focus of the M&S is appropriate fidelity to assist in generating the critical data for the decision processes.4.4 Sensing PlatformsThe FCS concept hosts a wide variety of sensing platforms.  Sensing platforms are characterized as the chassis upon which the sensor payload resides.  The sensing platform maneuvers and positions the respective sensor in the battle space or works in concert with complimenting sensors to achieve the desired sensing objective of generating intelligence and targetable data.Sensors generate sensor data, however, the sensing platforms or the complimenting sensing system is where intelligence and targetable data is derived that supports the SoS functions.  Data or sensor fusion / correlation first occurs on the sensing platform in order to generate a report that combines the respective levels of acquisition of a target with location and other required data, like activity, in a detection report.  In M&S, folks often confuse the embedded human performance modeling (HPM) inherent to many sensor models.  It is important to appreciate the distinction between a pure physics based sensor model against the combination of physics based and HPM modeling to represent a sensing platform or system. The sensing platforms in the FCS can be characterized by permutations addressing resolution of acquisitions and mobility.  Acquisitions can be decomposed into Detection, “I see something;” Recognize, “I see a wheeled vehicle;” Classify, “I see a tank;” and Identify, “I see a T-72 MBT.”  Dependent on the sensing platform inherent sensing capability defines the level of acquisition achievable.  Mobility can be defined as no, slow, medium, and high mobility.  Unmanned Ground Sensors (UGS) and manned Observation Posts (Ops) are examples of no mobility sensing platforms.  Civilians, Combatants, micro-Unmanned Air Vehicles (UAVs) and Unmanned Ground Vehicles (UGVs) are examples of slow mobility sensing platforms.  Manned and Robotic chassis and medium-UAVs characterize medium mobility sensing platforms.  Tactical UAVs, and Comanche are examples of high mobility sensing platforms.  Joint and National assets form another group, however they are best considered as sensing platforms that stimulate FCS sensing systems.  The respective various resolution acquisition and mobility sensing platforms form sensing systems to ultimately create the layered sensing network that enables the hemisphere of awareness characteristics of the FCS.  4.5 Sensing SystemsAs discussed above sensing platforms have varying resolution in acquisition and levels of mobility.  The various permutations in sensing platform capabilities are combined, logically, into the most efficient and economical organization of sensing assets to generate the desired intelligence and targetable data for the SoS.Sensing systems can be designed or formed ad hoc during operations dependent on the mission requirements.  For example, given an UGS no mobility, low-resolution sensing platform, which can be characterized as simply a “trip wire,” is combined with various UGS platforms characterized by sensor type (acoustic, magnetic, seismic, etc.) to create a no mobility sensing system that can achieve an aggregate acquisition of recognize or classify.  This UGS sensing system or multiple instance of the same can be complimented by a high mobility, high acquisition level sensing platform, like a TUAV, to create a sensing system that can efficiently and economically cover wide areas.  Dependent on the volume of detections other high acquisition sensing platforms can be allocated to service the demand.  In general, sensing platforms that can achieve an acquisition level of identification are normally at the top of the sensing “food chain” in a layered sensing network.  Low-resolution acquisition systems work in concert to achieve a higher resolution acquisition or to cue a high-resolution acquisition sensing platform which is often more expensive and less abundant.  Respective decision processes enable sensing systems to generate the desired data that ultimately compliments the desired SoS functionality of “seeing first.”4.6 Sensing Platform and Sensing System ManagementSensing platform and system management simply defines the efficient and economical employment of sensing platforms and systems against respective threat targets in order to generate intelligence and targetable data.  For the FCS, sensing platform and system management ideally begins from the IPB generated by Joint and National assets.  There may be a functional node that processes external sensing information or respective functional nodes have direct feeds from Joint and National assets- either way, the sensing plan is generated from information available from higher echelons or other forces in the area of interests.  A simplistic way to look at this is higher echelon or external feeds indicate where to look, the respective FCS formation then allocates sensing assets based on this information and then is dependent on the inherent capabilities of sensing systems or creates ad hoc sensing systems to generate required intelligence and targetable data.  Combined with friendly oriented sensing systems and threat oriented sensing the required situational assessment to enable “seeing first” at the platform and force level may be achieved.The M&S of sensing platform and sensing system management requires representation of all of the above- observables and sensors, sensing platforms, sensing systems, and the decision logic that drives the management of sensing platforms and systems- to include the respective sensor and data fusion algorithms respective to this level.4.7 Situational AssessmentSituational Assessment / Awareness (SA) is simply perceived truth respective to friendly and threat composition, disposition, and potential activity.  The Common Operational Picture (COP) or Common Relevant Operational Picture (CROP) often discussed relating to the FCS are specific examples of SA.  It can be stated that SA provides critical data elements to stimulate the majority of decision processes respective to a network centric concept.  Certain system level functions like sensing platform and systems management and effects potentially achieve their system level functionality with virtually raw data elements that support the generation of SA.  However, SoS functions oriented on understanding threat intent, friendly state, and other information needs to enable maneuver require higher order data processing / fusion to satisfy respective decision nodes.For example, the IPB process may indicate a specific platform class is associated to the threats main effort or critical activities.  Specific munitions or planned maneuver may be allocated against these platform classes or against the respective threat formations once detected.  During operations the initial detection of the specified class of platforms may trigger the allocation of more sensing assets in the respective area or drive the commitment of forces set aside to deal with this threat.  It is important to appreciate relevant SA is respective to various BFA decision processes.  Effects decision nodes may only be focused on locations, munition state, and activity of effects assets and targetable threat information; a maneuver support node may be focused on soil types, projected weather forecasts, location and state of engineering assets, and location and activity of maneuver formations requiring support; and other, less obvious BFA nodes can be focused on obscure SA such as a noticeable decrease in domestic activity in an area where threat forces are suspected or not suspected at all.  In general, the BFA may define required SA and ultimately what data products the sensing platforms and systems must generate to support effective battle command for the FCS. Representation of “Seeing First” entails modeling the generation of critical data elements at the platform and system level; modeling the propagation of respective data elements through the various decision processes and functional nodes to ultimately populate the common SA perspective; constraining SA based on a respective node logical nodal relationships or via representing communication and network effects.  In some respects, optimizing the decision processes and information flow to generate the desired SA picture doesn’t require representing communications effects.  After optimizing the critical processes, communications effects modeling can be introduced to evaluate the feasibility of the distribution of respective decision nodes in the envisioned concept.  Ultimately, the FCS operational objective is extended detections that enable “acting first.”  5. “Act First”5.1 GeneralSimilar to previous discussion, “acting first,” occurs from multiple perspectives- platform, force, and respective to BFA.   “Acting first” at the platform level may entail engaging a threat first, taking evasive action to mitigate contact, initiating planned maneuver, and even enabling hit avoidance technologies.  Respective to the force, “acting first” can mean rapidly reallocating support assets, effects, or creating ad hoc tactical formations to support decisive operational maneuver- in general maintaining the initiative over respective threat forces.  Concerning BFAs, “acting first,” may entail counter-jamming for network survivability; ordering, cross-leveling or pushing critical logistics and maintenance support to decisive forces; or simply adjusting and publishing a policy change related to dealing with the indigenous populations after realizing existing policy creates undesired tension due to cultural differences.  In general and as previously stated, action is directly related to the critical decision processes- acting first is enabled by efficiently providing the requisite information, in the proper context, to the appropriate functional node(s) to enable the decision process.  5.2 Extended EngagementsAchieving extended engagements at a platform and force level is the ultimate objective of the FCS.  At the platform level, this is simply achieving tactical stand off with organic capability- simply engaging the threat at ranges where the threat cannot return fire with organic weapons.  As a force, extended engagements are realized via engaging the threats tactical and operational centers of gravity before the threat has an equal opportunity.  For the FCS, a Networked Fires Service (NFS) is often regarded as the defining capability to achieve this objective.  The NFS is complimented by a variety of effects platforms, to include a Networked Fires system specifically designed to facilitate the NFS logic.  NFS is a SoS function because of its dependency on the layered sensing system to generate targets and conduct battle damage assessment (BDA), sustainment to enable supporting platform functions, and the effects system to service targets.  NFS is a decision node that can be centralized or distributed throughout a concept, via M&S the optimal logic and distribution can be ascertained.  The critical force effectiveness evaluation criteria of extended detection and engagements significantly reduce the value of traditional attrition measures.  For example, a FCS concept may appear to be inadequate with standard attrition measures, however, analysis of platform and force detection ranges indicate that extended detection were achieved, however, the relevant data never got to critical decision processes or the critical decision processes were inadequate to enable extended engagements.  Conversely, a FCS concept may appear to achieve decisive victory with standard attrition measures, but closer analysis reveals that the majority of detections and engagements occurred at close combat ranges, similar to legacy force encounters.  Although, the attrition data indicates a success, the concept actually has significant flaws.  Ideally, a combination of the effective processes in the too examples are desired.In order to support the FCS analysis, M&S tools must allow for the DCA of data elements critical to evaluating respective detections and engagement ranges.  Force-on-force M&S tools generally support, with varying resolution, critical data elements for sensing, engagement, platform state and in some respects C2 / Maneuver.  Dependent on how explicitly critical information flows and decision processes can be modeled indicates the level of resolution achievable for the FCS analysis.  6. “Finish Decisively”6.1 BDA“Finish Decisively” is significantly dependent on accurate BDA at a platform and force level.  BDA is potentially, one of the most difficult information requirements for any concept.  However, accurate BDA enables the efficient and economical allocation of resources at a platform and force level.Respective to platforms, accurate BDA results in conservation of ammunition and potentially survivability when a single platform is addressing multiple targets.  This obviously impacts sustainment requirements, because accurate BDA minimize wastage respective to munitions expenditures.  At a force level the pay offs of accurate BDA are significantly higher.  As often stated in this discussion, the critical pay off of a network centric concept is efficiency and economic utilization of resources.  Accurate BDA complimented by the requisite SA enables the economic allocation of resources against known threats- critical to the FCS is decisively massing forces and / or effects.  Without accurate BDA, balancing resources cannot easily be achieved against known and developing threats.  Not only must BDA be accurately assessed, but also aggregated to reflect the impact on threat forces of interest to enable maneuver decision processes.  BDA must also be documented in order to minimize redundant targeting and or utilization of sensing assets.For M&S and in the real world, BDA is quite difficult to ascertain unless the platform has suffered significant trauma that makes it obvious the platform received damage, e.g. turret blown off or is on fire, smoking, and / or exploding.  Real world sensing platforms and systems are significantly challenged to assess accurate BDA on damaged systems without the discussed trauma or sure indicators of damage.  Higher resolution BDA like mobility kill, sensor, weapons and communications kill, or crew kill are much more difficult, if not impossible, to determine without high resolution acquisition sensing systems virtually on top of the target.  Given BDA can be assessed, a record should be maintained in the organizational SA in order to minimize redundant sensing and effects missions.  The correlation of known BDA against developing SA requires data fusion to enable the decision processes in support of this function.The successful M&S of BDA requires high-resolution damage state observables, ground truth related to target damage state combined with acceptable “confusion logic,” and simple operational behaviors for sensing platforms and systems to facilitate representing this phenomena.  For example, if a sensing platform detects a potential target, instead of passing on the detection and continuing on its designated mission, the sensing platform will begin to track the target object until an identification acquisition is achieved or sensing platform “hand-over” is achieved with another asset.  Otherwise, a sensing platform will maintain track on the target object until effects are delivered or specifically tasked to break tracking.  An assumption can be introduced that is grounded on if a sensing asset that can achieve an identification acquisition level is tracking a target during an engagement and the target object receives damage- it is assumed the sensing asset can assess BDA.  Given the satisfaction of this criteria ground truth and “confusion logic” is applied to determine what damage state is reported.  An appropriate source would be required to provide data or develop the “confusion logic” related to the effectiveness of the BDA.6.2 Maneuver TaskingPreviously, “finishing decisively” was simply discussed as balancing resources at a force level.  This perspective remains accurate, however, the decision processes that enable this balancing act are extremely complex and cannot easily be automated or modeled.It can be stated that all BFA ultimately support decisive maneuver or the aggregate effect of the BFA is decisive maneuver.  Therefore the decision node(s) that enable maneuver subscribes to processed information that are the products of the supporting BFAs.  It is relatively safe to assume, that the critical decision processes at the top of the respective BFAs require a HITL.  The application layer is the interface to the HITL and M&S can be utilized to stimulate these interfaces in order to evaluate the capability of the HITL to be decisive and also the FCS concepts ability to generate the required data elements that support the respective applications.Some models can represent the higher order decision processes that support operations.  These operational models are characterized by the scale of the force-on-force scenarios represented, normally brigade and higher, and the ability to execute complex plans representative of military operations.  Granted, implementing these plans and requisite branches can be a rigorous process.  Operational models are also appropriately “dumb” meaning attrition is adjudicated with reasonable outcomes given the requisite capabilities of opposing forces.  For example, a single platform will rarely if ever defeat an organization of multiple representation of like platforms.  This consistent adjudication of attrition is desired given the scale of the scenarios and objective of the models.  Terrain is often not explicitly modeled, rather the effects of terrain are represented, e.g. mobility corridors with respective movement rates, etc.The majority of operational models consist of aggregate entities- entity representation of multiple platforms and organizations.  Obviously, an aggregate entity represents the cumulative capability of the respective organization.  For legacy forces there is significant empirical data to assess the aggregate capability of legacy organizations and permutations of like organizations.  In general, operational models are lower resolution and are dependent on empirical data generated from higher resolution tactical and component technology models to optimize them for effective analysis of emerging concepts like the FCS.  6.3 Sustainment  Sustainment ultimately translates into a platform or the force having the capability to “finish decisively.”  At the platform level this may entail simply haveing the appropriate munition available for the desired target.  However, for the force, this means having the capability to sustain decisive operations.  Balancing resources against known and developing threats is directly tied to sustainment.The FCS must have the respective SA to sustain current and future operations.  This entails providing necessary resources and services to platforms and organizations and also “ordering” appropriate resources and services based on the rate of consumption and requirements for future operations. All military operations have a culminating point- a point in time and space where resources, services, and human endurance are strained such that operations can no longer continue at the desired rate.  Successful sustainment operations prolong the culminating point with the objective of enabling sustained operations beyond the threats capability to endure.  Sustainment operations are characterized by limited resources in theater; allocation of resources based on mission, priority, and critical needs; distribution of resources to the respective consumers; and a respective rate of consumption for classes of supplies, available services, manpower and other relevant resources.  Specific decision processes with differing information requirements and assets support these respective sustainment characteristics.  Critical to effective FCS M&S and analysis are the representation of these decision processes, information flows, and also the successful distribution of resources given the potential distributed operational capability desired for the FCS.7. Summary7.1 Operational ArchitectureThe FCS operational concept requires higher resolution representation of decision processes and information flow respective to BFA and SoS objectives.  This requirement can be characterized as the capability to represent the Operational Architecture of a concept in order to evaluate its force effectiveness. The OA is defined as a set of elements consisting of information exchange requirements (IER), Mission Area Interactions, Tasks, Interoperability tables, logical connectivity and a description of the environment where the information system is to be operated [OA, 1995].  Representing the OA in conjunction with entity level force-on-force M&S provides the baseline foundations for the FCS SoS analysis.  Varying resolution and fidelity of the OA and respective components of the force-on-force models will define the resolution of the operational analysis the resulting M&S environment can support.7.2 Functional Decision NodesDecision processes respective to functional nodes, system functions, and BFAs are the keystone for effective SoS M&S and analysis.  Decision processes define the information subscription and publications requirements and the respective data processing.  Decision processes ultimately define the critical data elements for the SoS concept and function as requirements drivers for supporting platform and system functions.  These functional decision nodes can and should be distributed throughout the FCS concept to maximize network functionality without compromising critical decision processes.  7.3 Data FusionThe fundamental data elements that support the FCS are intrinsic to generating SA respective to the BFAs.  The required data fusion / processing transforms the fundamental data elements into information that drives higher order decision processes critical to SoS functionality.  7.4 Information FlowGiven the definition of the functional decision processes and data fusion requirements, information topologies can be defined for respective platform functions, system functions, and BFA.  Accurate representation of information flow enables the evaluation and optimization of the logical connectivity of functional decision processes and data fusion nodes that enables SoS capabilities. 7.5 Platform Entity level Force-on-Force M&SOnce the logical connectivity of respective functional decision nodes and data fusion nodes are ascertained, overlaying the resulting OA on top of a force structure with a scenario illustrative of the future environment enables the decisive step in refining the FCS concept for force effectiveness M&S and analysis.  The resulting M&S and analysis enables the optimization of platform functional requirements, methods of employment (TTPs & CONOPs), and conducting trade off analysis of OA components.The first step is to evaluate the concepts ability to “See First” – can the envision concept generate the required data elements respective to threat and blue forces to generate the desired SA for requisite BFAs to support “Understanding First.”  Then given the resulting SA and supporting data fusion processes analysis to determine if extended detections and engagements are achieved to evaluate “Acting First.”  7.6 Communications and Network EffectsConcurrently or sequential to force-on-force M&S, communication and network effects should be introduced to evaluate connectivity between critical nodes, network loading and the extent upon which critical functions, knowledge, and platform functions can be distributed within the force structure and during operations. 7.7 HITL and/or Operational Decision Processes  Concurrently or sequential to 7.5 and 7.6 HITL or higher order decision processes can be introduced to evaluate the application layer respective to BFA and the resulting capability to conduct decisive operations given the FCS concept.8.0 References[ASB, 1999]	Army Science Board, Full Spectrum Protection for 2025 – Era Combat Vehicles, 17 August 1999.[MNS, 2001]	U.S. Army TRADOC, FCS Mission Needs Statement 1.0, v4.2, 24 October 2001.[VISION, 1999]	Shinseki, GEN Eric K. and Louis Caldera, The Army Vision Statement, October 1999.[OA, 1995]	Warrior Focused Architecture Definition (Draft)- C4I Service Chiefs, 11 December 1995.  [SOLICITATION, 2000]	Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), Solicitation No. PS 02-07, 2000.[AMSAA, 2002]	FCS Unit of Action Systems Book version 1.2, 12 August 2002.Thomas Mathis is a Senior Systems Engineer for Raytheon Company.  He has worked as a Theater Missile Defense M&S and operations analyst and acquisition analyst for FCS.  Currently, he is the JVB Studies and Analysis Lead.  In this position he has supported the “Objective Force Survivability Study” in ’01 and is currently supporting TRAC-FLVN Future Concept Directorate (FCS) conduct of the “C4ISR Experiment” supporting the OF / FCS Analysis of Alternatives (AoA).   Mr. Mathis is also a contributing member to the C4ISR Modeling and Analysis Working Group (MAWG) organized by TRAC-FLVN to assess existing M&S capability to address the FCS problem space for the AoA.