Naval Training Meta-FOM (NTMF) Integration and Test EventWayne Belanger Charles O’RourkeSteve WernickiNaval Undersea Warfare CenterDivision Newport1176 Howell StreetNewport, RI 02841401/832-2244, 401/832-4563, 401/832-8076belangerwd@npt.nuwc.navy.mil, orourkec@npt.nuwc.navy.mil, wernickist@npt.nuwc.navy.milSean ReillyAnteon Corporation1 Corporate PlaceMiddletown, RI 02842401/849-5952 x3552sreilly@anteon.comKeywords:ForceNet, FOM, Integration & Test, Requirements Analysis, High Level ArchitectureABSTRACT:  This paper discusses the development of the Naval Training Meta-Federation Object Model (NTMF) Integrated Test Event.  The main purpose of the event is the injection of a High Level Architecture (HLA) capability into training programs of record to stress advanced training concepts that would not otherwise be possible.  These systems will include Battle Force Tactical Trainer (BFTT), Submarine Multi-Mission Team Trainer (SMMTT), Global Command and Control System Maritime (GCCS-M), and Virginia-class On-Board Team Trainer (OBTT).  The paper reviews how the event will influence the content of the NTMF and identifies potential lessons learned regarding ForceNet training.1.  IntroductionEfforts to develop the Naval Training Meta-Federation Object Model (NTMF) began in December 1998.  The threefold rationale for the NTMF is a) the need for forces to be able to train as they fight, b) the need for a meaningful, common interactive battlespace, and c) the need for simulation and training systems to match the evolution of the force, weapon systems, and threat [1].  The goal of the NTMF is to provide a means to facilitate the interoperability of legacy naval simulation and training systems, the majority of which are not HLA compliant, in a consistent manner that supports stated training objectives [2].  1.1 NTMF DevelopmentThe NTMF Working Group began developing the NTMF under the auspices of PMS430.  The Working Group consists of a diverse collection of Government and Industry personnel representing a wide range of Navy air, surface and subsurface trainers, and Marine Corps training systems.  The group meets quarterly [3].  To date, focus has been on the development of several scenarios (known within the Working Group as “use cases”) representing typical training events that stress interaction and coordination of various training devices, the federation object model (FOM) that meets the requirements of the scenarios, and common libraries so that all trainers are making the same assumptions, ensuring a “fair fight.”  The existing FOM draws heavily on reference FOMs and has been derived from the Real-Time Platform Reference FOM (RPR-FOM).  Currently, the NTMF Object Model Template exists as version 0.2 [4].The NTMF Project Plan approved by PMS430 requires, among other things, that model validation and an NTMF demonstration take place in FY02 [5].  In order to meet these deadlines and the expected milestones for future years, the NTMF Working Group has been developing requirements and making preparations for several Integration and Test Events.2.  Integration and Test EventsThe Integration and Test Events are planned with three goals in mind: 1) to demonstrate the training enhancements that the NTMF can provide to federates; 2) to verify that the requirements of the scenarios developed by the NTMF Working Group are articulated in the FOM; and 3) to expose any technical challenges associated with integrating the NTMF into existing training systems [5].The NTMF has been developed according to the Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) Model.  The FEDEP defines a “generic, common sense systems engineering methodology for HLA federations that can and should be tailored to meet the needs of individual applications” [6].  The Integration and Test Event has been designed to meet the requirements of Step Four of the FEDEP, the “Integrate and Test Federation” step.  The NTMF Working Group has made extensive use of UML software development techniques to meet those requirements.Three separate events are planned.  ITE #1 is scheduled for October 2002 at the Naval Undersea Warfare Center, in Newport, RI.  This event will integrate the Submarine Multi-Mission Team Trainer (SMMTT), the Virginia-class On-Board Team Trainer (OBTT), the Battle Force Tactical Trainer (BFTT) BFTT Operator’s Console (BOPC), and the Global Command and Control Systems – Maritime (GCCS-M) training devices in a coordinated USW battle group via a local area network.  A demonstration of this event and the results and lessons learned will be presented at the Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation and Education Conference (I/ITSEC) in December 2002.ITE #2 is scheduled for the fall of 2003.  It will involve additional simulations, including possibly the JSAF, SETI, WAF, C4I Gateway, and 89-OBT.  The goal of ITE #2 will be to federate these simulators over a Wide Area Network using the NTMF, and to use an expanded scenario with more wide-ranging training benefit.ITE #3 is planned for late 2004 or early 2005.  It will demonstrate the NTMF’s readiness to be deployed as a production-level infrastructure for linking trainers.  This ITE will specifically focus on an ASW synthetic training environment (ASWSTE).2.1 Training EnhancementsIntegration and Test Event #1 will be the first actual demonstration of the training benefit the NTMF will provide to the Fleet.  The NTMF Working Group therefore wanted to choose a training scenario to demonstrate that would be particularly relevant to today’s Naval training needs.The ForceNet concept encompasses the Navy’s ongoing attempt to network all systems in the Navy together, allowing seamless exchange of incoming sensor data and outgoing commands [7].  Historically, submarines have operated in isolation.  However, most naval warfare today and in the near future is expected to take place in the littoral regions, and warfare in these regions requires more real-time coordination between elements of a battle group than the deep-sea warfare to which commanders are now accustomed.  ITE #1, using a modified version of the NTMF Coordinated ASW Use Case scenario [8], features a submarine crew and the battle group command staff training in a ForceNet-linked battle group environment by allowing the simulated entities to have higher communications fidelity and reliability than they could have with current doctrine and technology.More generally, ITE #1 will demonstrate the novel training opportunities that will be available if the Fleet possesses the ability to create a meaningful federation of legacy trainers in a cost-effective manner.  Any situations that require multiple trainees on multiple entities can be improved by federating the trainers for those individual entities.2.2 FOM ValidationA vital requirement of integrating an HLA federation is that the FOM is capable of describing every interaction in the scenario.  In this task, the NTMF Working Group utilized UML software development techniques to validate the FOM against the scenario.  Each scenario is broken down into a series of distributed object communications using UML sequence diagram notation.  Modeling assumptions at either end of the interaction are also described during this analysis.  The FOM will be considered validated if it is able to support all of the distributed object communications called for in the UML diagrams.The federation use case diagram describes the interfaces between the various federates, as shown in Figure 1.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1 System Use Case DiagramThe Actors represent the individual entities to be simulated by the federates.  Specifically, fixed-wing aircraft and an SSN 751 will be simulated by the SMMTT federate, friendly surface ships (except for the CVN), helicopters, and an SSN 774 will be simulated by the Virginia-class OBTT federate, a CVN will be simulated by the GCCS-M federate, and hostile surface ships and submarines will be simulated by the Battle Force Operator’s Console (BOPC) federate.Typical sequences of events were developed for each federate using sequence diagrams.  The Typical Sequence of Events for the SMMTT federate is presented in  REF _Ref12847967 \h Figure 2.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2 SMMTT Typical Sequence of EventsIn this diagram, the interactions between the SMMTT Federate and the RTI (i.e. the rest of the federation) are expressly identified.  Each component on the sequence diagram is supported by text describing its function and meaning.  In this fashion, the interface requirements of the federation are specified.The scenario selected for ITE #1 has been fashioned to maximize the need for communication between subsurface and surface combatants.  The scenario also creates mission conflict by introducing threat behavior that will require coordination on the part of the combatant crews.2.3 Technical IssuesIntegration and Test Event #1 will provide the NTMF Working Group with first-hand knowledge of the technical challenges associated with connecting legacy simulators in an HLA federation using the NTMF.One of the first nuts-and-bolts decisions was to determine which trainer would simulate and control each entity.  Each trainer had strengths in different areas, demonstrating again the advantage of training with a federation of legacy trainers to attain the most realistic training environment.  For example, the SMMTT was selected to simulate the P-3C Orion because it can create simulated sonar detections, while the GCCS-M, for instance, cannot.  The Virginia-class OBTT was selected to simulate the SSN 774, because it has updated models describing the SSN 774’s behavior that the SMMTT does not have [9].A major technical consideration is the “fair fight” issue, one of the primary reasons for developing the NTMF.  Even when systems can physically exchange data on an HLA network, that does not mean they understand what they are sending each other.  If each system makes different assumptions and uses different algorithms to solve the same problems, it could create an unrealistic simulation, reducing the training value of the federation.To solve this problem, the NTMF Working Group has decided to not only deliver a FOM but also a collection of common libraries that will allow legacy trainers to all make the same assumptions and use the same algorithms.  These libraries are still being developed, and a subset of them will be ready for ITE #1.  For simulators that do not want to integrate a common library into their system, standard behaviors will all be documented and available to the system designers.Figure 3 Physical Connectivity of the ITE2.4 Results and FindingsUpon the completion of ITE #1, the NTMF Working Group will document the results and findings in several areas:the effectiveness of the current FOM in meeting the training needs of the Fleet;the effectiveness of the current FOM in meeting the requirements of the scenarios developed by the NTMF Working Group; andtechnical challenges that were overcome and how these challenges may affect future integration and test events.Integration and Test Event #1 would have much less meaning if it could only answer narrow questions about the particular trainers that were selected for the event.  Naturally, few training exercises will involve just this set of trainers.  However, the integration of these trainers can reveal certain facts about interoperability in general.First and foremost, the event is expected to demonstrate that it is relatively easy, quick, and inexpensive to create a federation of legacy trainers using NTMF.  Fear of major, expensive changes to their legacy systems has dissuaded many programs from pursuing meaningful interoperability using HLA.  ITE #1 may help the simulation community to acknowledge that conforming to the NTMF need not be painful.The event will also confirm the soundness of using UML software development processes to analyze the validity of the FOM.These findings will be presented (and the event itself demonstrated) at the Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation and Education Conference (I/ITSEC) in December 2002.3.  Conclusion3.1 SummaryThe NTMF is an initiative to develop a standard FOM to be used for Naval training applications where meaningful interoperability between legacy trainers is required, such as training for Forcenet concepts.  The NTMF Working Group has produced a FOM that is continuing to evolve.  Integration and Test Events are being organized to assess different aspects of developing trainer applications that use the NTMF, including: a) demonstrating the training enhancements that the NTMF provides to federates; b) verifying that the requirements of the scenarios developed by the NTMF Working Group are articulated in the FOM; and c) exposing any technical challenges associated with integrating the NTMF into existing training systems.  Conclusions and lessons learned from this process will be reported on at future SIWs.4.2 Future InitiativesLessons learned during ITE #1 will be used to improve the design of ITE #2, scheduled to take place in fall 2003.  ITE #2 will explore the ability of the NTMF to handle a more complex scenario, several additional trainers, and geographical separation across a wide area network.ITE #3, planned for late 2004 or early 2005, will incorporate the knowledge gained during the first two events and will be a demonstration of the NTMF’s readiness for deployment as a production-level infrastructure for linking trainers, and will focus on PMS430’s requirement that the NTMF support an ASW synthetic training environment (ASWSTE).5.  References[1]	Concept Paper for a Naval Training Meta FOM, Version 1.0, NTMF Working Group, www.pms430.com.[2]	Development of a Naval Training Federation, 99F-SIW-054, Jeff Bergenthal, Douglas Clark, Paul W. Maassel, Carrie Root.[3]	Naval Training Meta-FOM (NTMF) Working Group Terms of Reference, NTMF Working Group, www.pms430.com.[4]	NTMF Reference Implementation Software Design Description, v0.2, Anteon Corporation, December 28, 2001.[5]	NTMF Project Plan, NTMF Working Group, www.pms430.com, July 18, 2001.[6]	HLA Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) Standards Document, Bob Lutz, Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, www.sisostds.org. [7]	CNO Strategic Studies Group XX, ForceNet and the 21st Century Warrior (For Official Use Only), Naval War College, November 2001.[8]	Naval Training Meta-FOM (NTMF) Use Cases, NTMF Working Group, Doug Clark, GARD Associates, December 31, 2001.[9]	FOM Group Report: Integration and Test Events, NTMF Working Group, Sean Reilly, Anteon Corporation, May 9, 2002.6.  AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to acknowledge and thank the Naval Performance Monitoring, Training and Assessment Office (NAVSEA PMS-430), the Navy Modeling and Simulation Management Office (OPNAV N6M), and the NTMF Working Group for their efforts in setting the objectives and supporting the efforts to develop the NTMF.Author BiographiesWAYNE BELANGER is an Electronics Engineer for the Naval Undersea Warfare Center, Newport, RI. He is the Lead System Engineer on the Combat Control portion of the Submarine Multi-Mission Team Trainer (SMMTT) program. He has authored papers on the employment of Computer-Aided Software Engineering (CASE) tools in the development of HLA applications.CHARLES O’ROURKE is a Computer Scientist at the Naval Undersea Warfare Center, Newport, RI.  He has been a member of the NTMF Planning Group since June 2001.STEVEN WERNICKI is a Supervisory Engineer for the Naval Undersea Warfare Center, Newport, RI.  He has represented submarine sonar training interests on numerous Navy-wide committees in the areas of modeling and simulation, databases, and environmental acoustics.  He led the first successful development and implementation of real-time range dependent propagation modeling in a sonar team trainer system.  He served on the CNO sponsored Shallow Water Working Group and drafted the Submarine Warfare Training System requirements for the SWWG.  He currently supports the SEA92L1 target database commonality IPT and the NTMF.SEAN REILLY is a lead software developer for environmental acoustics and distributed simulations at Anteon Corporation.  His previous work for the Navy includes stints as editor of the guidance and rationale documentation for the Real-Time Platform Reference FOM, NUWC’s Chief Engineer for the AN/SQQ-89 on-board sonar trainer, and a leading developer for CTEIP’s Test and Training Enabling Architecture (TENA).