A New Physical Model of Hellfire Missile for SAFBoris Dobrydnev, Ph.D.BMH Associates, Inc.5365 Robin Hood Road, Suite 100Norfolk, Virginia 23513-2441. U.S.A757-857-5670 x 250 HYPERLINK "mailto:dobrydnev@bmh.com" dobrydnev@bmh.com Keywords:Weapon Modeling, CGF, SAF, AVCATT. ABSTRACT: The existing physical model of the Semi-Active Laser (SAL) Hellfire Missile represented in SAF did not meet the requirements of the Army’s Aviation Combined Arms Tactical Trainer – Aviation Re-configurable Manned Simulator (AVCATT-A).  The model had deficiencies in the representation of the weapon flight, environment effects, firing capabilities, etc. 	This paper presents a new higher-fidelity Hellfire Missile physical model.  The model simulates a physics-based representation of the Hellfire Missile launch and flight, including explicit representation of the four different delivery modes and the trajectories associated with them, missile burn time, improvements to the laser designator model, and the addition of a laser spot tracker model.  Laser signal loss in atmosphere is addressed as well.  The model is implemented in OneSAF Test Bed (OTBSAF) and successfully applied for the simulation of Hellfire missiles.  The Hellfire models for the CGF and Manned Modules have similar performance characteristics to support fair fight.IntroductionEmploying Computer Generated Forces (CGF) in various military simulators is known to enhance the realism of their training environments.  One of the areas of improvement in the CGF is the development of more realistic physical models.  A good CGF physical model has to satisfy all the requirements to ensure fair fight between CGF and manned modules (MM).  The new CGF Hellfire missile physical model that displays these features is discussed below.The need for a better Hellfire physical model emerged to satisfy the requirements for the Aviation Combined Arms Tactical Trainer – Aviation Reconfigurable Manned Simulator (AVCATT-A) system.  One of the AVCATT-A system goals is to provide realistic training to army helicopter pilots using hellfire missiles to engage armored targets.  Analysis of the existing Hellfire model revealed the need to improve performance to make the model adequate for the requirements of a complex, dynamic environment such as AVCATT-A. Model RequirementsThe Hellfire missile (Figure 1 REF _Ref15837099 \h ) physical model has to have realistic guidance and flight dynamics characteristics.  It should be able to adequately simulate the process of target detection, environmental effects, missile orientation based on known laser spot location, speed, and flight time. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1. Hellfire missile.The model has to accommodate four modes of delivery. The first delivery mode is known as the Lock-on Before Launch (LOBL) technique.  In this mode, the missile laser seeker acquires and locks-on to the coded laser energy reflected from the target prior to launch. The remaining modes use the Lock-on After Launch (LOAL) delivery mode.  These modes are named direct, low, and high and differ in the flight trajectory and altitude.  In addition, Hellfire is actually a family of missiles.  To satisfy the AVCATT-A requirements, the following missiles were implemented: AGM-114A, AGM-114C, and AGM-114K. These missiles have slightly different physical parameters and abilities.Hellfire Missile Conceptual ModelRegardless of specific model, each Hellfire missile has five basic components that allow it to operate during the sequence from launch to detonation.  These components are: the propulsion section.  Laser seeker, guidance section, control section, and the warhead.Located in the nose of the missile, the laser seeker is programmed from inside the aircraft to receive a specific laser code.  After the missile recognizes this code being emitted from a laser designator and reflected off the target, it locks on to this emission or laser spot.  After lock-on, the seeker sends the information to the guidance section, which directs the missile to the target.  The guidance section computes steering command data and then transmits this data to the control section.  The control section contains a pneumatic actuation system that converts steering commands into mechanical fin movement.The new Hellfire missile physical model consists of three parts: flight dynamics, guidance system, and laser seeker (Figure 2 REF _Ref15837573 \h ).  We do not model warhead here.  The laser seeker model provides the location of the laser spot.  The guidance system model gives commands to orient the missile in the desired direction.  The flight dynamics model controls the turning capabilities, speed, and time of flight.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2. Hellfire missile conceptual model.Laser Seeker ModelThe output of the laser seeker model provides the guidance model with the direction and distance to the laser spot, if the latter is detected.  The model does not know whether the spot is located on the targeted armored vehicle or somewhere else; it determines the direction to the laser spot rather than a vehicle.The model first collects data about all simulated laser spots located within the maximum detection distance from the seeker location.  Discrimination based on the laser code is performed here, so that only the spots with the relevant code are processed.  A seeker has a limited field of view and all laser spots located outside it cannot be detected.  The model then checks for  intervisibility to ascertain if terrain or some vehicles block the seeker from viewing the laser spot.Environment can affect the ability of the laser light to reach the seeker.  Clouds and smoke absorb electromagnetic energy and have to be taken into account.  The laser seeker model calculates the overall thickness of smoke and cloud layers between the seeker and the spot.  Only if the thickness is less than some threshold value, the seeker receives enough light to be able to detect the spot. The threshold value is a parameter and can be adjusted for better realism. Generally, there are two sources of laser energy: laser spot and the designator itself.  A designator may place itself at the wrong angle and attract the missile. In accordance with the AVCATT-A requirements, this scenario is not considered.Guidance ModelThe most complex and important part of the Hellfire physical model is the guidance model..A Hellfire missile can lock on a target before or after the launch.  The missile has the capability of being launched in the direct (Lock-On After Launch-LOAL) fire mode, where the initial target heading is established by an auxiliary pointing unit or by momentarily designating the target.  The missile is then launched without seeker lock-on.  Lock-On occurs automatically in-flight whenever the target is designated again. Missile trajectory and altitude differ for various modes (F REF _Ref15837592 \h igure 3). Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3. Hellfire firing modes.LOBL mode is known as a direct fire mode because the launch platform must have a direct line of sight to the target in order for the missile to see the reflected laser energy.  The missile will not launch without a lock-on.  This mode permits the shortest range to target engagement.  It also features the steepest trajectory and the highest altitude.LOAL-High mode enables the missile to be launched from behind masking terrain.  This mode has the longest minimum and maximum range.  LOAL-Low mode enables the missile to be launched from behind shorter masking terrain.  This mode has the same maximum range as LOAL-High.  These modes are known as indirect fire modes because the launch platform does not have to have a direct line of sight to the target.LOAL-Direct mode permits use of delayed designation and allows employment of the weapon under a cloud ceiling.  This mode is known as a direct fire mode because the launch platform must have a direct line of sight to the target. Simulation of the modes above is achieved in the following manner.  For LOBL mode, the missile flight dynamics model is commanded to take a pitch at some angle relative to the spot position.  If the missile is far from the spot location, the missile is directed a few degrees above the line to the spot (so called gravity bias).  As the missile is looking down on target it's seeker starts looking down in pitch faster and faster as it nears the target.  When the rate reaches some critical value the Hellfire missile is directed towards the laser spot.  In the simulation, the decision to aim directly to the spot is based not on angular rate but on the distance between the missile and the spot.  When the distance becomes small enough, the gravity bias is not used anymore. As for the three LOAL modes, the general principle is the same.  When far from the laser spot, the missile is directed at some parametrically defined angle above the line to spot.  This angle is the highest for the LOAL-High mode and the lowest for the LOAL-Direct mode. Approaching the spot, the missile is guided towards the spot itself.  The difference between LOBL and LOAL modes is the missile in a LOAL mode starts looking for a target only after some time (few seconds).  This time interval is the highest for the LOAL-High mode and lowest for the LOAL-Direct mode.  In the initial period of flight the missile is guided according to a predetermined algorithm. For all modes, if the laser seeker model does not receive emission from a spot or for an initial period in a LOAL mode, the missile will be directed to fly the preprogrammed way.  Immediately after takeoff the missile moves horizontally for some short time.  After that, it climbs at some angle, which is highest for the LOAL-High mode. A significant characteristic of the AGM-114K is how it reacts when it loses laser lock while in flight.  If a missile flies into a cloud, it can lose lock and may not reacquire the target.  While AGM-114A and AGM-114C would keep climbing and eventually miss the target, the AGM-114K seeker will continue to point at the target; however, the missile (instead of climbing) is commanded to turn so as to point in the same direction as the seeker, which results in the missile flying out of the clouds and toward the target.  This maximizes the probability of target reacquisition for the K missile.  To simulate this behavior, the guidance model orders the AGM-114K missile to descend rather than climb if the lock is lost ( REF _Ref15838140 \h Figure 4).Although the guidance model is a deterministic one, it contains a probabilistic mechanism to affect on the engagement output.  If for some reason a user wants to make Hellfire missiles hit targets less often than according to the simulated model, it is possible to do so.  A programmer can modify a hit probability parameter in the reader file.  This parameter can take values from 0 to 1.  Normally, this parameter is equal to 1, which corresponds to the completely deterministic model.  In case the hit probability parameter is less than one, a random number generator will add an error to the commanded direction and Hellfire missiles will miss targets with a controlled probability.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 4. Flight profile of AGM-114K.Flight Dynamics ModelThe flight dynamics model determines the ability of the Hellfire missile to perform the maneuvers commanded by the guidance model.  The missile can change its orientation in flight by modifying its pitch and yaw angles.  The rate of change is limited by a maximum turn rate, which is a parameter.  Pitch and yaw are not controlled separately.  Roll is not allowed.The propulsion section located near the aft end of the missile provides the missile’s thrust.  It has a solid fuel propellant that burns approximately 2-3 seconds.  The relatively short burn time is more than sufficient to allow the missile to reach its maximum effective range of 8 kilometers.  A simulated Hellfire missile model approximates this process by representing the missile as moving with a constant acceleration for the first three seconds.  Later, the missile will slow down due to air resistance.  The value of deceleration is proportional to the square of the missile’s velocity.  The proportionality coefficient is adjusted so that the simulated flight time would be close to the actual one.Model ValidationThe realistic representation of Hellfire missile trajectories is of much importance for the creation of an adequate training environment.  First, trainees should observe a visually correct picture of the missile engagement.  Second, Hellfire missile deployment is often a team effort.  One of the advantages of the Hellfire system is the missile can be launched by a helicopter hidden with terrain; the missile then will be guided to the target by a remote designator.  The missile trajectory must go over a hill or a mountain and bad trajectory simulation will inevitably lead to the wrong engagement end result.  Thus, to validate the model, we need to compare the simulated trajectories with that of real missiles.The available trajectory data for the first generation missile AGM114A allowed us to make the required comparison.  For LOBL mode, the sample actual trajectories are shown below (Figure 5 REF _Ref15970998 \h ). INCLUDEPICTURE "http://www.fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/missile/hellfire-trajectory1.gif" \* MERGEFORMATINET Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 5. Real-world LOBL trajectories.These trajectories resemble parabolas.  The descent segment of the trajectory is sharper than the climb segment. Simulation should produce a similar picture.  A simulated trajectory for AGM-114K missile is shown below ( REF _Ref15895182 \h Figure 6). EMBED Excel.Chart.8 \s Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 6. Simulated LOBL trajectory for AGM114K.As seen on Figure 6 REF _Ref15895182 \h , the missile slowly ascends and sharply descends just like in real life.For LOAL-Direct mode, the real-world trajectory is shown in Figure 7 below. INCLUDEPICTURE "http://www.fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/missile/hellfire-trajectory2.gif" \* MERGEFORMATINET Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 7. Real-world LOAL-Direct trajectories.Flying in LOAL-Direct mode, a Hellfire missile initially climbs with a constant rate until a designator lights a target.  Then this gradual climb stops and the missile starts moving to the laser spot in a way similar to that of LOBL mode. A simulated trajectory is shown below (Figure 8 REF _Ref15894189 \h ). Note the simulated missile is AGM-114K, so that the maximum altitude of its trajectory is lower than that of AGM-114A. EMBED Excel.Chart.8 \s Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 8. Simulated LOAL-Direct trajectory for AGM-114K.The missile initially ascends with a constant rate and then descends  parabolicallyparabolic ally. Trajectories for the LOAL-Low mode are shown on  Figure 9 REF _Ref15899416 \h .  They are similar to that of LOAL-Direct mode with the exception of the initial climb LOAL-Low employs to clear the obstacle.  INCLUDEPICTURE "http://www.fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/missile/hellfire-trajectory4.gif" \* MERGEFORMATINET Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 9. Real-world LOAL-Low trajectories.Simulated LOAL-Low mode trajectory is shown below in Figure 10 REF _Ref15899959 \h .  It has all the components of the real one. The missile climbs sharply in the initial section of the trajectory, after that its climb rate diminishes, and finally the missile descends parabolically toward the laser spot location.  EMBED Excel.Chart.8 \s Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 10. Simulated LOAL-Low trajectory for AGM-114K.Finally, the real-world LOAL-High trajectory is displayed in Figure 11 REF _Ref15960759 \h .  It is similar to that of LOAL-Low mode; the primary differences being the steeper initial climb associated with a higher obstacle and the overall higher altitudes achieved during flight. EMBED PBrush  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 11.Real-world LOAL-High trajectories.A simulated LOAL-High mode trajectory is shown below.  As is the case of LOAL-Low mode, the simulated trajectory contains all the elements of the real-world LOAL-High trajectory.   EMBED Excel.Chart.8 \s Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 12. Simulated LOAL-High trajectory for AGM-114K.Future DevelopmentThe Hellfire physical model can be improved in many aspects.  The model flight dynamics is not actually a physics-based one.  It uses such assumptions as constant acceleration, independence of turn rate from the missile speed, etc.  The missile flight does not depend on wind.  Utilization of the physics-based flight dynamics will achieve better results.  This new flight dynamics should calculate missile movement by means of forces of thrust, gravity, air resistance, etc.The seeker model can be enhanced by more detailed sensor simulation.  The new seeker model may include simulation of the seeker modes such as scanning, tracking, and others.  More sophisticated environment effects modeling can be figured out.SummaryThe new Hellfire missile physical model is now implemented in AVCATT-A system.  Its existence demonstrates progress towards realism and increases sophistication in weapons modeling in CGF.  Inspection and testing of the improved Hellfire missile model has revealed the simulated trajectories to be sufficiently similar to the real-world trajectories, to support its validation for use with AVCATT-A.  As a result, the AVCATT-A system is enhanced so Army aviators receive better training through use of real world physical representations.References[1]	Lee Standley: “Hellfire missile manual” on disc. [2]	Adam W. Lange: “Hellfire. Getting the Most from a Lethal Missile System” Armor, January-February 1998., pp.25-30.[3] Federation of American Scientists, Military Analyst Network,       HYPERLINK "http://www.fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/missile/agm-114.htm" www.fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/missile/agm-114.htm Author BiographyBORIS DOBRYDNEV is a research scientist for BMH Associates, Inc.  He holds a M.S. degree in computer science and Ph.D. degree in physics from Old Dominion University.  He was a software developer for AVCATT-A, and has been involved with the BFTT AMN and JSAF FBE projects.descendsHellfire ModelFlight DynamicsGuidance SystemLaser Seeker