Developing the Air Expeditionary Wing Analysis System (AEWAS) for Crisis Response Decision SupportLt Col Calvin J. RomrellAir Expeditionary Force Battlelab360 Gunfighter Avenue Mountain Home AFB, ID 83648 (208) 828-3506e-mail:  HYPERLINK "mailto:calvin.romrell@mountainhome.af.mil" calvin.romrell@mountainhome.af.mil Dr. Robert J. MightInnovative Management Concepts, Inc.45625 Willow Pond PlazaSterling, Virginia 20164703-318-8044 ext 209e-mail:   HYPERLINK "mailto:rmight@imcva.com" rmight@imcva.comMichael L. MetzInnovative Management Concepts, Inc.45625 Willow Pond PlazaSterling, Virginia 20164703-318-8044 ext 210e-mail:   HYPERLINK "mailto:mmetz@imcva.com" mmetz@imcva.comKeywords:    Military, Decision Support Systems, Unit Level, System Dynamics, Resource AllocationABSTRACT:  The Air Expeditionary Wing Analysis System (AEWAS) is a proposed Air Expeditionary Force Battlelab initiative to provide a prototype quick turn analysis and simulation tool at the wing or unit level.  The proposed AEWAS prototype will provide Air Force wings or other operational organizations the following capabilities: the ability to study wing-level activities to help identify areas where improvements can lead to more effective and efficient wing level planning and execution; identify bottlenecks (constraints) in wing operations during the execution phase of an operation; identify critical resources for current and potential operations (in the operations planning process); the ability to train wing operations, maintenance, logistics and planning staffs in a manner that provides realistic stimulus and feedback (including after action review (AAR)) for both currently planned operations and alternative future operations; the ability to quickly study alternative future operations to determine the impact on current wing operational plans – this is to specifically address potential crises and the timing of these potential crises; and, the ability to rapidly “look forward” during a real operation to help make real time decisions. This paper will describe the AEWAS system and its two primary components, the Decision Support for Air Command and Control (DSACC) simulations and the Joint Resource Allocation Model (JRAM).  DSACC is a suite of six system dynamics based models of air unit operations.  JRAM is a mathematical model used for determining best resource allocations within an air wing or group of air wings.  The paper will focus on how to use the AEWAS to support crisis response and help unit level commanders evaluate their war plans, including alternative course of action, against different enemy actions.  It will also help them determine if they have sufficient resources for their planned actions and where the bottlenecks and critical resources are.Paper Number: 02S-SIW-1181.  IntroductionDuring the last twenty years, the Air Force has placed significant effort on the development and fielding of analysis and simulation (A&S) systems.  In the theater level analysis area the THUNDER simulation has proven to be an excellent tool for operational level air and space warfare analysis.  THUNDER is now being updated by the Air Force Studies and Analysis Agency with the new and more capable STORM (Synthetic Theater Operations Research Model) for the same theater level operations analysis tasks.  In the training area, the Air Warfare Simulation (AWSIM) has provided an effective tool for training at the Air and Space Operations Center (AOC) level for theater air operations.  The National Air and Space Model (NASM) that will replace AWSIM will be initially built with the same operational level focus as AWSIM for AOC training activities.  However, similar efforts have not been conducted at the tactical or unit level.  In order to improve this deficiency the concept of the Air Expeditionary Wing Analysis System (AEWAS) has been proposed to the Air Expeditionary Force Battlelab where it is now a candidate initiative. AEWAS combines a group of existing standalone models that simulate the activities of a “virtual” air expeditionary wing or group (AEW/AEG) in faster than real time.  Because AEF wings now lack a dedicated analysis and simulation (A&S) decision support system capability wing exercises must be manually scripted in a time consuming effort that often does not fully integrate the play of all wing organizations.  Due to this shortfall, wing battlestaff training suffers from a lack of A&S training tools and commanders have insufficient decision support tools.  Some of the challenges in developing AEWAS are to further explore the needs of the unit level planners and battlestaffs, design a capability within AEWAS to meet these needs, develop the system, and demonstrate AEWAS capabilities in an exercise. This paper will describe the AEWAS, its capabilities, its components, and how it will be used to help unit level commanders both train their battle staff members and help them make critical decisions. 2. AEWAS DescriptionAEWAS is the combination of the DSACC suite of system dynamics models and the JRAM model that will support tactical unit level planning analysis and execution analysis.  The planning analysis process and components of AEWAS (shown in Figure 1) starts with the real world data that flows in to an AEF unit.  This data will be stored in a database and then be pushed through a data conversion system that will provide input to the planning analysis component.  The planning analysis component provides the input data for JRAM that will conduct the resource allocation modeling to support the trade-off analysis decisions.  JRAM’s output is stored in a database and then pushed into the results analysis (planning) post-processing component. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1 - Planning Analysis Process and ComponentsThe AEWAS execution analysis process and components of AEWAS begins with either the real-world data or the results analysis from the planning analysis component as shown in Figure 2.  Either input is pushed through the data conversion component and an input database is created.  The data conversion component will be largely the same tool as that used for the planning analysis system.  From the database data is fed into the execution analysis component where the DSACC models are used to create the output.  The output is stored in a database and pushed to the results analysis (execution) post-processing component. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2 - Execution Analysis Process and ComponentsBy combining two existing and mature simulation capabilities (DSACC and JRAM) AEWAS will provide an automated A&S system to AEF units for the first time.3.  AEWAS CapabilitiesAEWAS capabilities will help the AEW/AEG commander and their battlestaffs make decisions – primarily by providing A&S support to improve responsive command and control (C2) of our expeditionary Air Force at the unit level.  While the theater level air component or joint forces commander uses the AOC to execute theater level operations, the AEW or AEG commander uses the Expeditionary Operations Center (EOC) to exercise unit level command over forces.  However, current decision support tools are not available to help the EOC exercise the entire unit’s forces.  In addition, owing to the nature of the Air Expeditionary Force (AEF) construct, many of the EOC personnel from the lead wing, and numerous other contributing units within the AEF, have never previously trained with their EOC counterparts.C2 entities (such as the Air and Space Operations Center or AOC) at the operational and strategic levels have wargames aided by simulation capabilities that allow some degree of mission rehearsal, analysis, and training.  The EOC has no comparable wargaming and simulation tools with which to exercise.  Unit level exercises are typically the product of painstaking, but mainly static and manual, planning developed by wing plans and exercise personnel.AEWAS will provide the mechanism by which the EOC can train in a simulated dynamic environment; it also supports planning, monitoring and analysis of actual AEW missions.  AEWAS will enable wing C2 personnel to train autonomously or as part of a larger theater construct.  In addition, it will provide a tool by which AEW or AEG leadership can “what if” future constraints on wing or group resources, and other developments, to determine impacts on tasked responsibilities.For the first time ever, AEWAS will allow operational-level training audiences (such as the Air Force Forces [AFFOR] staff) to simulate a virtual wing and its relevant activities and outputs interactively, across the spectrum of logistics, combat support, medical issues, as well as operations.  Currently, only wing operations and intelligence functions are adequately modeled for operational level training audiences, with the role of logistics confined to requirements necessary for flight operations.AEWAS will provide tactical C2 training and analysis opportunities, and a new capability for training operational level C2 beyond the Air and Space Operations Center (AOC).DSACC and JRAMIn this section, the two existing models – DSACC and JRAM – that will be integrated into the AEWAS are described in detail.  One of the primary reasons that the AEWAS prototype can be developed in 18 months is that the existing models will be used.DSACCDSACC is a suite of system dynamics models that simulate most of the critical activities of an air unit. DSACC supports total activity and resource management and planning for an operational AEF, providing decision support to the AEF leadership and staff.  DSACC is a state-of-the-art decision support tool that supports a more efficient AEF by providing accurate and detailed forward information about operational and other implications of resource management, planning, and day-to-day command and control decision-making.  It can provide fast, flexible 'what if' capacity to the AEF battlestaff, avoiding the risk of making expensive mistakes with the actual AEF resources due to lack of information about future effects of current or past decisions.Here is a short list of DSACC capability descriptions by active duty Air Force officers:DSACC is capable of supporting every USAF core competency, including Global Awareness and Global Command and Control, by providing comprehensive vision into Blue force data. Its ability to rapidly model alternative courses-of-action enables Air and Space Superiority, Global Attack and Precision Engagement. DSACC’s ability to predict resource requirements is how Rapid Global Mobility accomplishes Agile Combat Support.DSACC’s modeling of information flows and C2 decision processes is crucial to attaining Information Superiority.  DSACC fits into emerging concepts of operations and supports the conversion from relatively static, batch processes to the required dynamic, collaborative planning, execution, and assessment capabilities in a distributed environment.Because DSACC approaches the air and space operations problem from a holistic perspective, it provides crucial knowledge and decision support that enables such faster-than-real-time concepts.DSACC provides accurate decision support of AEF resource management, planning, and operations; for individual major resource types, functions, and operational units, in all military-political and operational conditions.  The software is a detailed modeling representation of AEF command and control decision processes, information flows, mission objectives, procedures, constraints, operational resource types, and priority systems.  It simulates future AEF operations in detail.Operational impacts of external events and factors (budgetary, climatic, geographic, military, political, and technical etc) are inputs to the modeled system. These factors, and internal resource levels, can be varied experimentally for planning purposes; thus avoiding the need to subject the AEF to risk of error from decisions whose future operational and resource effects are unknown.Prediction of future operational behavior and outcomes by DSACC takes account of all significant interactions in simulated future time between resource types and directorates, and of interactive effects of the wide variety of command and control decisions, on an AEW/AEG-wide basis.DSACC’s decision support of command and control includes 'what if' experimentation; problem and opportunity anticipation; evaluation and ranking of alternatives; coordination of interactive management and functional areas and levels; and system redesign for more-robust handling of external instability and uncertainty.DSACC comprises six standalone models.  Five of these can each deliver enhanced efficiency and effectiveness of resource-management control and planning in one or more functional areas of the operations, logistics and supply-support sectors of an AEF; for peacetime, exercises, and wartime.  The sixth model extends across those sectors, and mainly comprises the content of the other five.  For decision-support purposes, however, this model is rather more than the sum of the parts, because of additional content and linkages included.The DSACC models run on desktop or laptop PCs with any current Windows operating system.  Each functional model simulates the daily activities of all 'unit x base' elements individually, even on a worldwide basis.  Pertinent characteristics of individual aircraft types, operational units, bases, resource categories and activities (and their links with each other) are included.  Information flows, decision processes, constraints, objectives, and their constituent entities correspond to those in the real AEF.The DSACC models are:1. Operations.  This model supports peacetime flying training, exercises, and wartime mission execution analysis and training by mission type and target (for missions involving ground targets).  Management of mission availability includes the main resource types (aircraft, crews, weapons, etc); unit, mission and target priorities; resource deployments and transfers; aircraft maintenance commitments; damage to and attrition of aircraft; mission and target characteristics; interfaces with other functional areas; and various operational constraints and objectives.  Selection of bomb and missile configurations for individual target types is simulated.  Significant characteristics of any likely 'scenario' (e.g. enemy ground defenses and radius of action) have been modeled.  Each may be experimentally varied in the model, without having to commit actual assets in order to ascertain effects of variation.2. Aviation fuel.  This DSACC model treats aviation fuel, supply, requisition, storage, and use; and the requisition and supply of permanent, temporary, and emergency fuel storage facilities at base locations and elsewhere.  These factors are interactively related to operational requirements.  Unit deployments; transfers and redirections of resources in transit; delivery delays and other lead times; and operational constraints, objectives, and priorities are all taken into account.3. Aircraft maintenance.  Each maintenance level is individually modeled, by operational unit and aircraft type etc; including frequency of entry and duration of stay per aircraft, and dedicated mechanic hours needed for each type of task.  The various aspects of aircraft spares are fully treated, in conjunction with scheduled maintenance and otherwise.  Repair of aircraft damage, resupply of reparable aircraft spares, and pre-flight servicing are included.  Unit priorities, between the various types of tasks performed by mechanics (in case of competition for this scarce resource), and between grounded aircraft that are available for cannibalization, are accessible to experimentation.  Off-base maintenance at individual levels is a modeled option.  The model supports management decision-making and policy formulation involving links between aircraft maintenance, flying operations and other functional and resource areas.4. Aircraft munitions.  Manufacture, procurement, provisioning, requisition, selection for operational use, and storage of bombs, their associated components, and other types of air weapons stores (ammunition, missiles, etc).  This model simulates selection of suitable bomb and missile configurations for each unit's planned activities.  Characteristics and limitations of individual aircraft types, relative to numbers and types of stores that can be carried, are linked to operational requirements in this model.  Priority issues feature prominently in simulated behavior when resource shortfalls occur.  These issues relate to ranking of scheduled target types, and to choice between different mission types (each of which may involve desired categories or combinations of air weapons stores).5. Personnel.  This model simulates operational personnel resource categories attached to operational units; including crews in training, operational crews, mechanics, and munitions assemblers/ loaders.  Other categories could be readily added.  Allocations to, and employment by, units are included, together with deployments, transfers, and losses.  Interfaces of personnel categories with operational activity rates and other resource categories have been modeled.6. The AEF model.  All aspects from the five functional models are brought together.  This model treats interactions between and within the main functions in a fully system-wide context: so that dynamic effects of any external or internal change may be determined, wherever in the overall system those effects will occur.JRAMThe current version of JRAM is an operational level planning and force structure analysis model that links military operations to unit and system capabilities in a sophisticated, but simple manner.  JRAM uses the Advanced Integrated Multidimensional Modeling System (AIMMS) analytic decision support software.  The model explicitly treats information in planning and accounts for the use of information during execution.  It identifies the value of information while identifying the best force structure for alternative Concepts of Operation for multiple theaters.  One of the AEWAS development tasks will be to modify JRAM to provide more information at the tactical or unit level of war.In JRAM, military goals and objectives are unique sets of tasks that are prioritized by time and place to represent different concepts of operations.  This permits a planner or analyst to study unit and system capabilities, and the information associated with these capabilities, for many Concepts of Operation.Each task has specific completion criteria.  Units/systems and the associated information needs to complete each task are studied independently to generate data for each unit/system when performing that task.  This is accomplished using a combination of operational planning factors and existing simulations and models at the one-on-one and small engagement level of combat.  Operational planners are a primary source of information when this input is developed.  They are the ones who must decide in a real situation what resources would be allocated to specific tasks.  Simulations and models help establish system effectiveness and attrition for units and systems performing specific tasks.  Once this data and the task priorities are established for a given Concept of Operations, JRAM performs an optimum allocation of systems to tasks for each Concept of Operations.  The Concept of Operations can be for a large unit when studying equipment needs of the unit or a theater level JTF when studying a CINC’s force structure needs.The allocation is constrained by many factors that influence system availability.  The following are some constraint examples for a JTF level assessment: location of existing units/systems and lift available to get them to the theater of operation, funds to purchase new systems and base them so they can be used in a timely manner, funds for peacetime operations and maintenance, intelligence information that is essential for generating Air Tasking Orders, etc.  The value of information is only one of many factors that influence the ability of a force to complete a set of complex, interrelated tasks.  In JRAM, information is not treated in isolation.  Using JRAM, the value of information is identified in terms of the other systems that would be needed to implement a concept of operations if the information is missing or not timely.  That is, JRAM simultaneously determines the marginal contribution of information and all contributing systems (primary and support).There are many tasks that are essential to a concept of operations.  JRAM allows a planner or analyst to add one or many types of tasks (destroy, deny, disrupt, deceive, deploy, etc.) that require resources to complete, and then study the impact on other tasks when resources are allocated to complete the new tasks.  JRAM allows tasks to be impacted by information in both the planning and the execution phase of an operation.  For example, in a “destroy” type task the number of aircraft needed to destroy a given set of targets is determined by the ability of ISR assets to detect, classify, and discriminate.  For example, if we cannot discriminate between real targets and decoys the number of sorties needed to destroy the targets will be significantly greater.  The ability of the communication networks to link this information in a timely manner then affects the ability of the planning process to get the information to the appropriate people in a timely manner.ISR assets and the communication network can be constrained by a planner or analyst to study the impact on the overall concept of operation.  This allows an analyst to vary any system parameter (primary weapon system or supporting system - including information systems) to study the impact on many different concepts of operations.  By treating tasks, system capabilities, funds, peacetime basing, lift, acquisition costs, and operation/maintenance costs parametrically, a planner or analyst can study the value of information and the systems needed to provide or deny information as an integral part of the entire force structure. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3 - JRAM Basis ConceptFigure 1 shows JRAM from an operational planners perspective.  The triangles are the changes in the tasks and the things that need to be done.  Constant changes to determine how best to use existing resources to accomplish the tasks.  Operational planners start with changes to the tasks with their “what ifs?”  They   concentrate on changes to the tasks they need to do (constrained by resources) and determine if existing resources are sufficient or more are needed to accomplish the tasks that need to be done.  An operational level planner’s emphasis is on tasks completed, but always constrained by the resources used are within reasonable bounds.  An operational planner would use JRAM to help identify the best set of resources for alternative future operations.  This can greatly assist in the establishment of resource requirements.  Unit level planners would do the same type of analysis with the exception that their tasks are directed by the AOC and they need to determine if they have the resources (in terms of aircraft, munitions, crews, fuel, and maintenance capability) to accomplish the tasks. In summary, optimum resource allocation is used to identify the “best” set of systems to complete tasks in a military operation.  This is accomplished using a prescriptive model such as JRAM.  A prescriptive model has an objective function (in our case this is  “optimize the value of the combat and combat support tasks completed”), a given set of resources, (which can include funds to buy new resources) and a set of constraints.  The objective function maximizes the sum of the tasks that can be performed for a given set of resources and constraints.  The constraints limit the ability of systems to perform the tasks.  Some of the more important constraints are based on:the number of primary systems in the existing force structurethe funds to buy more primary systemsthe number of support systems in the existing force structure that impact the effectiveness of the primary systems the funds to buy more support systemsthe funds to operate the systems (both in the CONUS and at forward operating bases)the information about the tasks that allow systems to be allocated to perform the task (e.g. target detection and classification)The results provide the marginal contribution of existing and proposed systems to alternative concepts of operations and the tasks that are completed.  The tasks that are not completed provide an excellent way to quantitative the risk associated with alternative force structures and Concepts of Operation.  During AEWAS development, both DSACC and JRAM will be more finely focused on the AEW/AEG operations and unit level activities.  Integrating DSACC and JRAM The AEWAS Battlelab Initiative proposes to combine DSACC and JRAM into the AEWAS.  This effort will include the following phases:Phase I – User Requirements Identification (3 months)Phase II – Conceptual and Detailed Design (4 months)Phase III – Design Implementation (11 months)Phase IV – Test (4 months)Phase V – Installation and Training (2 months)Phase VI – Exercise Demonstration (2 months).Some phase activities overlap and the total development effort for the initial prototype is 18 months.The task of building the proposed AEWAS from the existing DSACC and JRAM systems requires that IMC build a planning analysis component and an execution analysis component.  The planning analysis component is shown in Figure 1.The execution analysis component of AEWAS is shown in Figure 2.  Since both DSACC and JRAM are existing systems, the AEWAS prototype development process will be primarily on building a system around them that allows their capability to be integrated.  This will include identifying the real world data available at and generated by an AEW/AEG unit, building the data converters to move the data into one of the models or out of the models, building relational databases, identifying the data required by each model, and obtaining the required data.  Working with potential future users at the unit level, we will identify more fully their A&S needs and build the AEWAS to meet those needs.5.  Using AEWAS to Support Crisis Action PlanningAEWAS will be a capability embedded within each AEF lead wing (both in the Combat Air Forces and Mobility Air Forces).  This capability will enable the lead wing commander to do part task training for selected elements of the EOC (logistics, base operability, operations, medical, special and personal staff, command post, or maintenance operations), or to conduct EOC-wide training with lead wing personnel augmented by “gained” additions from other AEF units.  Further, AEWAS will be an integral capability within those operational wargaming units (Warrior Preparation Center or 505 Exercise Control Squadron) that have been tasked to add AFFOR training to their agendas in addition to AOC-centric exercises.  These organizations can also use AEWAS to feed aggregated simulations designed to train joint staffs. The AEWAS simulations will feed work center outputs to appropriate functional persons in the EOC and the system will be designed to support the EOC for training and analysis purposes.  AEWAS outputs will include graphical and tabular data, and inputs to C4I systems such as Theater Battle Management Core Systems – Unit Level (TBMCS-UL) and USMTF-formatted messages.  In short, the system will meet output and information exchange requirements from all unit control centers of a virtual wing up to the wing focal point within the EOC.In the event that an operational-level training audience is targeted (e.g. the AFFOR staff), the system can aggregate key products of an EOC (reports, messages, data) and provide them with minimum human interface to the C4I systems employed by the AFFOR staff.  The disaggregated detail of model content supports a wide range of output information.AEWAS will build upon the operations-oriented output of models such as Air Warfare Simulation (AWSIM), JQUAD, and Logistics Simulation (LOGSIM) and their successors, National Air and Space Model (NASM) and Joint Simulation System (JSIMS).  By providing information pertaining to over 23 other functional areas within the wing (such as personnel data, unit intelligence, base civil engineering, force protection, etc), AEWAS will provide a mechanism to simulate wing inputs which heretofore have only been possible by having robust wing level play; a rare occurrence.Because AEWAS will simulate expeditionary wing or group activities (in advance of those activities), wing planners and leadership can use the models to determine effects; thereby creating an effects-based decision-making capability.  For example, force deployment data may be changed to determine the impact of future wing capabilities to perform mission tasks.AEWAS will include a detailed database that supports replication by the suite of models of the makeup (combat, combat support, and combat service support) of an expeditionary wing.  This database will be tailored as necessary to create the optimum environment for wing or AFFOR-level training and analysis.6.  SummaryThis paper described why AEF units need the A&S capabilities of AEWAS as a unit level decision support and simulation tool.  The Air Expeditionary Force Battlelab identified the need for an A&S tool to train the AEW/AEG battlestaffs and EOCs and AEWAS was identified as a potential candidate initiative to meet that need.  The proposed AEWAS prototype will be built around the existing DSACC and JRAM models – saving development time and money.  The primary challenge to the developers is identifying the user needs at the unit level and building the capability to meet those needs into the AEWAS prototype.  Once AEWAS is developed AEF commanders and their battlestaffs will have an additional capability in their toolset to support crisis action planning and battlestaff training.7. ReferencesAir Force Agency for Modeling and Simulation (2000).  Operational Requirements Document, HQ USAF 009-93-11, National Air and Space Model (NASM), Version 2.0.Forrester, Jay W., (1968).  Principles of Systems, (2nd ed.).  Waltham, MA: Pegasus Communications.Forrester, Jay W. (1987).  Lessons from System Dynamics Modeling.  System Dynamics Review,3(2), 136-149.Might, Dr. Robert J (2000): The Role of Resource Allocation Models in the Quadrennial Defense Review Process, Military Operations Research Society Mini Symposium, Vienna, VA, April 2000.Streiffer, Dan (2000): AIMMS 3: New version of Advanced Integrated Multidimensional Modeling System provides fully integrated application development environment.  OR/MS Today, August 2000. INCLUDEPICTURE "http://lionhrtpub.com/orms/cleardot.gif" \* MERGEFORMATINET Author BiographiesCALVIN J. ROMRELL is Director, Tanker Operations, at the Air Expeditionary Force Battlelab at Mountain Home Air Force Base, Idaho.  He was the project officer for the Integrated Flight Operations Initiative, which documented all of the C2 processes of the Expeditionary Operations Center.  He is an RC-135 and KC-135 Master Navigator.  He has had command and control experience at the wing and joint headquarters level.  He studied simulation at the Air Force Institute of Technology. DR. ROBERT MIGHT’S experience as a researcher, teacher, planner, and developer of models and simulations of military operations spans more than 20 years.  During this period, he has conducted research in the representation of command and control for the Air Force, Army, and the Office of the Secretary of Defense.  As a full-time faculty member at George Mason University, he taught modeling, simulation, wargaming, and systems engineering courses at the graduate-level.  He also developed and managed interactive wargames and simulations to support the curriculum at the National Defense University’s Gaming and Simulation Center.  He has been involved in the planning and development of several large-scale theater-level models and simulations including THUNDER and STORM.  He is the developer of the original Theater Attack Model (TAM) at the Air Force Studies and Analysis Agency and of the Joint Resource Allocation Model (JRAM).  He is currently president of a systems engineering and information technology firm in northern Virginia.MICHAEL METZ, Vice President of Innovative Management Concepts, is the Technical Director of the Joint Warfare System (JWARS) Verification and Validation program.  He is a specialist in the design, development, verification, validation, and accreditation of simulations.  He has been the User Group Chairman for the RAND Strategy Assessment System (RSAS), a mission space modeler for the STORM simulation, and a researcher and author in the areas of simulation verification and validation.PAGE  