Minutes, HLA FEDEP WG 3-13-2002 MeetingMinutes taken by M. Petty.  Whenever possible, comments are attributed to the speaker.  Comments should be considered to be paraphrasings, except those in quotation marks which are quotations.  Unidentified speakers are designated in this document as “Q”.Call to orderMorse calls meeting to order at 1904.  She asks people to sign attendance list.Morse:  This is not a FEDEP PDG meeting.  This meeting is a provisional convening of the IEEE FEDEP Working Group (WG), which is officially a subgroup of the IEEE SISC.  “I am interim chair for this meeting solely for the purpose of running the meeting and holding elections”.  Officers elected tonight will be submitted for approval by the SISC at their meeting 3-14-2002.FEDEP productization process and optionsLutz presents “FEDEP Productization”.< Slides of presentation included by reference.  Material on slides not repeated here. >Lutz:  The FEDEP PDG has existed since 3-28-2001.  The FEDEP PDG recommends making the FEDEP an IEEE Recommended Practice.  The next FEDEP draft is expected to be out in April or May 2002, and may be ready for balloting by Summer 2002.  The existence of an MOU between SISO and IEEE (or the lack thereof) could effect whether the FEDEP becomes a SISO or IEEE product, i.e., the MOU could affect the productization path for the FEDEP.  The IEEE PAR (Project Authorization Request) for an IEEE FEDEP product must be submitted by an appropriate sponsor (e.g., SISC) to initiate the IEEE product development process.Lutz recommends submitting a PAR to maintain possible courses of action, whether or not an MOU is approved.  He outlines the different courses of action with and without MOU approval.Lutz:  The FEDEP PDG has not decided yet whether the FEDEP productization will be within IEEE or SISO; submitting a PAR preserves both options.  The PDG’s preferred route to FEDEP productization is still within SISO.  The FEDEP WG mirrors FEDEP PDG, but within the IEEE structure.  The WG is an IEEE group, within the SISC; PDG is SISO group; the two are parallel groups.Scrudder:  The SISO FEDEP PDG is expected to produce draft 4 for the FEDEP.  In the next round of review, will the SISO PDG or the IEEE WG perform the review?Lutz:  That is open for discussion.  The PDG will put the FEDEP up on a web site for open review.  Then the PDG will vote to determine if it is ready for balloting, or if there are outstanding issues.  Parallel efforts by the PDG and WG could be made to put the document up for open review, discuss it on separate reflectors, and conduct two votes to go to ballot.   The two groups [PDG and WG] must operate independently until a decision is made to follow the SISO or IEEE productization tracks.Lutz presents FEDEP productization schedule.< Slide “The Way Ahead” included here by reference. >Lutz:  Closure has been reached on most of the round 3 comments.  According to this proposed schedule, an electronic voting period is planned to start 4-1-2002.  The Assigned Reviewers can begin work immediately, even while waiting for electronic vote results.  Assigned Reviewers perform a first assessment as to whether drafting group has successfully resolved comments.  On 5-31-2002 an initial decision point for selecting a productization track (SISO or IEEE) based on MOU status  is reached.  If the MOU status has been determined, only one balloting pool will need to be formed.  A vote begins 6-24-2002 on whether to take the document to ballot or conduct another review round.  A balloting group forms in August.  A Ballot Resolution Committee (BRC) will be established at the Fall 2002 SIW.  This is the last possible decision point for selecting the productization track; if no MOU is in place by then, the recommended course is to break off from SISO and follow the IEEE track.  IEEE balloting is expected in October-November 2002, followed by a ballot resolution period.Q:  Must SISC attendees be IEEE members?Morse:  No.Q:  If there is a fourth review round, how long will it take?Lutz: About a month.Q:  Is there a strong objective to finish this year?Lutz:  We’ve started with a reasonably mature product, it has been through several rounds of review already.  The users want a recognized product.  We’ll never be able to make the product perfect.  The question is whether it is good enough to be useful.  It is Recommended Practice, not a standard.  There is no specific deadline.  There is a general desire to see it occur as quickly as possible.  Right now, I know of no outstanding issues with the FEDEP, except a few from people who have not been part of the PDG process.  When we put the document out for open review, we will see comments from people who have not been part of the process and who want a fourth round.  PDG and WG members should participate in that discussion.  A fourth round of review is better than having outstanding issues in balloting.Turrell:  DMSO is taking a “hands-off” position with respect to FEDEP productization.  DMSO wants a product as quickly as possible, but if it needs to go to another round of review, then “so be it”.Scrudder:  The existence of a consensus among PDG/WG members does not guarantee that the balloting group will also agree.  The balloting group could include SCS members and IEEE SISC members.  How do we form WG officially?Morse:  Membership availability must be announced at the SISC meetings, with similar voting rights rules.  My sense is that like the PDG meetings, everyone who shows up will be able to vote.Turrell:  Voting blocks can form in the balloting pool.  If we move too quickly, some people may recruit supporters to their position during the balloting.  If we form two parallel groups, with overlapping membership, what is to say that the two FEDEPs will be the same?Lutz:  It doesn’t matter if they are the same, there will be no merging of different documents.  One path or the other will end when a productization path is selected, and one of the documents will be dropped.Turrell:  Won’t that cause voting blocks to form?Lutz:  There is primarily a single group of people interested in the FEDEP, who have been participating in the PDG all along, so no divergence between SISO and IEEE FEDEP documents expected.Scrudder:  A divergence is possible.Lutz:  We can avoid that by making the productization track decision at the first decision point.Scrudder:  The decision doesn’t have to be made until September.Lutz:  I was trying to give SISO as much time as possible to finalize the MOU.  We have already given them a year.  We can decide as a group that enough time has elapsed.Turrell:  IEEE will review all the SISO processes and procedures.  We hope that all the work done by the SISO PDG will transfer to the IEEE WG.  That may or may not occur.  It is more than an MOU document that has to be approved.Lutz:  When we reach the first decision point, who makes the decision?  There is no PDG meeting at that time?Scrudder:  Can the PDG vote electronically?Morse:  Yes.Lutz:  What would we vote on, the choice between the IEEE or SISO paths?Scrudder:  Yes.Lutz:  Does the WG want an electronic PDG vote on the question of a SISO or IEEE path in May, based on the current status of the MOU?Turrell moves to approve the WG making the SISO or IEEE path decision by electronic vote; Scrudder seconds.No vote is taken on the motion, due to ensuing discussion.Morse:  The PDG can’t vote here, we’re not the PDG.Scrudder:  This idea should be put on the PDG reflector.Turrell:  There is a certain sense of urgency.  Several NATO tasks are dependent in part on a FEDEP, we need to keep the process moving.Scrudder:  Does NATO care if the FEDEP becomes a SISO or IEEE product?Igarza:  The NATO STANAG is assuming there will be an IEEE FEDEP standard.Scrudder:  After a PAR is submitted, how long does the WG have to produce standard?Little:  Two years.Scrudder:  If the PDG continued their work to the point of producing a SISO standard, then it was decided that the IEEE/SISO MOU would work, they could then take [the FEDEP] to IEEE balloting.Little:  There could be copyright problem.Scrudder:  SISO would have to transfer copyright.Lutz:  Balloting is generally a painful process, doing it twice is to be avoided.Scrudder:  The second balloting process would be work but it would add some value.Lutz:  As PDG chair, I believe my group wants a product sooner.Morse requests motions on:1.  Election of officers for the WG.2.  Submitting a PAR to IEEE for the FEDEP.3.  Making a decision at the May decision point between the IEEE and SISO productization routes by way of by way of an electronic vote of IEEE WG.Lutz:  How is “success” defined in votes on whether or not to go ahead with balloting?Scrudder:  What did the HLA WG do on their vote to proceed?Lutz:  Symington asked the HLA WG to decide by a show of hands vote.Scrudder:  Balloting takes a lot more effort than a round of document review.Lutz:  Suppose PDG votes to take the document to balloting by something less than near unanimity, such as 60-40.  I don’t want to go to balloting with such a small majority.Scrudder:  The SISC makes the final decision about whether to go to ballot.Little:  The SISC chair can decide and ask for a vote after the fact.The discussion of how to adjudicate decision to go to ballot continues.Petty:  Perhaps the WG should vote on the threshold for the proceed-to-ballot vote.Lutz:  Someone would suggest a threshold.Morse:  SISC itself must make the final decision.Election of WG officersMorse conducts an election of officers for the FEDEP WG.For Chair:  Lutz, nominated by Little, seconded by Bouwens; no other nominations.Vote taken on officer, 15 in favor, one opposed.  Lutz elected as FEDEP WG Chair.For Vice-Chair:  Scrudder, nominated by Bouwens, Scrudder declines.Little, nominated by Scrudder, seconded by Lutz.Vote taken on officer, none opposed, Little elected as FEDEP WG Vice-Chair.For Secretary:  Morse nominated by Little, seconded by Bouwens.Vote taken, no dissent, Morse elected FEDEP WG Secretary.For Technical Editor:  Scrudder, nominated by Bouwens, seconded by Rouget.Vote taken on officer, none opposed, Scrudder elected Technical Editor.FEDEP productization decisionsLutz, as newly elected FEDEP WG Chair, takes over meeting.  Petty continues taking notes at request of Morse, FEDEP WG Secretary.Lutz asks WG if they have reviewed the PAR.  Lutz explains that the PAR was written assuming the FEDEP productization would follow the IEEE path.Morse moves to authorize the officers to make a decision about forwarding the PAR to the IEEE NesCom; motion seconded by Little.Vote taken on motion, none opposed, motion passes.Morse states that the SISC has to ratify this decision.Scrudder moves to give WG Chair authority to set the majority threshold that must be met in a WG vote to ask SISC to forward FEDEP for balloting, and to allow WG Chair to conduct that vote electronically.  Seconded by Little.Scrudder:  If decision is made to go SISO route instead of IEEE, none of this matters.Vote taken on motion, none opposed, motion passes.Lutz:  Will IEEE/SISO decision will be made in May?Scrudder:  I don’t think we’ll be able to make decision in May.Lutz:  If MOU is not in place by May, or it’s final outcome is not known in May, we should follow the IEEE route.Scrudder:  No one has done this yet with IEEE.Lutz:  Switching from the SISO path to the IEEE path may be delayed or blocked by legal problems.Turrell moves that WG make SISO vs. IEEE productization path decision in May; seconded by Little.Vote taken on motion, none opposed, motion passes.Scrudder:  Information about this decision should be conveyed to SISO.Lutz identifies notifying SISO as an action item.  He also states that the fact that a May decision point has been established should be passed to McKeeby and McLean.Motion to adjourn made; seconded.  Vote taken on motion, none opposed, motion passes.Meeting adjourns at 2033.End of Minutes, HLA FEDEP WG 3-13-2002 Meeting