Web-Based Repository for STRICOM SNE ObjectsJames SchaeferBenito GranielaPerry HeardSAIC12479 Research Parkway Suite 600Orlando, FL 32826407-207-3633, 407-306-1636, 407-207-3637James.R.Schaefer@saic.com, Benito.M.Graniela@saic.com, Perry.L.Heard@saic.comJulio de la CruzSTRICOMAMSTI-ES (Julio de la Cruz)12350 Research ParkwayOrlando, FL 32826-3224407-384-3733Julio_DeLaCruz@stricom.army.milKeywords:3-D model, repository, search engineABSTRACT:  Over the years the M&S community has developed numerous Synthetic Natural Environment (SNE) databases for analysis, training, mission-rehearsal and many other military simulation applications.  These environments are composed of atmospheric, space, oceanographic and geological components.  The land component of the SNE includes features, which are prime components for reuse.  Fixed features include 3D models of buildings, bridges, and other point features and moving models of components such as tanks and aircraft.  These products are expensive and time consuming to produce, but they offer the potential for re-use if organized and made available to future projects and programs.  Web-Based Repository for STRICOM SNE Objects (WBRO) creates a user-friendly method of searching and accessing these products.  Under funding from STRICOM, SAIC has established a test bed for the development of a repository, which will allow reuse of SNE components.  The WBRO project provides a framework and an environment where ideas for cataloging, searching, and exchange of SNE products can be developed and tested.  Among the ideas being investigated and tested are issues such as meta data content standards, restricted access to limited distribution databases and models, user requirements (both database content and search engines), and linkages to SEDRIS and SEDRIS FOCUS (a suite of value adding products).This paper will present the current status of the Web-Based Repository for STRICOM SNE Objects as well as present a demonstration of the current capabilities.  More importantly, it will also discuss the issues involved in standardizing the storage of SNE models and databases and in creating user-friendly search engines that satisfy the needs of the large and diverse M&S customer base.  Both these elements are essential in developing repositories that are both robust and easy to use.  Therefore, they should be of prime concern to M&S SNE providers as reuse becomes more and more important to simulation developers.IntroductionIn order to support training on new virtual battle spaces new synthetic environments must be developed.  These environments are normally constructed using terrain elevation and feature data.  To quickly, efficiently, and economically build these virtual environments, source data must be readily available and easy to find.  As part of the process, point features are normally replaced with corresponding 3D models; textures are used on polygon surfaces based on areal and material characteristics.  Significant savings in development time and money can result from the re-use of visual 3D models in the process.  The Web-Based Repository for STRICOM SNE Objects is a system that in the future will be a user-friendly portal between customers and the vast quantity of pre-existing models and databases.  This paper describes the current status of this project with the goal of generating feedback on the test bed system so that we can make necessary changes to the system well before it is actually operational.BackgroundThe current methodology for building a simulation terrain database is to hire a contractor to build the terrain skin and overlay it with 3D models provided by the contractor.  In order to save time and money in the future STRICOM decided to build a repository that would hold all the models that have already been built under various contracts (CCTT Korean database, Kosovo database, etc.).  This repository would be available to the public (with appropriate restrictions) to use in building future databases.  Thus, when contracting for a new database the government could specify that the models used would be from the WBRO and therefore be government furnished information.  It would also allow potential contractors to study the models before bidding on a new contract.  A side benefit of this repository work would be the development of standards for new model development.  In the future, new model development would have to be to a set standard that everyone would understand—instead of a new standard for each contract. In order to have a system that people could easily utilize it was decided to first build a test bed system that would be used to let people test-drive and provide comments while at the same time we work towards understanding the full requirements and developing the standards.Best Practices StudyOne of the things that everyone understood going into this project was that many others are doing similar repositories and/or search engines.  Table 1 provides just a glimpse at the major systems investigated. EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Table  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1. Comparison of just some of the other repositories investigated.We tried to use the best practices from each so that we are not reinventing the wheel.  In this case pros and cons are only in relation to our needs, and are not meant to imply good or bad practices.  As you can see in the comments section, we used ideas/solutions from MEL (Master Environmental Library), Virtual Targets Library, the TEC 3D Model Library, Facets 3D Models, and the 3D Model Works.  One of the things that we discovered in looking through all the various sites was that there are a lot of different methods of searching the information based on the intended users level of understanding.  It was deemed crucial to the success of this repository that we have search methodologies that spanned virtually the entire spectrum of users knowledge.  Once the metadata is setup, creating different methods of searching on the information is relatively simple.  Therefore, we set up three different methods based on the assumption that we would have users that are not familiar with STRICOM models, somewhat familiar, and know exactly what the Korean CCTT database is and only wants to look at those models.  That way we are not forcing the power user to wade through everything that a novice user needs just to get at the right model to satisfy their needs.There are many other sites that we investigated that are not in the table, and there are numerous others that we are constantly discovering through contact with other organizations.  This will remain an ongoing effort to stay abreast with the community of repositories.  Metadata IssuesMetadata is the key to any search engine.  Good metadata is essential if the user is going to be able to quickly and efficiently search for artifacts of interest.  Although standards exist for metadata formats, its contents are most of the time less then acceptable to support practical searches.  Therefore, most of the time this requires the extraction of feature descriptors directly from the data itself.The initial metadata standard selected for the repository was the Content Standard for Digital Geospatial Metadata (CSDGM).  The standard defines the information required by a prospective user to determine the availability and fitness of a set of geospatial data for an intended use.  The standard establishes the names of data elements and compound elements and information about the values that are to be provided for the data elements.The CSDGM elements, which describe the metadata, are:Identification Information—basic information about the data set like citation, description, spatial domain, keywords, and access and use constraintsData Quality Information—general assessment of the quality of the data setSpatial Data Organization Information—information on the mechanism used to represent spatial information in the data setSpatial Reference Information—details on the spatial reference used for the data setEntity and Attribute Information—details about the information content of the data set, including the entities types, their attributes, and the domains from which attribute values may be assignedDistribution Information—provides the distributor of, and options for obtaining, the data setMetadata Reference Information—describes how current is the metadata information, and the responsible partyThe main idea behind using the CSDGM is that it will be possible in the future for users to discover the availability of Geospatial data at other clearinghouses, which support the standard.  For example, MEL users could discover 3D models stored at the Web Based Repository quickly and easily.  Figure 1 shows the data flow used to populate the metadata files. EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure 1. Data flow for metadata generation.  The data used to populate the CSDGM fields was obtained from the 3D model SEDRIS transmittals.  The initial sets of 3D models used to populate the repository were extracted from CCTT databases.  Since the amount of metadata provided on the source databases was limited it was augmented with a relational database generated by the TSGA project.  The result was an extensive set of classification and attributes codes in the CSDGM attribute section.  In the future it will be more convenient if the metadata was stored in the STF (SEDRIS Transmittal Format).  This way as the models are extracted from the STF model library the necessary metadata in CSDGM is generated and no augmentation is necessary.The initial approach used for discovery of SNE artifacts was a simple search using the ISEARCH engine.Although it was possible to search the metadata itself, more meaningful searches are possible through the use of relational databases.  However, the schema necessary to build a relational databases that contains all the fields in CSDGM is too complex and may not prove to be practical.  Therefore, it was decided to build a simpler relational database schema, which is populated by selected database fields.  For this purpose a Java program was developed which takes the CSDGM data, builds the necessary relational database tables, and populates the database.  This approach allows for the test bed to regenerate and populate the relational database using different schemas.SEDRIS LinkageIf this system is not user-friendly, then it will not be used.  That is our mantra whenever we had to make a decision on how to do things for this repository.  One of the things that is absolutely essential is that it work well with SEDRIS.  This means not only that the internals are compatible with SEDRIS, but also the systems be fully integrated on the inside and the outside.  As a first step we are making it easy for a user to get at some of the tools within SEDRIS to view and manipulate the databases that they download from our site.  In the demonstration we show how easy it is to download an STF and then view it using side-by-side.In the future the user will be able to sit at the computer and search for available databases, download the STF, view the STF, and manipulate the STF to meet needs, and then upload the new STF to the repository. The repository will then be able to extract the correct metadata and after validation by the system controller, make the database available for others to search and download.  All without the user even being aware of the switch between the repository and SEDRIS sites.   Demonstration of Current Repository Test-BedArchitectureThe current test bed architecture is composed of three tiers; client, application server, and database server.  The client is currently a web browser but it could be any application, which can connect to the application server.  It is conceivable that database generation systems could directly query the application server for the availability of models.  The application server receives user requirements or queries and relays those to the database server.  The applications server also handles system administration tasks and client data presentation and formatting issues.  The database server mimics the functionality provided by the relational database thereby isolating the system from relational database specific issues.  As the system grows, it should be possible to replace the relational database with a more powerful system and not affect the rest of the system.Figure 2 shows the major building blocks of the architecture.  Clients connect to the application server to request information about SNE artifacts.  The application server queries the database server for information meeting the needs of the client.  The database server searches for information that matches the user request and returns information to the application server, which contains the location and metadata descriptions of the SNE artifacts.  The application server uses the information provided by the database server to display the information to the client. EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure 2. Architecture for current WBRO configuration. The data presented to the user may consist of 3D model representations, text descriptions, and other documentation available for the artifacts.Searching for ModelsAs discussed earlier, the search engine provides three types of searches (see fig. 3).  The first is for the novice user who only knows that he wants “a tank”.  He can type in the keyword “tank” and he will get every instance of the word “tank”.  The disadvantage to this simple a search method is that he will not only get the M1-A1 “tank”, he will also get a myriad of other hits including oil storage “tank”.   We hope in the future to make this into more of a drop down menu of possible key words to make the system easier to use. Figure 3.  Initial search engine page.  Allows users to select which type of search to use.The second methodology is the use of attributes in the form of common words (see fig. 4).  This is for the user who knows about possible models but may not know where they exist or what database they were originally in.  In this case the user goes down a series of drop down menus to narrow the search for what he wants.  The disadvantage is that he must have some level of understanding of information like what a domain is and other such things.  Each level narrows the search, but the user can stop at any level and get all the instances that match to that level.  We plan in the future to make the system such that after the user picks something for level 1 that level 2 and below only has selections that fit what was selected for level 1. Figure 4. Entity type search.  Allows users to select from pre-selected entity types.The third methodology is for what we call the power user (see fig. 5).  This individual is very familiar with the databases and has a pretty good idea of he wants.  He can go to models using specific EDCS codes. Figure 5. ECC search page.  Allows users that know and understand ECC to do specific searches.Model InformationOne of the requirements for this system that is constantly being updated is what information does the user need to make an intelligent decision on what model is the right one for their needs.  At this time we have the capability to show several things on the page that comes up after the initial query (see fig. 6).  We show a thumbnail of the model just to give the user an idea of what the model is—just in case they wanted a storage tank and instead have an M1 tank.  Clicking on the thumbnail gives the key metadata in plain text (see figs. 7 and 8).Figure 6. Initial page that provides basic information on available models based on user search criteria.Figure 7. Detailed information on specific model selected by user.  Note that this page scrolls through many pages of information.  The next is shown in the following figure.Figure 8.  Continuation of the previous figure.What exactly is “key metadata” we are still investigating using the test bed system.  In fact, at this point we have to hand enter much of the key metadata since we do not want to spend the time to automate until we have a better idea on what the user needs to see on this page.Going back to the previous page gives the user the ability to go to several different locations.  The user can view the entire metadata, download a pdf file that contains the CCTT data sheet (or something similar for non-CCTT models), go to a VRML viewer, or directly download the model STF.  The user can also go directly to the SEDRIS page for SEDRIS tools, go to other repositories (MEL/ESG, etc.) that may have what they need, go to VRML page, or just get more information by using one of the links to other M&S sites (see fig. 9).  Figure 9.  Page that provides downloads of tools that may be useful to the user.ConclusionIn this paper, we presented the ongoing work to create a user-friendly, readily available data repository.   We still have many problems to overcome and we would appreciate any feedback and/or suggestions to make this system better.  The only way to improve the user interface is to get feedback from potential users and existing providers.The future of repositories is that we need to make them more compatible with the other tools that the simulation user will utilize when constructing a simulation or a particular scenario.  It is difficult for people that are not familiar with the domains of the SNE to know even the basics of all four domains.  SME’s will not always be available to assist, so the less training and experience is required, the best.  Therefore, it is extremely important for a coordinated effort to, if not combine, at least create intense cooperation between the repository, search engine, toolkit, and translator programs and teams. It is the authors’ opinion that the more we can make all the various systems work together and compliment each other the more our customers will use the right tool at the right time to create the right solution.Author BiographiesDr. Jim Schaefer is a Senior Scientist with SAIC.  Dr. Schaefer serves as project director and principal investigator for Web Based Repository for STRICOM SNE Objects.  Prior to joining SAIC, Dr. Schaefer was in the U.S. Air Force serving in various technical and leadership positions.  Dr. Schaefer earned a B.S. in Physics from the University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire in 1977, a B.S in Meteorology from the University of Utah in 1980, and an M.S. and Ph.D. from Texas A&M University in 1985 and 1988 respectively.Benito Graniela is a software engineer at SAIC, where he works on visual and computer generated forces representation for urban synthetic environments.  Prior to SAIC he did research at the Institute for Simulation and Training in interoperability of visual distributed environments and as a result developed a deep understanding of the basic elements of networked distributed simulation.  Mr. Graniela earned a B.S.E. in Electrical Engineering from the University of Puerto Rico in 1995 and an M.S.E. in Computer Engineering from the University of Central Florida in 1992.  Perry Heard is a software engineer at SAIC where he works on weather modeling for synthetic environments.  Prior to SAIC he worked for Micro Design International, a mass storage software company.  Mr. Heard earned a B.S. in Physics in 1992, an M.S. in Mathematics in 1998, and an M.S. in Physics from the University of Central Florida in 2000.Julio de la Cruz is a Project Engineer at U.S. Army Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM) in Orlando, Florida.  He has fourteen years of experience working within the DoD/Army acquisition process.  He has been a lead project engineer for Major Defense Acquisition Programs (ACAT I, II, III) at various points of his civil servant career since 1988.  Currently Mr. de la Cruz is a lead Project Engineer and a principal investigator in the Synthetic Environment & Technology Management Division with multiple management responsibilities managing the acquisition of 6.1 Basic, and 6.2 Exploratory Development. Most recently, his efforts include the Synthetic Natural Environment Science and Technology Objective program and STRICOM's Common Synthetic Natural Environment initiatives.  Mr. de la Cruz holds a Master of Science degree in Engineering from Texas A&M University and a Bachelor of Science degree in Engineering from The City College of New York. PAGE 1 PAGE 2 PAGE 11