The Environmental Data Coding Specification: The Standard for Specification of Environmental Objects and PropertiesRobert F. RichbourgInstitute for Defense Analyses, 1801 N. Beauregard StreetAlexandria, VA 2311rrichbou@ida.orgDale D. Miller, Annette JanettLockheed-Martin Information Systems, Advanced Simulation Center3605 - 132nd Avenue SE, Suite 400Bellevue, WA 90006 HYPERLINK mailto:ddmiller@lads.is.lmco.com ddmiller@lads.is.lmco.com, ajanett@lads.is.lmco.comPaul G. FoleyQuantum Research International1901 N. Beauregard Street, Suite 500Alexandria, VA 22311 HYPERLINK mailto:pfoley@dmso.mil pfoley@dmso.milDavid JodeitITT Industries2560 Huntington AvenueAlexandria, VA 22303david.jodeit@itt.comKey words: environmental representation, synthetic environment, classification, standardization, SEDRISABSTRACT:   Digital representations of the physical environment continue to be in great demand, an established trend that appears likely to extend well into the future.  Acquiring, enhancing, and processing source information into a format suitable for application use also continues to  require significant investment in database generation time and cost, providing a strong motivation for reuse of extant data.  Further, federation of disparate systems, each potentially having their own environmental representation, is becoming more commonplace.  Both data reuse and system federation depend on the unambiguous communication of environmental objects, properties, and their conditions as a prerequisite for success.  The Environmental Data Coding Specification (EDCS) was initiated as a part of the SEDRIS project and is designed to serve this need across a very wide domain of applicability.  Concurrently with development, EDCS documentation and utilities are being reviewed by a SISO Product Development Group (PDG) to assess the EDCS as a potential interoperability standard for use with simulations and investigate generation of supporting SISO products focused on EDCS implementations and mapping documents for various legacy feature attribution systems.  One eventual SISO PDG recommendation will be to  endorse the EDCS as an approved standard of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) International Standard for SISO member use.This paper presents an overview of the EDCS (as defined by the December, 2001 ISO first Committee Draft, ISO/IEC 18025) and all dictionaries that comprise the specification.   We also describe a use case that illustrates EDCS capability to specify authoritative data.Prologue In parallel with its development, the Environmental Data Coding Specification (EDCS) is in the process of becoming an international standard according to the established processes of the International Standards Organization (ISO) and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC).  This paper describes the EDCS as it is now specified in the ISO first Committee Draft document ISO/IEC 18025.  The ISO committee draft document is lengthy and contains a great amount of detailed information.  This paper provides only an overview of the entire EDCS and those who require in-depth information should consult the ISO document directly.As a parallel undertaking, the Simulation Interoperability and Standards Organization (SISO) has approved the formation of a Product Development Group (PDG) that will make recommendations as to its constituency’s adoption of the EDCS database implementation, interface and related mapping documents as SISO Products.  SISO PDG efforts are directed toward assuring that the EDCS specification meets the needs of the simulation community.  SISO is directly participating in the international standards development, having established Category C Liaison Organization status with ISO/IEC Subcommittee 24 (Computer Graphics and Image Processing) and its Working Group 8 (Environmental Representation).  When the EDCS becomes an ISO/IEC standard, related SISO products will reference that standard.1.  IntroductionThe requirement for modern simulations to unambiguously interchange digital environmental data is now ubiquitous.  In the early to middle 1990’s, the requirement was most often driven by a desire to reduce the cost of producing simulation-ready synthetic environments through pre-simulation data sharing for reuse.  Experience demonstrated that different simulation programs were routinely required to (re) build new versions of the same physical locale.  A system that could enable data sharing among different programs would provide substantial time and cost savings.  This is still a viable premise and an essential goal, but is no longer the only rationale for continued development of environmental data interchange capabilities.Today, federation of disparate simulations is becoming more commonplace.  Federation of simulations not only delivers new simulation capabilities, but brings new challenges as well, particularly regarding correlation between different systems and their environmental representations.  One method of enhancing system-to-system run-time correlation depends on having single servers for all or classes of environmental data.  Correlation of data is assured as all federates utilize the server(s) as the single data source.  As an example, the Ocean, Atmosphere, and Space Environment Services (OASES) system provides wind, temperature, water column, and other meteorological and oceanographic data to all subscribing federate systems in the United States Joint Forces Command Millennium Challenge (MC02) joint experiment, the series of Navy Fleet Battle, Experiments (FBEs), and evolving phases of the DMSO-sponsored Environment Federation.  In these applications, OASES exemplifies a newer emphasis on run-time, unambiguous interchange of dynamically-changing environmental data in addition to established concerns of sharing pre-simulation, static data.The Synthetic Environment Data Representation and Interchange Specification (SEDRIS) effort was initiated in 1994 to permit the complete, unambiguous interchange of environmental data.  The early vision included the concept of sharing environmental data among many applications, and thus amortizing the cost of environmental data production.  Key design decisions focused on producing an expressive data model that could represent the structural semantic of a wide variety of environmental data, independent of any specific implementation or ultimate application.  The SEDRIS Data Representation Model (DRM) is the basic technology component that fulfills this role, providing a flexible model that can represent data forms and the inter-relationships between data objects.  However, the SEDRIS design philosophy never assumed that use of the DRM alone could meet the overall interchange goal.  SEDRIS development also included early effort on specification of other basic components, including one that could characterize environmental objects according to their semantic identification.  This component is the Environmental Data Coding Specification (EDCS), and it has emerged as a stand-alone resource that has applications well beyond dedicated use with the DRM.  As an example, OASES relies on the EDCS to specify served data to consuming applications in the federations mentioned above.  These are all High-Level Architecture (HLA) federations that have agreed on a Federation Object Model (FOM) that utilizes the EDCS for run-time specification of dynamic data, without reference to the DRM or other SEDRIS technology components.  Thus, the EDCS has demonstrated an ability to address both run-time and pre-run-time requirements for environmental data interchange.The EDCS purpose is to provide a set of environmental concepts are unambiguously defined, flexibly denoted (and encoded) and easily bound in exchange formats and to programming languages.  This approach will provide for the shared understanding of the semantic that is associated with specific environmental data, without regard to the data modeling strategy employed to represent that data.  As an example, a data provider could utilize the DRM to represent a house as a point feature, a collection of polygons in an aggregate geometry, an areal feature, a 3D icon in a model library, or a number of other data representations.  However, the EDCS will allow the unambiguous identification of any of these representations as that of a “house” so that automated systems can identify and subsequently reason about that data and its implications as appropriate.  Clearly, this could become a very large enumeration problem; the EDCS must provide for the identification of any environmental object that could potentially be included in any synthetic environment.  This includes data that might be present at any time during an application’s life cycle, spanning all functional (e.g., entertainment, training, analysis, simulation) and physical (e.g., air, land, sea, space) domains. At initial introduction, the EDCS appears to be an incredibly complex specification that will require significant effort before proficient use becomes a possibility.  However, the specification is based on an elegant design that rests on 9 distinct categories of information that together permit unambiguous identification and characterization of all environmental data concepts currently in routine or infrequent use.  Mastery of these 9 information categories, and their interrelationships, can be readily achieved.  Perceived complexity arises from the wide scope of detail included in the EDCS, which is simply an inescapable reflection of the EDCS problem space itself.  The environmental data in use today is detailed, voluminous, diverse, and continually growing.  Complete specification and characterization of this entire data set necessitates a coding specification that can address all of these properties. Thus, necessarily, the “devil is in the details” in the EDCS, just as it is in the EDCS problem space.  However, developing an understanding of the 9 categories of information, each of which is addressed by a separate dictionary in the specification, offers a viable method of understanding the EDCS as an interoperability resource.  Thus, we need not pursue a fine-grained examination of the details.  Accordingly, the majority of this paper describes the EDCS Dictionaries that collectively define the EDCS.   As a precursor, we present basic design tenants that have been derived from experience with other specification systems.2.  Background: Other Data Dictionaries, Catalogues, and Code ListsThe benefits of utilizing sets of codes to identify and characterize environmental data have been recognized for many years.  Several systems exist to associate semantic identifications with specific environmental data concepts.  In fact, EDCS designers benefited from accumulated experience with several such systems.  Many EDCS entries have been directly taken from other systems so that the EDCS is now a superset of systems that address sub-domains (e.g., meteorological, hydrographic, or data used in mapping, charting and geodesy) of environmental data.  These systems include the Digital Geographic Information Exchange Standard (DIGEST) Feature and Attribute Coding Catalogue (FACC), the International Hydrographic Organization’s S-57 transfer standard for digital hydrographic data, and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) Manual on Codes that describes data categories and element classifications for BUFR (Binary Universal Format for the Representation of meteorological data) and GRIB (Gridded Binary) data representation and exchange formats.The DIGEST FACC is of particular interest (regarding terrain representations) as several authoritative data providers have historically relied on the FACC, or codes that have direct mappings into the FACC, for data specification.  Therefore, early versions of the terrain component of the EDCS were constructed as strict supersets of the codes listed in the FACC; every FACC code, label, and definition was identically present in the EDCS.  Experience in using this early version of the EDCS led to a better understanding of design requirements for a specification that would address a large domain of applicability.  A more detailed discussion of this experience is provided in Reference 2.  Here, we simply note that the EDCS design benefits from experience with other systems and thus represents an evolutionary approach to the specification problem.3. Design FundamentalsThe EDCS contains a set of 9 dictionaries of environmental concepts to support the encoding and communication of qualitative and quantitative information associated with physical environments, both real and virtual.  These dictionaries have been designed to conform to several basic principles:•  Each concept must have an unambiguous definition.  The definition serves, more than any other information for each concept, to ensure association with the intended semantic.  Concepts may be defined in terms of other concepts, making concept relationships readily apparent, ensuring consistency, and reducing the complexity of concept definition.•  Each concept must have a denotation that supports efficient machine processing of that concept.  This denotation is the code representing the concept. Each concept must have an equivalent denotation for human comprehension of that concept.  This denotation is the concept label. Each concept must have ties to concepts in other reference sources (e.g., standards, publications, dictionaries).  This is a reference for the concept.•  Each concept must have references to concepts in other sources and must indicate a reference type as one of authoritative, prescriptive, informative, dictionary, or none of these.  Reference type information promotes cross-domain concept communication and provides the concept user with a notion of the authoritativeness of the concept.•  Object specification occurs along two fundamental axes; classifications specify the type of object (chair, tree, mountain, …) while attributes specify object state(s) (hot, red, tall, …).•  Object state is expressed as a set of valuated measures.  Some states are values along a continuum while others can only assume discrete values.•  Discrete values are often described as complete enumerations of value sets.  The logical type is a special case of the enumerated types.•  Continuous values are numerical, and can be expressed as either real or integer.  Numerical values often require units of measure (ampere, gram, hertz, …).•  Some values can be expressed using comparable units of measure (1 kilometer is the same as 1000 meters), requiring specification of equivalence classes of units.•  Similar concepts can be organized into sets.  Such grouping facilitates searches through concepts to find those that are related by some aspect.  Some concepts are complex so that one concept may be similar to multiple sets of other concepts (the sets of similar concepts need not be disjoint).•  Groups of similar concepts can be organized into schema. Similarity of concepts is based on application context.  These contexts can be viewed as descriptors of the organizational schema.These design guidelines have been directly translated into the EDCS dictionaries themselves.  They become readily apparent by looking at the categories of information addressed by each dictionary and the fields within each dictionary that provide the categorical information.4. The EDCS DictionariesIndividually, the EDCS dictionaries address different categories of information that together address all aspects of the specification problem, providing mechanisms to unambiguously identify data objects and associated properties used in modeling the environment.  Four of the dictionaries directly pertain to the unambiguous identification of environmental concepts, providing unambiguous definitions and flexible denotations and encodings. These dictionaries address the following categories of information:• EDCS Classification Dictionary: Classifications that identify the type of environmental object (e.g., house, river, road).• EDCS Attribute Dictionary: Attributes that describe the state (sometimes called condition) of environmental objects (e.g., length, color, material).• EDCS Attribute Enumerant Dictionary: Attribute enumerants that tabulate discrete values of specific attributes (e.g., color: {red, green, blue, …}).• EDCS Unit Dictionary: Units that tabulate basic, quantitative measures of state (e.g., meters, volts, degrees in centigrade).Three of the dictionaries amplify or otherwise allow comparison of information as specified in the preceding dictionaries.  These 3 dictionaries address the following categories of information:• EDCS Attribute Value Metadata Dictionary: Metadata that provides information concerning the values of EDCS attributes (e.g., the attribute value is missing, the attribute has more than one possible value, the attribute value is specified).• EDCS Unit Scale Dictionary: Unit scales that describe standard mechanisms to extend (scale) the basic units so that a wide range of numerical quantities can be expressed (e.g., 102, 230, 10-24).• EDCS Unit Equivalence Class Dictionary: Unit equivalence classes define sets of units that are mutually comparable (e.g., electron-volts, joules, and watt-hours are comparable measures of energy).The final two EDCS dictionaries exist to aid in the process of finding the best code for use in a specific situation.  These two dictionaries describe:• EDCS Organizational Schema Dictionary: Organizational schema defining a partitioning of the EDCS codes from the context of a specific application area (e.g., the General Organizational Scheme that relies on natural or general scientific principles and knowledge to organize similar concepts).• EDCS Group Dictionary: Groups that comprise each organizational scheme and are collections of codes similar from the context of that organizational scheme (e.g., Hydrology, Air Transportation, and Physiography are groups in the General Organizational Scheme).Each of these dictionaries is a list of entries pertinent to their category of information.  Each entry consists of a collection of fields, some of which are common to all EDCS dictionaries.  These common fields are:• Definitions: Each entry in every EDCS dictionary includes a definition (textual description) that describes the nature, properties, scope, or essential qualities of that environmental concept corresponding to the dictionary entry.• Labels: Each entry in every EDCS dictionary includes a label that is a human-readable character string intended to succinctly denote the environmental concept corresponding to the entry.  Labels are unique within dictionaries, but the same label may appear in multiple dictionaries.• Codes: Each entry in every EDCS dictionary includes a positive integer code to denote (encode) the concept and facilitate computer processing of associated data.  Codes have a one-to-one relationship with labels and are thus unique with a scope of use.  Generally, codes are unique within dictionaries.  Codes for attribute enumerants are the exception in that they are only unique with respect to the set of enumerants that tabulate allowed values of a single attribute.• Reference:  Each entry in every EDCS dictionary is provided with a reference to the text that appears in that entry.  This reference will preferably cite an International Standard, in which case the reference is considered prescriptive and as incorporated into the EDCS.  Other, types of references can be standards, specifications and dictionaries.  These are not viewed as being incorporated into the EDCS.  When every entry is referenced to a single source, as is the case with the Unit Scale Dictionaries, this field is not specifically indicated as part of each entry.• Reference Type: Each entry in every EDCS dictionary has a reference type describing the relationship between the cited reference and the entry information.  When every entry shares a single reference type, as is the case with both the Units and Unit Scale Dictionaries, this field is not specifically indicated as part of each entry.In addition to these common fields, the individual dictionaries generally contain other fields of information as well.  These remaining fields provide information that is not relevant to all the dictionaries, but is required to conform to the design principles listed above.  The dictionary-specific fields are:• Group: Entries in the Classification and Attribute dictionaries are associated with one or more Groups in the General Organizational Scheme.• Value Type: Attribute Dictionary entries list the type of value used to quantify the attribute state.  These types may be one of integer, real, enumeration, logical, count, index, a type of string, or null.  Integer and real types may be numerical or may specify a range of numerical values.• Unit Equivalence Class: Again, some numerical attribute values are associated with units of measure.  The Unit Equivalence Class field provides all (comparable) units that are applicable to the attribute.• Plurality: Entries in the Attribute Value Metadata Dictionary may apply to single attributes or to a set of attribute values, as indicated in the plurality field.• Attribute Label: Entries in the Enumerant Dictionary are tabulations of discrete values relative to specific attributes.  This field lists the attribute. • Symbol: Entries in the Unit and Unit Scale Dictionaries typically originate in the International System of Units (SI) and as such, have internationally recognized symbols (e.g., “cd” for candela, “Hz” for hertz), as indicated in this field. • Equivalence Class Membership: This field lists individual units of measure that are members of the same unit equivalence class and are thus comparable (e.g., the units gram, kilogram, long ton, and ton are several members of the equivalence class Mass).• Organizational Schema:  Entries in the Group Dictionary include this field, indicating the Organizational Scheme of which the Group is a member.• Links: The EDCS is provided as an HTML document so that some dictionaries can contain links to other information.  The Group Dictionary contains a link field, indicating the classifications and attributes that are part of the group.Table 1 provides a graphic view of the fields and their relationship to the individual dictionaries.The set of EDCS dictionaries provides the basis for associating semantic identity with data that describes the environment.  The entries they contain can be combined in a virtually unlimited number of ways so that they can describe environmental data from a wide variety of domains.  Obviously, this flexibility of combination offers significant expressive power to the data provider who will associate labels or codes with data.  However, the same flexibility can be an obstacle to the data consumer who must account for the attendant characteristic of “potentially many ways to express the same concept.”  The EDCS also provides a mechanism to lessen this burden, as described in the following section.5.  EDCS ProfilesThe EDCS does not mandate or even suggest typical associations between entries in different EDCS dictionaries.  As an example, a classification may be associated with any attribute or collection of attributes.  This design decision affords significant expressive power and avoids limiting the domains to which the EDCS can be successfully applied.  However, it is not difficult to imagine a situation where a data consumer expects that specific classifications should always be associated with some minimum set of attributes and that the values assigned those attributes should be presented using a restricted set of value types and units of measure.  As an example, a data consumer concerned with mobility planning would be interested in bridge data, a concept that can easily be identified using available EDCS codes.  Perhaps the data consumer also requires load class values for each bridge object to make the mobility analysis meaningful; the consumer cannot usefully plan using bridge data without this attribution.  The EDCS Profile provides a method for the data producer and data consumer to reach agreement on the codes used to describe data, thus avoiding the potential for any mismatch in producer and consumer expectations. An EDCS Profile is designed so that useful subsets of the EDCS Dictionaries (and their content) can be specified for use within specific domains of applicability.  Profiles must, at a minimum, enumerate a list of EDCS Dictionaries and lists of entries in those dictionaries.   Optionally, profiles may also include constraints that restrict (mandate) relationships between entries in the dictionaries listed in the profile.  However, constraints must adhere to some specific guidelines. Permissible constraints can, as examples, require that a specific set of attributes always be associated with specific classifications, that only a subset of enumerated values may be associated with attributes having that enumeration value type, that real value type attributes restrict the range of values, and specify many other requirements.  Essentially, EDCS profiles can serve as a contract that limits the flexibility of a data provider, but also reduces the complexity of the decoding problem for data consumers. Note that Profiles can only limit EDCS usage.  There is no mechanism within the Profile concept that permits extension of the EDCS (to allow EDCS use in a novel domain of applicability as an example). However, extensions to the EDCS are possible through use of the EDCS registration mechanism.6.  RegistrationThe EDCS designers recognized early that the specification would have to change and grow in order to apply to novel areas and as the number of different types of environmental objects that require identification increases.  Therefore, registration of new Dictionary entries is anticipated and a formal procedure has been established.  Registration is not intended to permit modification of existing EDCS content, but is the mechanism to propose new dictionary entries for the Classification, Attribute, Attribute Value Metadata, Attribute Enumerant, Unit, Unit Equivalence Class, Organizational Schema, and Group Dictionaries.  Note that it is not permissible to extend entries in the Unit Scale Dictionary through the registration process.  The registration procedure requires that submissions include information for all fields of the relevant dictionary except the code itself.   Codes will not be reused but rather deprecated from use and maintained in the registry for historical reference or potential reactivation to meet user requirements.New profiles may also be included through the registration process.  In fact, only the default profile exists at this point.  The default profile includes all entries in every EDCS Dictionary and does not impose any constraints on use of those entries.7.  Application Program Interface (API)The EDCS document also describes an application program interface (API) that is intended to support conversion of values between comparable units and scales of units.  Clause 9 of the ISO Committee Draft document notes any of several units of measure or unit scales can be applied to identical physical quantities.  Appropriate choices for units and scales depend on and change with context of application.  Thus, the EDCS API provides a function that can meet the attendant conversion needs.  The function specification requires that data types also be provided and these are also indicated in a language-independent form.Clause 9 also defines a set of abstract data types that associate labels with codes.  This listing establishes appropriate information that not only provides for language bindings, but specifies a complete listing of all the environmental concepts described in the EDCS.8.  Use ExampleThe EDCS is provided as an on-line resource (HTML document) designed to be viewed using standard browser software (e.g., Netscape Navigator, Microsoft Explorer).  As yet, it is not known whether or not hard-copy versions of the final standard will be made available through ISO/IEC processes.  The following example demonstrates use of the browser software to select a set of codes suitable for identifying selected entries in the National Imagery and Mapping Agency document “Interim Terrain Data (ITD) / Planning Interim Terrain Data (PITD)”, (NIMA document MIL-PRF-89014A, 15 March, 1996). This document specifies the format, content, and product design of the unsymbolized digital data sets that comprise ITD and PITD products.ITD is a product developed to satisfy the land combat short- and mid-term requirements for digital terrain analysis data.  It is based on the level of detail represented in 1:50,000 or 1:100,000 scale Tactical Terrain Analysis Data Base (TTADB) data.  ITD is designed to use the Defense Mapping Agency Feature File (DMAFF) coding schema, a coding specification that is very similar to that described in the FACC.  ITD describes data in terms of 6 thematic files. The ITD themes are Surface Configuration, Vegetation, Surface Materials, Surface Drainage, Transportation, and Obstacles.  Appendices A and B of the ITD specification document list the features, feature codes, associated attributes, attribute codes and attribute values for data in each theme.  In this example, we work with the ITD feature information on trees, as described in the ITD Vegetation theme.Table 2 is an extract of the information in the ITD specification describing the allowable attributes (and their possible values) that could be used to describe the areal ITD feature “Trees” (DMAFF code 5C030). The table includes the applicable codes as informative only; these codes are not required in order to find applicable EDCS codes.The first task is to find the most appropriate classification code that will unambiguously identify the feature itself.  Several methods might be used at this point.  One could consult Annex C (“Groups and References for EDCS Classifications”) of the ISO document, and then select the link to Table C.21, “ECs whose label begins with T” to determine if there is an EDCS entry for “Trees.”  In fact, there is a classification with label “Tree” defined as “An individual woody-perennial <PLANT>, having a self-supporting main stem or trunk; a tree or tree-like plant.”   (Note that the definition contains a link to the associated EDCS classification for “Plant”, a related concept that is separately included in the EDCS. This link exemplifies the design principle of allowing concepts to be defined in terms of other concepts.) While the ITD specification does not provide a clear definition of the concept intended to be characterized by feature name “Trees”, it seems clear from the possible attribute values and the areal nature of the feature that a group of trees is intended, not an individual tree as specifically indicated by the EDCS “Tree” classification.  Note that the EDCS does not provide a “Trees” classification.Instead of proceeding directly to a linear scan through the alphabetical list of classification codes, another approach would start by looking at related codes by consulting the General Organizational Scheme described in Clause 8 of the EDCS document.  Here, Table 8.6 lists the 47 groups of similar or related codes in this organizational scheme.  The Group labeled “Plant” seems the most promising to locate appropriate codes for this problem, given the Group definition.  Two links are located next to the label “Plant”, one for associated attributes and one for classifications.  Picking the “EDCS Classifications” link here should reduce the search space from the entire set of over 1200 classifications.  In fact, the link leads to a table of 41 classification labels, including the previously viewed “Tree” classification.  Other candidates listed here include classifications labeled “Forest” and “Forest Preserve.”  The former is defined as, “A <REGION> of <LAND> containing a substantial number of closely spaced <TREE>s; a forest.”  This definition makes it clear that it is a reasonable mapping for the DMAFF code labeled “Trees”, thus ITD areal features identified as “Trees” will be identified by using the EDCS classification “Forest.”Selecting EDCS counterparts for the ITD “Trees” attributes is a similar process.  The ITD specification lists only four possible values for the attribute “Vegetation Characteristics”, indicating that it is really an attribute having enumerated values.  Also, the attribute name and values again indicate that an appropriate EDCS attribute should be organized with the Group “Plant.”  Using the “EDCS Attributes” link from the Group “Plant” (as above, in Table 8.6) leads to another table containing 20 EDCS-related attributes (selected from the nearly 1400 attribute entries in the EDCS).  After scanning the labels of the Group members, two appear to be likely candidates to represent the ITD “Vegetation Characteristics” attribute.  They are the EDCS attributes “Tree Type’ and “Vegetation Type”, both of which are of value type enumeration.  The possible values for the former are “Deciduous”, “Evergreen”, and “Mixed.”  “Forest Clearing” is not a possible value.  The latter EDCS attribute has 85 possible enumerated values, including all 4 of those listed as possible values of the ITD attribute.  When representing ITD data using EDCS codes, it is not important that the EDCS offers more codes than are required, only that all codes required are present.  Thus, EDCS attribute “Vegetation Type” is an appropriate choice to represent the ITD “Vegetation Characteristics” attribute.The ITD attribute “Density Measure” is intended to provide the percent of canopy cover within an area during the summer months (e.g., when trees have their leaves).  Here, the percent is indicative of the ratio of the area under the tree canopy and the total area classified as “Trees.”  The Plant Group in the EDCS Organizational Scheme includes a listing for attribute “Summer Canopy Cover Fraction”, which is exactly the quantity expressed by the ITD attribute “Density Measure.”  Its EDCS definition is, “The fraction of summer <TREE> canopy closure within the <REGION> delineated by an <OBJECT>.”  Subtle details complicate equating these two attributes.  The ITD specification document implies that associated values for “Density measure” will be expressed as integers to be interpreted as percent, except that the value of ‘0’ should be interpreted as “unknown.”  The EDCS values to be used with “Summer Canopy Cover Fraction” are much more precise; these are real numbers, which can be associated with the deprecated unit “percent” or the SI standard “pure number”, which is actually unit-less and thus more appropriate for fractional values.  However, there is no special interpretation of any value that can be used to represent “unknown.”  In this case, the EDCS Attribute Value Metadata “Undesignated” (definition: “The attribute value cannot be given for some reason other than it is missing, multi-valued, not applicable, or withheld.”) can be used to signify an unknown canopy cover quantity.Similar complications arise regarding the next three ITD attributes.  “Height Above Ground Level”, “Stem Diameter Size”, and “Tree Spacing Category” all of which require the use of integer values tied to specific units of measure (meters, centimeters, and decimeters respectively) except in the special case of value ‘0’, which is to be interpreted as “unknown.”  For each of these ITD attributes, there is a closely corresponding EDCS attribute.  The EDCS Attributes include “Predominant Vegetation Height”, “Mean Stem Diameter”, and “Tree Spacing”, all members of the Plant Group and all associated with real numbers to express quantities of length.  In each case, EDCS Attribute Value Metadata can be used to signal the “special interpretation” case, just as described above.  The EDCS Units offer alternatives to represent the ITD quantities.  Each EDCS attribute will use meters as the basic unit of measure.  The associated values could either express the quantities directly in this basic unit (with decimal digits representing decimeter and centimeter values) or could use the EDCS Unit Scales of “Deci” and “Centi” to express decimeter and centimeter values directly.The final ITD attributes listed in Table 2 are similar in that they do not have exactly corresponding counterparts in the EDCS.  However, the EDCS is capable of unambiguously representing the information that these ITD attribute express.  These attributes are also candidates for additions to the EDCS as new enumerated attributes that would be proposed through the existing registration procedures.  The ITD “Overlay Category” attribute is present for every ITD data object to indicate the thematic layer for that object.  There is no enumerated attribute in the EDCS that lists exactly the standard ITD thematic layers.  However, the EDCS Organizational Group “Abstract Concept” includes the attribute label “Object Set Type” as one of its 65 members.  This attribute, defined as “The type of an <OBJECT_SET>“, appears well suited to capture the data thematic layer information.  Further, the attribute value type is enumerated and includes the value “Vegetation”, so that thematic layer for ITD Feature “Trees” can be identically entered.  “Object Set Type” also contains enumerated values that are suitable to specify the other ITD themes, based on their definitions, if not their labels.   The other ITD themes that must be represented are Unknown, Surface Configuration, Surface Materials, Surface Drainage, Transportation, and Obstacle.  Again, EDCS Attribute Value Metadata can be used to represent the “Unknown” state. Enumerates of “Object Set Type” that can be used for the other values are, respectively, Terrain Configuration, Terrain Composition, Inland Water, Ground Transportation, and Ground Obstacle.  Finally, the ITD attribute “Undergrowth Density Category” has a closely corresponding EDCS counterpart, “Brush Density.”  The dilemma here is that, as shown in Table 2, the ITD attribute has enumerated values while the EDCS attribute specifies real number values to express fractional quantities. The ITD specification is not so precise as to communicate the numerical quantities that could be associated with its two known-value enumerates.  However, trafficability-related measures of brush undergrowth associate the 0 – 15% coverage with “sparse”, 15 – 50% coverage with “moderate”, and “more than 50% coverage” with “dense” characterizations of undergrowth. As above, the “Undesignated” EDCS Attribute Value Metadata could be used to signal the ITD “unknown” value.    In this circumstance, intervals of real number values for the EDCS Brush Density attribute could be used to represent the ITD known attribute values (e.g., possible values for the attribute would be the intervals (0 – 5), (5 – 15), (15 – 50) and (50 – 100), all using deprecated unit Percent).  This is also a situation where an EDCS Profile could be used to specify the restrictions on Brush Density values and ensure use of this attribute to be more applicable to and appropriate for the specific problem at hand.Table 3 summarizes one EDCS entry representation of the ITD “Trees” feature attributes.  The discussion leading up to this table provides some general lessons for using the EDCS in this type of undertaking.  First, the Organizational Scheme is quite useful for locating related EDCS entries, without requiring a scan through the entire document.  Also, the entry definitions are vital. Similarity of labels (and ITD names) alone is clearly an insufficient basis for  the mapping decisions, as illustrated in using the EDCS classification “Forest” to represent the ITD semantic of “Trees”, despite the presence of the EDCS classification “Tree.”  The definitions are also vital during the process of deciding on appropriate attribute entries.  Working with attribute entries illustrates the EDCS flexibility with values, value types, units, and unit scales and how they can come into play.  Finally, note that, even though exact equivalence may not exist, unambiguous representations can be made.  These cases do, however, point to the value of using profiles and registration of new entries.9.  SummaryThe EDCS is a developing international standard dedicated to implementing a set of labels and codes for complete and consistent specification and description of all environmental data.  This is a highly ambitious project that, almost by definition, can never be completed.   Instead, the EDCS will be in a process of constant evolution so that, as environmental databases continue content growth in scope and detail, the EDCS will be extended to keep pace.  An ISO/IEC standard registration and review process will manage EDCS content changes.The EDCS does not need to be “fully” complete to have substantial (pragmatic) utility.  It is being used today in a variety of applications that support both pre- and runtime data interchange, and such usage is growing.  However, to assure wide applicability, EDCS evolutionary growth should be managed by participants from the entire simulation community concerned with or affected by identification of environmental data, including those outside the SISO’s Simulated Natural Environment Forum. The SISO EDCS Product Development Group has been formed to review and propose improvements to the EDCS, ensuring that it meets the diverse requirements of the broad simulation community.  This is an important task as the EDCS matures as an International Standard, and a SISO product.  ReferencesBirkel, Paul A., “SEDRIS Data Coding Standard”, Proceedings of the Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 1999, 99S-SIW-011.Richbourg, Robert, et al., “Standardizing the Codification of Environmental Objects: The Environmental Data Coding Specification”, Proceedings of the Fall 2000 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 2000, 00F-SIW-071National Imagery and Mapping Agency,  “Performance Specification: Interim Terrain Data (ITD) / Planning Interim Terrain Data (PITD)”,  MIL-PRF-89014A, 15 Mar 96,  see  HYPERLINK "http://164.214.2.59/publications/specs/index.html" http://164.214.2.59/publications/specs/index.htmlMilitary Survey, UK, “Digital Geographic Information Exchange Standard (DIGEST) Ed. 2.1, published for the Digital Geographic Information Working Group, February 1998.  See  HYPERLINK http://www.digest.org http://www.digest.org. HYPERLINK "http://www.iho.shom.fr/" International Hydrographic Organization. Publication S-32, Hydrographic Dictionary. 5th Edition. Monaco: 1994. Available from World Wide Web:  HYPERLINK "http://www.iho.shom.fr/Dhydro/Html/site_edition/disclaimer.html" http://www.iho.shom.fr/Dhydro/Html/site_edition/disclaimer.html. HYPERLINK "http://www.iho.shom.fr/" International Hydrographic Organization. Publication S-57, IHO Transfer Standard For Digital Hydrographic Data, Appendix A Object Catalogue - Description of the feature-coding schema to be used for hydrographic requirements. Edition 3.1. Monaco: November 2000. HYPERLINK "http://www.wmo.ch/" World Meteorological Organization,  HYPERLINK "http://www.wmo.ch/web/arep/lib1/cat/wmo306.html" Manual on Codes: International Codes. Geneva, WMO: 1995. WMO No. 306, three volumes. (Volume I.1, Part A: Alphanumeric codes. 1995. ISBN 92-63-15306-X.) (Volume I.2, Part B: Binary codes and Part C: Common features to binary and alphanumeric codes. 1995. ISBN 92-63-15306-X.) (Volume II: Regional codes and national coding practices. 1998. ISBN 92-63-14306-4.)Attribute NameCodeAllowable ValuesUnitsVegetation CharacteristicsVEGDeciduous, Evergreen, Mixed, Forest ClearingDensity MeasureDMT0 - 100PercentHeight Above Ground LevelHGT0 - 150MetersStem Diameter SizeSDS0 - 900CentimetersTree Spacing CategoryTSD0 - 500DecimetersOverlay CategoryOVCVegetationUndergrowth Density CategoryUGDUnknown, None-to-sparse, Medium-to-denseTable 2. ITD Attributes for Tree FeaturesITDEDCSAttribute NameAllowed ValuesAttribute LabelValuesUnitsUnit ScaleMetadataVegetation CharacteristicsDeciduous, Evergreen, Mixed, Forest ClearingVegetation TypeDeciduous, Evergreen, Mixed, Forest ClearingDensity Measure0 – 100 percentSummer Canopy Cover FractionRealPure NumberUndesignatedHeight Above Ground level0 – 150 MetersPredominant Vegetation HeightRealMetersUndesignatedStem Diameter Size0 – 900 CentimetersMean Stem DiameterRealMetersCentiUndesignatedTree Spacing Category0 – 500 DecimetersTree SpacingRealMetersDeciUndesignatedOverlay CategoryVegetationObject Set TypeVegetationUndergrowth Density CategoryUnknown, None-to-Sparse, Medium-to-DenseBrush DensityReal IntervalPercentUndesignatedTable 3. EDCS Representation of ITD Feature “Trees” AttributesFieldEDCS DictionaryClassificationAttributeEnumerantUnitMetadataUnit ScaleUnit Equivalence ClassOrganizational SchemaGroupDefinitionXXXXXXXXXLabelXXXXXXXXXCodeXXXXXXXXXReferenceXXXXXXXXXReference TypeXXXXXXXXXGroupXXValue TypeXUnit Equivalence Class LabelXXPluralityXAttribute LabelXSymbolXXEquivalence Class MembershipXOrganizational SchemaXLinksXTable 1. EDCS Dictionary Fields