Port and Harbor Interactive Simulator - a PC SolutionRob CoxSAIC12479 Research Parkway Suite 600Orlando, FL 32826407-207-3609 HYPERLINK "mailto:coxr@saic.com" coxr@saic.comBenito GranielaSAIC12479 Research Parkway Suite 600Orlando, FL 32826407-207-3666 HYPERLINK "mailto:benito.graniela@saic.com" benito.graniela@saic.comSam BrandNaval Research Laboratory7 Grace Hopper Avenue Box 2Monterey, CA 93943 HYPERLINK "mailto:brand@nrlmry.navy.mil" brand@nrlmry.navy.milRobert Glenn HandlersSAIC550 Camino Estero Suite 205Monterey, CA 93940 HYPERLINK "mailto:robert.g.handlers@saic.com" robert.g.handlers@saic.comKeywords:Simulation, Visualization, Port Security, Navigational Safety, High-resolution, Interactive, Mission RehearsalABSTRACT: To date, many simulations of ports and harbors have been constructed for use in large, full bridge simulators.  As technology has progressed, the ability to construct a physically accurate, realistic simulation of ports and harbors on personal computers is now possible.  The objective for this effort was to develop a portable, high-resolution interactive simulation capability of ports and harbors that would provide realistic operational support for navigational safety, schoolhouse and ship-board training as well as provide for mission rehearsal, and port protection.  There were several requirements and assumptions made for this effort.  Some of those included a PC based system that would model the complete environment to include air, land, sea (winds, currents, port traffic, etc.) and terrain and bottom topography (buildings, docks, jetties, entrance channels, NAVAIDS, etc.).  The system developed uses an open architecture (non-proprietary).  For the visual component, we assumed the user would require an "out-the-window" visual system that includes visualization of interactive environmental effects (e.g., visual cues such as eddies around buoys to indicate tides/currents).  Also, the simulation would be standalone, but there would be a requirement for interoperability.  Therefore, the system must be able to be interoperable with other simulations utilizing standard interoperability technologies such as Synthetic Environment Data Representation and Interchange Specification (SEDRIS), High-Level Architecture (HLA), and Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS).  Finally, the system must have a capability to support training and mission rehearsal scenarios.The Port of Palm Beach was selected as the initial port to model.  It was selected because the U.S. Navy had planned to conduct a port survey for its safe haven program for the fleet in times of adverse weather.  The port survey took place in mid October 2001.  Prior to that date, we constructed the port database using overhead imagery, nautical charts, and Army Corps of Engineers’ Surveys.  During the survey, digital imagery was taken to enhance the simulation.This paper describes the project, the tools used to create the simulation, the methodology required to gather the data, the product created, and the users requiring such a technology.IntroductionThrough the years the world’s fleets have trained in full-bridge simulators at their various naval academies or training institutions.  These simulators require the students to come to the facility.  The full-bridge simulator is very capable of training on many subjects such as Ship Handling, Casualty Prevention, Emergency Ship Handling, and Pilot Training.  The mock-up of a real ship bridge is usually located in the center of a cylindrical projection wall on which the graphics image is projected.  Because it is full-size, the simulator is usually equipped with realistic consoles and instrumentation. Depending on the design, the simulator has features to include maneuvering close to a berth, a separate rudder column, and software to include the effects of winds, waves, currents, and other equipment such as radars.The major drawback for these simulators is the size and cost.  Students have to physically go to the simulator.  If there is a need to train while on a cruise, that cannot be accomplished.  While full-bridge simulators are valuable training tools, technology has advanced such that the same training objectives can be met on Personal Computer (PC) based systems.  Through tools developed for the U.S. Modeling and Simulation (M&S) community, it is now possible to effectively and efficiently produce the same simulation of ports and harbors on a PC or laptop.  With this capability, a Commanding Officer, Navigator, or crew can train while on a cruise to a new port (foreign or domestic) and become familiar with all the hazards of that port, navigational aids, piers, and facilities before arriving.  More importantly, the crew have it available onboard the vessel and do not have to go to a different facility to train.  Thus, training and per diem costs at a different facility can be avoided.  All this can be accomplished for much less than it would cost to develop a full-bridge simulator for each individual port.In addition, recent events, including the September 14, 2000 “Standdown” to allow Commanding Officers to review seamanship, ship handling, and navigational procedures after the 10 collisions and groundings of U. S. Navy ships in the preceding 12 months, provides the ideal opportunity to examine new technologies to assist ship Commanding Officers.This effort was developed with the above in mind – a portable, high-resolution simulation that is fully deployable with the vessel that will meet the objectives of training, navigational safety, mission rehearsal, security (both vessel and port), and for any special operations that would be required at a price that is affordable.This paper describes the objectives of this portable simulation, the architecture of the simulation, and extensions to the current version.Use, Objectives, RequirementsAs this effort was being conceived, we questioned what are the uses of (or stated another way: who would use) a portable simulation of ports and harbors.  There are seven major uses of a portable simulation like this.  They are: Navigational SafetyMission RehearsalTrainingPort SecuritySituational AwarenessShip SecuritySpecial Operations.  As vessels approach a port, the Commanding Officer, Navigator, Office of the Deck, and Conning Officer need to know where the navigational aids (NAVAIDS) are for that port and the significance of those NAVAIDS.  This simulation provides a way to ensure that the appropriate ship personnel have not only seen their location, but there is a textual message for each NAVAID of importance.  Mission Rehearsal allows each vessel Commanding Officer to ensure that entry can be practiced before entering into the port and harbor area.  Also, that mission can be rehearsed, reviewed, and practiced over and over while steaming to that port.  Of course, the training aspect is well known.  The unique feature of this tool is that the training can continue while on the vessel.  The crew does not have to go to a special facility.  With Port Security, Situational Awareness, and Ship Security, all-important features of the port, potential hazard areas, and other activities that may affect the vessel can be included in the simulation.  This includes the development of specialized scenarios to test the crew on security measures.  Special Operations includes any aspect of those operations that may require covert actions.  Special Forces can use this system to train on ingress and egress from ports, this includes underwater and how to effectively meet their mission with minimal threat.  The objectives to meet these functional uses are:The tool has to be portable and high-resolution to effectively visualize and simulate the port of choice for operational support and realistic schoolhouse, and shipboard training.The tool has to provide port, harbor, and shipboard personnel a simulation capability for port and harbor security and situational awareness.The tool has to be extensible so that it can be easily modified.The tool will use standards and software developed by the M&S community to ensure the third objective is met.With the functional uses defined and the objectives stated for the tool, we developed a series of requirements and assumptions that had to be followed in development.  They include:The tool shall be PC based and shall visualize three-dimensional models of the port and harbor environment to include air, land, sea, terrain, and bathymetry (this includes effects of winds and currents, port traffic, entrance channels, buildings, piers, jetties, NAVAIDS).The tool will be open-architecture based for ease of extending the functionality.The tool shall provide an “out-the-window” visual look of the interactive environmental effects (visual cues such as eddies around buoys, tides, and currents).There shall be a multi-sensor, object oriented database (radar, night, day, IR, etc.).The tool shall be able to interoperate with other simulations utilizing such technologies as DIS, HLA, and SEDRIS.The tool shall be capable of supporting multiple scenarios such as training and mission rehearsal.ArchitectureThis section describes the architecture we employed to develop this prototype simulation.  We will present an overview of the architecture and then discuss in detail the implementation of that architecture.  This discussion will include an overview of the interface and use of various M&S software programs to provide the flexibility within the simulation for multiple users.System architectureThe following diagram (Figure 1) shows the top-level architecture for this tool.  As is shown, we used (or can use) multiple types of raw source data.  For this  EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure 1. Top-level architecture for Port Simulationprototype we used overhead imagery downloaded from the INTERNET.  We then value added to it by adding Digital Elevation Model (DEM) data from the United States Geological Service (USGS), and bathymetry data obtained from the Port Pilots.  Other source data included digital imagery taken while at the port.  We used USGS data primarily because it was readily available.  National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) data can be used, too.  For this prototype, MultiGen’s Creator was used to produce a Flight database and SEDRIS Transmittal Format (STF).  We are in the process of regenerating the database using TerraSim’s TerraTools.  This is because of one of our objectives was to be able to use multiple tools developed for the M&S community.  Either tool allows the user to import various forms of raw source data and produce output in either format we needed.  Once we had the Flight database, we were able to use a sheath viewer and “fly” the database to visually inspect it for correctness.  As we will point out later, this capability was taken to the Port of Palm Beach.  We showed it to the Port Pilots and they provided their input as to the visual cues they use for navigational safety.  We used their input to make the simulation more realistic and functionally useful.After creating the STF, we used a standard SEDRIS tool to convert the STF to the Compact Terrain Database (CTDB).  We required the CTDB because we needed to run other applications such as the Dismounted Infantry Semi-Automated Forces (DI SAF).  We did this because a couple of our functional uses are for security.  We are using DI SAF to allow for two security scenarios.  The first is to protect vessels from harm, such as another vessel colliding with it.  The DI SAF is used to control the motion of vessels, instead of dismounted infantry, moving in the port area.  The second function is to use DI SAF to control actual personnel on the docks or in the port area.  An example of this application is if there is a hostage situation at a cruise line terminal.  The security personnel can train on how best to disarm the hostile forces holding the hostages.  Currently, we are running ModSAF 8.0, which is compatible with the OneSAF Test Bed. Implementation of the Architecture for the Port of Palm BeachThe first implementation of the architecture was for the Port of Palm Beach, Florida.  Palm Beach was selected for two major reasons.  First, SAIC in conjunction with the Naval Research Laboratory were collecting data and information for the “Hurricane Haven” study for the Port of Palm Beach.  This provided the local opportunity to interact with port and harbor personnel.  The second reason is that Palm Beach is a relatively small port, making it ideal for a prototype.By selecting a port that was being studied for the Hurricane Haven study maximized resources and time.  Many of the contacts made for the Safe Haven study would have already been contacted for the port simulation.  Thus, we could interview those people at the same time.  For instance, the Port Pilots, who are responsible for bringing vessels into and out of ports were interviewed and provided many useful insights.  Those insights included typical NAVAIDS they follow, channel depth charts, and tide/current information.  Personnel interviewed to provide input for the simulation included the Port Pilots, a Cruise Ship Captain, Port Security officials, and the U.S. Coast Guard.Before we built the simulation, we built the database for it to interact with individual simulation objects.  As discussed in the previous section, we used a common database tool to generate the database and created a CTDB from the STF.  Figure 2 is the visual view of the inlet to the port.  While this view shows the standard out the window view from right above the surface, we can “fly” through the database at various levels including under the ocean surface.  We can do this because we built the database with bathymetry data provided by the port pilots and the Navy. EMBED MSPhotoEd.3  Figure 2. Visual look at the database from the inlet to the Port of Palm BeachWhile at the port, we had arranged for the U.S. Coast Guard and a Cruise Ship to take us into and out of the port.  During those excursions, we took over 600 digital photographs of the port.  Many of the photos were of the key NAVAIDS that the Pilots and Captains use to navigate the port safely.  Other photographs were taken to provide a general “situational awareness” of the port.  This was done because often simulations are cartoonish and we wanted to provide a level of realism to the simulation.  So, when the simulation is running, the user can and will have a digital photograph of that location of the port.  Figure 3 is an example of this concept from the simulation. EMBED MSPhotoEd.3  Figure 3. Digital photograph of the Port of Palm Beach as compared to the simulation viewThe simulation view is different form the actual digital photograph because of input from the port pilots.  We were building the simulation based on features that the port pilots said are important for navigational safety.  Therefore, we did not include several cranes and other moveable objects at the port.  The port pilot does not uses those objects as markers for navigation, whereas, they use the power plant and some of the buildings as NAVAIDS.As pointed out earlier, we have taken over 600 photographs of the port and are considering which ones to include in the simulation.  Another type of photograph we took while there were panoramic views of the port.  At several locations, we took 1800 photographs of the port.  Those will be included in the simulation and at certain locations the user will be able to view the port as if he was looking out the bridge of his vessel at that point.The actual simulation merges the use of digital photography, textual words, a plan view display, and an out-the-window display.  Figure 4 shows these three types of additional information that are present in the simulation view. EMBED MSPhotoEd.3  Figure 4.  The three additional views provided in the simulationThe textual box is used to provide information on the port.  This information can come from the Hurricane Haven reports, Mediterranean Severe Weather Port Guide, or even from other local sources such as the harbor officials and port pilots.  Port Pilots are excellent sources for critical navigational safety and meteorological/oceanographic insights.  Information that may appear in this box could also include channel depth and width, current strength and location, or information on the turning basin.  The text is also linked to the location of a vessel in the simulation.  At various locations, the text will change to provide the specifics for the vessel location in the simulation.  For instance, if the vessel is just approaching the port entrance, the depth and width of the channel could appear.  The top view or plan view display allows the user to have that view for overall situational awareness with respect to his ship position.  The user can also zoom in and out on the location.  This could also be a Digital Nautical Chart (DNC).The final box is the integration of the digital photography into the simulation.  Like the textual box, this picture changes as the vessel moves through the simulation.  As we discussed earlier, this view is there to show the user that the simulation is actually replicating the actual port and could provide selected panoramic views.Figure 5 is the Simulation Graphical User Interface (GUI). EMBED MSPhotoEd.3  Figure 5. Simulation GUI showing the simulation out the window view, textual box, plan view, and digital photography viewThe GUI shows four different views of the port.  As explained earlier, the three bottom views are for the text, plan view, and photography.  The large view above these boxes is the view as if one were on the bridge of the vessel coming into the port.  A user also has the additional capability of going up and getting a “bird’s eye” view or going down to get an underwater perspective.Other features in the simulation include the ability to simulate oceanographic conditions.  The port pilots told us that at the entrance to the port there is generally a strong northward moving current (impact of the Gulf Stream).  Therefore, instead of lining the vessel exactly on the range markers that indicate the center of the channel, they have to enter the port to the left closer to the green buoys and the current will force the vessel into the center of the channel.  We modeled this by creating a feature that is similar to the feature one would define for terrain in simulations.  This feature has a three dimensional location.  When a vessel comes into that three-dimensional area, a 2-3 knot current will be acting on the vessel pushing it to the north.  When shown to the port pilots, they were pleased with the effect it has on the simulation and the vessel.Another feature we have added to the simulation is connecting the DI SAF software to the simulation.  This allows us to have various individual combatants (vessels) operating in the port at one time.  Therefore, we can now run scenarios such as the situation with the USS Cole incident in the Middle East.  Also, we can run scenarios such as terrorists taking control of a building in the port and the security forces having to clear the building.  Another scenario we are developing using this software is bringing Special Forces troops into the port for a specific mission.  We have modeled the US Navy SEAL Delivery Vehicle and are working to have the vehicle to come into the port, have a SEAL team deploy, then destroy a building in the port, and then depart.Extensions to the current implementationThis project is in its infancy.  There are several other feature we are planning to add to the simulation.  Those features include:Day and night.More detailed environmental effects (winds, currents, waves, reduced visibility, etc).Local environmental input (rules of thumb from the Port Pilots and other officials at the port) or environmental data from the port driving mission rehearsals.Tactical environmental effects (these are features that are of concern to Special Forces and missions that they conduct).Hazardous release/hazardous cloud modeling.Building interiors for security and emergency response.We understand what must be done to add many of these items.  The major factor in adding them to the current simulation is time.  This effort is only months old and the time has not been available to add these features.As others begin to use the simulation, it is anticipated that new requirements will surface that will entail additional modifications to the simulation.  It is believed that the architecture is extensible to handle the items that we will add and those that will come in the future.SummaryIn this paper, we have presented a technology developed for simulation of ports on a laptop/desktop PC.  The genesis of this effort was the need to train officers and crews on port navigational safety onboard ships and in the classroom without having to travel to the large bridge simulators.  Also, it was intended to provide a cost effective method to train those crews on inexpensive, commonly available hardware such as PCs.  To that end, we have developed a tool that gives a visual and simulated depiction of a port.  It provides a high-resolution environmental database for simulation on a PC.  The simulation is highly extensible and uses common modeling and simulation techniques and tools such as SEDRIS and DI SAF.  The architecture is such that adding features can be accomplished without major adjustments to the simulation software.The tool developed now has multiple uses to include navigational safety, port security, and special operations.  It is envisioned to provide the user with these features and others as development continues.AcknowledgementsThis effort could not have been accomplished without the effort of many people.  Primarily, the authors would like to thank the U.S. Coast Guard for use of one of its vessels.  The Palm Beach Princess Cruise Line also provided the team with extraordinary support.  The Captain allowed us use of a stateroom and total access to the bridge for the numerous camera angles we required.  Palm Beach Port Pilots and the Port of Palm Beach provided detailed information and suggestions that have contributed immensely to this effort.  Finally, we would like to thank the Merchant Marine Naval Reserves.Author BiographiesDr. Rob Cox is a Chief Scientist with SAIC.  Dr. Cox serves as project director and principal investigator for SEDRIS.  He leads the SAIC ASSET Group’s Synthetic Natural Environment research efforts.  Prior to joining SAIC, Dr. Cox was in the U.S. Air Force.  He has served in a diverse set of positions in Korea, Nebraska, and Washington DC.  Mr. Benito Graniela is a Software Engineer with SAIC.  His primary focus is in visualization and development of simulation databases.  Most recently he has focused on databases for urban warfare in support of the DI SAF and VERTS programs.  He is also a working on a project that models building interiors for modeling and simulation applications.Mr. Glenn Handlers is a Division Manager of the Atmospheric Sciences Division with SAIC. The Division primarily supports the Naval Research Laboratory in Hurricane/Typhoon Haven Studies, Modeling & Simulation, Web Application Development, and Atmospheric Research. Prior to joining SAIC, Mr. Handlers was in the Navy. He was a Surface Warfare Officer initially and then specialized in Meteorology/Oceanography (METOC).Mr. Sam Brand is a research meteorologist with the U. S. Navy. He is Head of the Meteorological Decision Aids Section of the Naval Research Laboratory’s Marine Meteorology Division. His major areas of research have included Maritime Meteorology, Severe Weather Decision-making and Environmental Effects on Weapons, Sensors, and Platforms. PAGE 702S-SIW-034