Dynamic Situation Assessment and Prediction (DSAP)Alex F. SistiAir Force Research Laboratory/IFSB525 Brooks Rd.Rome NY 13441-4505315-330-3983sistia@rl.af.mil Keywords:Predictive Battlespace Awareness (PBA), Intelligence Preparation of the Battlespace (IPB), Course of Action (COA) Assessment, Modeling and Simulation, Decision Support, Dynamic Planning and Execution ABSTRACT: The face of war has changed.  We no longer have the luxury of planning campaigns against a known enemy operating under a well-understood doctrine, using conventional weapons and rules of engagement; all in a well-charted region.  Instead, today’s Air Force faces new, unforeseen enemies, asymmetric combat situations and unconventional warfare (Chem/Bio, co-location of military assets near civilian facilities, etc.).  At the same time, the emergence of new Air Force doctrinal notions (e.g., Global Strike Task Force, Effects-Based Operations, the desire to minimize or eliminate any collateral damage, etc.) – while propounding the benefits that can be expected with the adoption of such concepts – also impose many new technical and operational challenges.  Furthermore, future mission/battle commanders will need to assimilate a tremendous glut of available information, and still be expected to make quick-response decisions – and to quantify the effects of those decisions – all in the face of uncertainty.   All these factors translate to the need for dramatic improvements in the way we plan, rehearse, execute and dynamically assess the status of military campaigns. This paper addresses these crucial and revolutionary requirements through the pursuit of a new simulation paradigm that allows a user to perform real-time dynamic situation assessment and prediction.1. IntroductionThe face of war has changed.  We no longer have the luxury of planning campaigns against a known enemy operating under a well-understood doctrine, using conventional weapons and rules of engagement; all in a well-charted region.  Instead, today’s Air Force faces new, unforeseen enemies, asymmetric combat situations and unconventional warfare (Chem/Bio, co-location of military assets near civilian facilities, etc.).  At the same time, the emergence of new Air Force doctrinal notions (e.g., Global Strike Task Force, Effects-Based Operations, the desire to minimize or eliminate any collateral damage, etc.) – while propounding the benefits that can be expected with the adoption of such concepts – also impose many new technical and operational challenges.  The pace of war has changed as well; resulting in a drastically compressed decision cycle.  Real-time situation assessment from focused and coordinated Intelligence, Reconnaissance and Surveillance (ISR) collection assets provides the opportunity to perform in-mission replanning/retasking for the betterment of an on-going mission; however, with the promise of Dynamic Battle Management also comes the cost of processing massive amounts of data to help arrive at such replanning decisions.  Future mission/battle commanders will need to assimilate this tremendous glut of available information, and still be expected to make quick-response decisions – and to quantify the effects of those decisions – all in the face of uncertainty.   All these factors translate to the need for dramatic improvements in the way we plan, rehearse, execute and dynamically assess the status of military campaigns.2.  BackgroundIn order to cogently discuss and describe the notion of, and rationale behind, Dynamic Situation Assessment and Prediction, it is first necessary to introduce several concepts.  Circular and incestuous in nature, they are presented below in no particular order. 2.1  Global Strike Task ForceIn [1], Gen John P. Jumper, now Chief of Staff of the Air Force, introduced a concept called the “Global Strike Task Force (GSTF) as the way of achieving air dominance in the “new face of war.”  Designed to be the “Air Force’s contribution to the nation’s kick-down-the-door force,” it calls for integrated and orchestrated employment of existing and new military assets and weapons systems, and a petition to adapt and leverage new technologies; admonishing that “battles, campaigns and wars … were lost because fundamental changes in the nature of warfare went unrecognized.” [2]  2.2  Dynamic Battle ManagementPhilosophical, ideological and historical insight regarding the conduct of war, such as those described in the GSTF concept and in the area of Crisis Action Planning, have given rise to other observations as well.  Particularly evident are the blurred distinction between the phases of operational planning and execution, and the need to break down process and product barriers that have characterized operations involving C2 and weapons systems. Dynamic Battle Management (DBM) calls for “shared information, decision support, superior connectivity and [a] common operating picture among all Joint C2 nodes in theater.” [3]  Fundamentally, DBM translates to “…dissemination of the right information to the right C2 node and shooter at the right time.”2.3  Intelligence Preparation of the Battlespace and Predictive Battlespace Awareness  “Intelligence Preparation of the Battlespace is the systematic and continuous process of analyzing the threat environment in a specific geographic area.” [3]  The qualifier “continuous” implies the need to extend the assessment of enemy posture, capabilities, modes of operation, etc. – traditionally a planning phase function -- into the execution phase as well.  IPB consists of four basic steps: 1) defining the battlefield environment (terrain, weather, logical infrastructure, Areas of Interest, etc), 2) describing the battlefield’s effects on both friendly and enemy operations, 3) evaluating the threat; i.e., how the threat normally “organizes for combat and conducts operations under similar circumstances,” and 4) determining enemy Courses of Action (eCOA).The other side of this dual concept is Predictive Battlespace Awareness (PBA).  Given the enemy’s most likely objectives and COA(s) – products from step 4 of the IPB process – the commander’s staff then develops Courses of Action in response to postulated Enemy COAs, wargames friendly vs enemy COAs and orchestrates and employs ISR assets for the purpose of corroborating these forecasts; as opposed to using these assets merely for discovery.  The basic idea is to not just react to enemy activity after is has occurred, but to anticipate what he is most likely to do and to pre-act; i.e., get there first and be waiting for him. 2.4  Course of Action (COA) AssessmentMuch has been written on Course of Action (COA) development and assessment, and it would be impossible to fully capture the breadth of a concept that goes back thousands of years.  Suffice it to say that COA development today is predominantly an ad hoc manual process – albeit supplemented by off-line automated decision support tools – and is relegated to the planning phase of an operation.  As described above, Step 4 of the IPB process is to determine an enemy’s potential/likely Courses of Action, which are handed off to a PBA process whereby blue COAs are planned to defeat or avoid the enemy’s offensive.  Essentially, the process boils down to a question of the type: “given what we (perceive we) know about the enemy (from IPB), and what we know about ourselves and our objectives, what is our best Course of Action, against his Course(s) of Action?”  And although this process represents the way assessment of alternative COAs has been done for centuries, it fails to address the fact that each side’s COA is inexorably linked to what the other is doing, one move at a time.  What is needed is a way to assess multiple friendly COAs against multiple enemy COAs, and more to the point, to “dovetail” each individual COA vs eCOA assessment into one chain of events that constitutes the interplay between the two combatants.  Ideally, one would like to optimize his/her status at multiple steps (if not at each step) along the way; and of course, an optimization function here would be a duple whereby we aspire to maximize our progress towards achieving our overall offensive goal, while minimizing the enemy’s progress in achieving his.  2.5  Simulation in OperationsProbably the most instrumental and revolutionary concept being endorsed by this research is the notion of using simulations not only for the traditional pre-mission activities of developing appropriate Courses of Action (including performing comparative assessments, wargaming and rehearsal), but as an in situ component for monitoring, and if necessary, altering the conduct of an on-going mission.  The following section describes in more detail the idea of Simulation in Operations.3.  Simulation in OperationsWithout question, the foremost proponent of using simulations during the conduct of military operations is John R. “Buck” Surdu.  Surdu, in a series of papers [4-12] describes a concept he calls “operationally-focused simulations;” which he defines as “…simulations explicitly designed to support operations vice training and analysis…” [8].  Noting that simulation had been shown to be effective in supporting decision-making in non-battlefield situations, his research propounds its use in all four phases of the conduct of military operations: planning, rehearsal, execution and after action review.  That simulation has, or could have, utility during the planning, rehearsal or after action phases should come as no real surprise to any forward-thinking researcher/practitioner.  Rather, the methodologies being researched and prototyped by Surdu and his colleagues in “operationally-focused simulations” represent some landmark advances in real-time operational decision support.  Space constraints of this paper preclude giving their work proper treatment.  However, it can be crudely summarized by saying that their methodology and their prototype system (OpSim) uses operationally-focused simulation, software agents and various other advanced technologies to monitor operations, predict outcomes, determine the significance of deviations between the plan and the actual operation, and to inform decision-makers of different projected outcomes.  The interested reader is urged to read the cited references for the details of this revolutionary concept.4.  Dynamic Situation Assessment and Prediction (DSAP)Upon hearing one of Surdu’s presentations, we immediately saw the tremendous potential of his proposed methodology, and set out to extend his ideas into the realm of air operations (Surdu, an Army veteran, primarily focuses on ground campaigns; although he notes the applicability of his methodology across other services).  Our perusal of the literature – both of his writings and bibliographical references he cites in his work – coupled with related research we were undertaking in the area of enabling technologies for real-time decision support, led us to believe that his methodology is not only valid in an air domain, it is a much-needed solution towards assuring dominance in this “new face of war.”  What we envisioned was a system called “Dynamic Situation Assessment and Prediction,” or DSAP.  This concept, arising from Surdu’s research, envisions a hybrid system that could be “attached” to an on-going experiment, exercise or mission.  Such a system, depicted in Fig. 1.1, would perform two distinct but related functions: the first involves methods and technologies for achieving Dynamic Situation Assessment – an essential element required for Dynamic Battle Management -- while the other addresses the non-trivial (and not uncontroversial) notion of Prediction.  These functions, and the technologies needed to support their implementation, are discussed below.4.1  Dynamic Situation AssessmentDynamic Situation Assessment refers to the monitoring of the state of an on-going mission or exercise, including assimilation and fusion of real-time intelligence feeds and other status updates, and appropriate (read: relevant) presentation of decision-quality information to the decision-maker(s).  While this might at first seem to be nothing more than a visualization task, it is doing much more than that.  It also comprises a simulation of that scenario; specifically, that scenario used to plan the mission currently being executed.  From the start of a mission or exercise and up to the current time, this system – besides presenting to the user a visual depiction of the situation – is also comparing the mission’s execution to that mission as planned.  Doing so, the user can see at any point if the mission is proceeding as planned, or if – more likely – “reality” (e.g., the sudden appearance of previously unknown threats) has caused a worrisome enough divergence from the plan that some action – from mission abort to prosecution of a new target of opportunity – may be desired.  This then leads to the second function of this proposed system: Prediction.  4.2  PredictionWhereas dynamic situation assessment covers actions from mission start to the present time, prediction concerns itself with activities occurring (scheduled) from the current time onward. For this capability, the simulation that originally generated the plan is restarted; once configured to reflect the current situation.  This then is the Prediction Engine, whereby likely outcomes of the current reality (e.g., projection of trajectories) are assessed; to see if the plan is still valid as is, is doomed to failure, or – through retasking -- could be saved, or even improved.  5.  Technology ChallengesA system such as envisioned here involves research and judicial application of a variety of different technologies in order for it to fulfill its promise.  It implies a marriage of the state-of-the-art in collaborative and distributed simulation and rehearsal, advanced visualization techniques and devices, modeling and simulation paradigms; intelligent agents, emergent and adaptive systems, prediction theory, control theory, human factors, and effects-based operations; to name a few.  In the sections that follow, we address four basic technology areas that are essential to the realization of a Dynamic Situation Assessment and Prediction system.5.1  Prediction TheoryIt should be noted here that although it is eminently desirable to be able to perform Predictive Battlespace Awareness – in fact, to do predictive assessments in general – it is far more easily stated than done.  Rarely has a topic generated more controversy in the literature and around the conference table than has the concept of prediction.  The literature is rife with articles about prediction theory, control theory, complex systems, nonlinear dynamics and chaotic behavior, and the like.  In the section that follows, we will strive to put into perspective – in a very cursory fashion, so as not to offend the sensibilities of the purists who may easily spend entire careers paying the subject its proper due – what should or should not be expected of a predictive system.Some physical aspects of an operation can be accurately predicted (for example, we may ask “Given fuel capacity, maximum velocity, and distance to target, can my strike aircraft reach the target by some specified time?”).  However, calling that type of activity “prediction” is somewhat of a stretch; it should probably be termed “projection” (or merely “calculation”).  And, based on past observations and historical doctrine/modes of operation, we can also predict many situations with acceptable accuracy if we constrain ourselves to taking relatively “close” glimpses into the future – say, the next step/move of an opponent… but even that may not constitute “prediction” to a purist; perhaps “forecasting” or “estimation” might be a better word.  And even those proven methods break down rapidly as one tries to look further and further into the future.  Some game-playing systems can look ahead 10, 20, 100 moves; “predicting” the likely situation at each of those stages, and associating a confidence value at each stage.  However, at some point – and determining at what point might make a good research project – ones confidence surely dips below that offered by a fair toss of a coin.  Be that as it may, accurately predicting the future status or outcome of a game is nothing compared to predicting human behavior in the throes of combat.  We can and do “predict” likely routes the enemy might take, or whether or not a planned strike asset will be flying in harm’s way, or whether or not he’ll make his tanker time. But as retired General John Warden has noted “Humans are much less predictable...”  On top of all that, there is this: even if humans were by their nature predictable, and even if we could accurately capture and represent into a system the behavior of an intelligent adversary, there exists a basic tenet of competition that holds that any good game-player/combatant does whatever he can to avoid becoming predictable.  This is not to say that striving to implement a predictive system or component is an unachievable, or even unrealistic goal.  Nor are these opinions meant to denigrate the good work being done in researching and applying the various theories of prediction.  Rather, it should serve to caution that prediction of human behavior, in a complex, dynamic, highly nonlinear environment is a very, very daunting task.  Maybe the best we can expect a system to do is to anticipate what might happen, and have a contingency plan for each likely occurrence; such that we can adapt/react accordingly to a situation when it does happen (known in military parlance as “branches and sequels”).  Again, for a more detailed treatment of this area, the interested researcher is urged to read Surdu’s papers on a concept he and his colleagues call Anticipatory Planning [6, 10, 11], the paper by McFee et al [14] on Predictive/Lookahead Battle Planning and Cave’s treatise on Prediction Theory. [15]. 5.2  Model Abstraction/MultiResolution ModelingNext generation decision makers (for example, in an Advanced Technology Aerospace Operations Center) will be required to dynamically plan, monitor, execute and assess their missions; in a volatile environment, and all in the face of a tremendous volume of information with varying degrees of uncertainty.  In assimilating this information, and in keeping with the commander’s objectives, operational planners will develop and assess, in real time, various Courses of Action (COAs).  While there are Course of Action tools that exist today, none are capable of running multiple “what if” vignettes in real time; due to the complexity that has been built in for the sake of accuracy.  Surdu, in [8], also recognizing that detailed COA tools run off-line in the planning stage are unsuitable for real-time execution, recommends that real-time COA assessment be based on an aggregate-level model.  Research is required to look at the application of Model Abstraction other complexity-reduction techniques to capture the essence of detailed models/simulations for use in real-time decision support systems. 5.3  Information Visualization That decision support systems for any domain are dramatically improved by the addition of some degree of visualization is inarguable.  To date, however, even the most state-of-the-art visualization approaches concern themselves with visualization of data; e.g., terrain, maps, iconic depictions of threat laydowns and flight packages, etc.  But data is not information, and it is information that the commander needs to wage his campaign.  This technology area concerns itself with research in a) visualizing the “invisible” aspects of the battlefield (for example, threat envelopes, chemical cloud dispersion, weather effects, effects of jamming on the range of coverage of an air defense radar, etc.), and b) depiction of useful “decision-quality information on demand,” such as a combatant’s strength, will, intent, degree of uncertainty of perceived data, etc.  Allowing a decision-maker to visualize the mission as it unfolds, in a manner that makes sense to him/her, provides tremendous latitude to make time-critical mid-course decisions.  5.4  Simulation Paradigm ChangesIn a thinkpiece written to address the technical implications of a DSAP system [16], Kwak looked carefully at the functional requirements of such a system; with a mindful eye on how those requirements map to the capabilities of any current simulation paradigm.  Noting first that while “traditional simulation systems are designed to live in a controlled environment -- the range of inputs and interaction possibilities are controlled or even pre-defined,” he determined that a simulation capability as described by the DSAP system would need to be a “heavy-duty” simulation.  As defined by Kwak, a heavy-duty simulation would need to be able to survive under any imaginable (i.e., unknown at setup time) exercise or mission data and user interactions that might occur in the real world.  He goes on to describe four new technical changes to traditional simulation paradigms implied by the requirement for a “heavy-duty” simulation.A fully-populated behavior space.  Traditional simulation systems have many behavioral holes; some portions of the behavior space which are not implemented, and which are cleverly avoided during simulation runs.  DSAP needs to be able to properly respond to literally all cases that might happen in the real world.  Kwak calls this a behaviorally complete simulation..Wide range of simulation execution speed.  As Surdu also noted [7, 8], a system such as DSAP needs to be able to vary in execution speed from running in real-time – synchronizing with the speed of the mission in order to perform situation assessment -- while at the same time, being capable of running faster than real-time in order to quickly evaluate candidate COAs.  Kwak calls this characteristic temporally scalable simulation.Rapid Scenario Construction.  This was also cited by Surdu and others as a requirement and technical challenge.  In addition to the rationale propounded by Surdu, Kwak includes the need for modularity, while avoiding “…any idiosyncratic interactions with other models.”Dynamic User Interventions.  Simulations for DSAP applications, Kwak asserts, should be able to realistically handle dynamic real-world user interventions without becoming unstable.SummaryThe Dynamic Situation Assessment and Prediction tool envisioned in this paper holds much promise for the successful conduct of the “new face of war.”  It does not come without a price, however.  It involves research and judicious application of a variety of technology areas described above: Model Abstraction, which allows us to perform faster-than-real-time simulations of mission outcome, as well as assessments of alternative courses of action; Prediction Theory, so that we may attempt to determine the weaknesses in the plan and predict possible failures or recommend changes to the current mission tasking; Information Visualization, in order to provide the user with “decision-quality information” regarding the on-going situation; and revolutionary changes to conventional simulation paradigms implied by the requirements of rapid simulation configuration, rollback/lookahead synchronization issues, and insertion of situation information on the fly.7.  ReferencesGen. J.P. Jumper, “Global Strike Task Force: A transforming Concept, Forged by Experience,” Aerospace Power Journal, Spring 2001, pp. 24-33Gen. J.P. Jumper, “Global Strike Task Force: Kicking Down Doors,” Air Combat Command News Service article by MSgt T. Somerville, 10 Aug 01Maj. A. Romano, “Combat Air Forces Concept of Operations for Time Critical Targeting (draft),” Feb 01 J.R. Surdu, and U.W. Pooch, “A Methodology for Applying Simulation Technologies in the Mission Operational Environment,” Proceedings of the 1998 IEEE Information Technology Conference, Syracuse, NY, Sept 1-3, pp. 45-48. J.R. Surdu and U.W. Pooch, “A Methodology for Using Intelligent Agents to Apply Simulation Technologies to the Mission Operational Environment,” Proceedings of Enabling Technology for Simulation Science III,. Orlando, FL, Apr 5-9, 1999, pp.  294-299.J.R. Surdu, J.M.D Hill and U.W. Pooch, “Anticipatory Planning Support System,” Proceedings of the 2000 Winter Simulation Conference, Orlando, FL, Dec 10-13, pp. 950-957J.R. Surdu, and U.W. Pooch, “Simulation Technologies in the Mission Operational Environment,” Simulation, vol. 74, no. 3, pp. 138-161J.R. Surdu, and U.W. Pooch, “Simulations During Operations,” Military Review, the Professional Journal of the U.S. Army, Mar-Apr, 2001, pp. 38-45J.M.D. Hill, J.R. Surdu, J. Vaglia and U.W. Pooch, “Synchronized Simulations in Planning Systems,” Advanced Simulation Technologies Conference (ASTC ‘2001): Military, Government and Aerospace Simulation Symposium, Seattle, WA., 22-26 April 2001, pp. 69-75J.M.D. Hill, J.R. Surdu and U.W. Pooch, “Implementation of the Anticipatory Planning Support System,” Advanced Simulation Technologies Conference (ASTC ‘2001): Military, Government and Aerospace Simulation Symposium, Seattle, WA., 22-26 April 2001, pp. 76-81J.M.D. Hill, J.R. Surdu and U.W. Pooch, “Anticipatory Planning Using Execution Monitoring and a Constrained Planning Frontier,” in Proceedings of the IASTED International Conference on Applied Simulation and Modeling (ASM 2000), Banff, Canada, July 24-26, pp. 168-172 J.R. Surdu and J.M.D. Hill, “Simulations in Command Posts of the Future,” to be published in Proceedings of Advanced Simulation Technology Conference, San Diego, CA, 14-18 April 2002J. Jelinek, “Predictive Models of Battle Dynamics,” in Proceedings of Enabling Technology for Simulation Science V, Orlando FL, 20 April 2001 J.K. McFee, Jr., K. Pathak, J. Shaw and M.Y. Weise, “Application of Optimistic PDES Techniques to Perform Real-Time Predictive Battle Planning for National Missile Defense,”W.C. Cave, “Prediction Theory: A Framework for Modeling,”Kwak, S.D. “DSAP (Dynamic Situation Assessment and Prediction),” unpublished white paper, May 2000Author BiographyALEX SISTI is the Technical Advisor for the C4ISR Modeling and Simulation Branch, Information Systems Division, in the Air Force Research Laboratory’s Information Directorate; in Rome NY.  He has been actively applying his modeling and simulation research interests in a variety of Air Force programs since 1982. He received the A.A.S degree in Accounting in 1975, a B.S. in Computer Science in 1982 and earned his M.S. in Computer Engineering from Syracuse University in 1989