Battle Command System Training at Fort Hood Texas--An Integrated Approach John W. DiemDirectorDigital Training FacilityU. S. Army III Corps Headquarters Fort Hood, TX 76544(254) 287-1910HYPERLINK "mailto:John.Diem@hood.army.mil"John.Diem@hood.army.milThomas R. RuhlIITRI/Strategic Operations GroupU. S. Army III Corps HeadquartersFort Hood, TX 76544(254) 287-8886 HYPERLINK "mailto:Thomas.Ruhl@hood.army.mil" Thomas.Ruhl@hood.army.milDarran T. AndersonMAJ, FACorps G3 Simulations OfficerIII Corps Training and SupportFort Hood, TX 76544(254) 287-8727 HYPERLINK "mailto:Darran.Anderson@hood.army.mil" Darran.Anderson@hood.army.milNorman L. (Lane) AllredIITRI/Strategic Operations GroupU. S. Army III Corps HeadquartersFort Hood, TX 76544(254) 532-8321 x2295HYPERLINK "mailto:lane.allred@hood-ctsfmail.army.mil"lane.allred@hood-ctsfmail.army.milABSTRACT:  This paper addresses the process of implementing a digital training strategy.  The U. S. Army’s III Corps will be the first fighting force of its size equipped with a complete suite of interoperable, automated Command, Control, Communications, Computer, and Intelligence  (C4I) systems.  To be successful, III Corps must do these two things well:1) Continually develop and maintain digitally trained combat ready soldiers, leaders, and staffs that can perform in this intense environment, and,2) Provide a robust, realistic individual and collective training environment that fully replicates the friction of gaining and sustaining information dominance during military operations.  The Corps’ transition from analog to digital operations requires an effective training program coupled with aggressive personnel management that develops, maintains, and improves our digital expertise.  Our ability to capture, document, and teach tactics, techniques and procedures (TTP) and lessons learned will form the foundation of Digital Standard Operating Procedures and unit sustainment training plans for the Corps’ units to improve individual, leader, and staff digital proficiency.  We will focus both on “how to train” as well as “how to fight” in the development and execution of this training program.This paper will review the process of establishing a viable training strategy at III Corps that provides an integrated approach to training individual and collective tasks on the Army’s evolving C4I systems.  A major enabler of this training strategy is establishing the synthetic environment tools that can provide a realistic environment and force the execution of integration and interoperability tasks at all levels of training.  III Corps is evaluating a broad range of options for simulation and after action review (AAR) tools to support these efforts. Key components of the III Corps digital training strategy will include a digital training facility (DTF)* that will provide vignette-based simulation drivers for operator, leader, and staff training; a fixed tactical internet (FTI) that uses simulations, communications system surrogates, and tactical communications components to replicate the communications environment from platform to Corps headquarters; and digital multipurpose range complexes that provide simulation and AAR wrap-around capabilities to create live-fire training opportunities that employ weapons platforms which integrate digital C4I systems.  III Corps is also undergoing a program to modernize existing training capabilities to insure that simulation and C4I interface capabilities are interoperable, scalable, and affordable.   Once established, a key challenge will be keeping this training environment current with C4I systems as they evolve.*At the time of this writing, DTF was the correct name of the facility.  However, alignment with the to be published Army training strategy may cause a name change to Battle Command Training Center (BCTC).1.  IntroductionIII Corps is the Army’s premiere mechanized fighting force and, for the last ten years, has been at the Army’s cutting edge of implementing information technologies to support the tactical commander.  As a result of this modernization effort, it is also at the leading edge in developing and implementing a digital training strategy.  This strategy allows units to move from situational awareness to situational understanding and ultimately to situational dominance.  III Corps will be the first fighting force of its size equipped with a complete suite of interoperable, automated Command, Control, Communications, Computer, and Intelligence  (C4I) systems that comprise the Army Battle Command Systems (ABCS).  To be successful in the employment of these C4I systems, III Corps must do these two things well:1) Continually develop and maintain digitally trained combat ready soldiers, leaders, and staffs that can perform in this intense environment, and,2) Provide a robust, realistic individual and collective training environment that fully replicates the friction of gaining and sustaining information dominance during military operations.  III Corps’ transition from analog to digital operations requires an effective training program coupled with aggressive personnel management that develops, maintains, and improves our digital expertise.  The Corps’ ability to capture, document, and teach tactics, techniques and procedures (TTP) and lessons learned will form the foundation of Digital Standard Operating Procedures and unit sustainment training plans for the Corps’ units to improve individual, leader, and staff digital proficiency.  The training strategy will focus both on “how to train” – e.g. training leaders on how to plan and conduct training for units equipped with modern information technologies -- as well as “how to fight” in the development and execution of this training program.  	2.  Current Assessment.  The Corps’ current challenge is both attainment and sustainment of digital skills.  This challenge occurs primarily because of personnel turbulence, software and hardware changes, new equipment fielding, and rapid deterioration of specific non-reinforced digital skills.  As new versions of software and/or hardware are fielded, operators and leaders must undergo “Delta” training in order to understand the differences in functionality.  In general, training proficiency tends to peak for major exercises; digital skills are no exception – in fact, at the leader and staff level, they peak only during exercises due to the lack of leader and staff training prior to the event.  Without continuous sustainment training, digital skills tend to decay more rapidly than other military skills.  The basic tenet of the III Corps Army Battle Command Systems (ABCS) training plan is to establish continuous individual and unit collective training opportunities without relying on any particular training or testing event.    3.  Training Strategy.   III Corps digital training will take a building block approach, similar to that employed for the acquisition of other military skills.  Each training block is designed to develop the digital skills required for the next level of situational understanding with the goal of achieving situational dominance using ABCS. For this strategy to work, it is imperative that soldiers, staffs, or units enter digital training already proficient in their MOS/functional job requirements.	This building block approach has been incorporated into the III Corps Gate Strategy, which incorporates those “go to war” events, (digital, maneuver, and live fire) a combat arms unit must accomplish prior to deployment.  As III Corps’ digital training strategy evolves, gates will also be developed in coordination with combat support and combat service support units and organizations to establish training events, gates, and objectives that reflect their unique missions and organizations. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 1.  Combat Arms Gate Strategy4.  Fort Hood’s Digital Training Facility (DTF)To support the fielding of digital C4I systems at Fort Hood, system Program Managers (PMs) have conducted all New Equipment Training (NET) and DELTA training at the Central Technical Support Facility (CTSF).  The PMs will continue to have responsibility for these courses as they field new software versions or updates; however, some of them may be conducted in the DTF rather than the CTSF.	The DTF, when it becomes operational in FY02, will be the hub of III Corps’ digital training strategy, as III Corps becomes the Army’s First Digitized Corps (FDC).  The DTF will be responsible for all new personnel training, staff training, and leader training.  The DTF offers a suite of ABCS digital classrooms, six reconfigurable tactical operation centers (TOCs) that can be configured to replicate battalion through Corps command posts or elements, AAR facilities, a Digital Battlestaff Sustainment Trainer (DBST) simulation and AAR suite, and a Digital Reference Center.  The TOCs will afford digital staffs (battalion through Corps) the opportunity to conduct simulation-driven, vignette-based training with minimal setup and preparation requirements.  The TOCs will include or replicate, via simulations and observer/controllers, a multi-echelon training environment.	To further enhance the training of staffs, the DTF will be connected to the Battle Simulation Center (BSC), the Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT), the Digital Multi-Purpose Range Complex (DMPRC), and units conducting maneuver training in local training areas.  This connectivity will be provided by the III Corps Fixed Tactical Internet (FTI), which will allow units to train simultaneously in the Live, Virtual, and Constructive environments and to access DTF training reachback capabilities and digital training resources during events conducted across III Corps.5.  Training Concept. To ensure training success at the unit level, units must be given every opportunity to train on their digital systems and have the opportunity to tailor the training environments to meet training objectives and maximize available training time.  To accomplish this, digital training takes a building block approach.  There are five levels in the overall training plan:Level I - Individual Development TrainingLevel II – Section/Cell Staff Team TrainingLevel III - Staff Drills TrainingLevel IV – Functional Command PostTrainingLevel V – Full Command Post Training.Previously, Level I and some Level II training has been provided by ABCS and C4I PMs and the CTSF.  Level V training has been provided via major command post or field training exercises, or even during some operational tests.  In the future, all five levels of training must be provided as part of one over-arching training strategy that insures the training readiness of III Corps.Individual Training (Level I).  This training provides the foundation for all other training.  It is the initial training in the operation of systems and devices on which all other training builds.  There are four types of individual training (NET, Delta, new personnel, and sustainment training) and three categories of personnel who attend these courses: operators, system administrators, and system maintainers.     a.  New Equipment Training.  This training begins when new or modified equipment is introduced into the unit.  Program Managers (PMs) provide the New Equipment Training.  Units are responsible for scheduling soldier attendance at NET based on distribution of systems and their digital battle roster.  To maintain an effective battle roster, units should train a minimum of two operators per device (day shift and  night shift).  A third operator per device (swing or senior operator) is recommended.    b.  New Personnel Training.  The requirement for new personnel training is occasioned by the assignment of incoming personnel to units already equipped with digital systems and by the reassignment of untrained personnel to positions as operators and users of these systems.  This training will be provided by the DTF.  These soldiers should be scheduled for this training as soon as they arrive at Fort Hood.	Note:  The DTF will work with PMs who provide NET or Delta training to insure that the training meets III Corps training requirements.  Those requirements will include: 1) tracking of the attendees via the Corps’ training management system, 2) presentation of an overview of the system under instruction’s role in III Corps C4I operations, 3) inclusion of simulation-supported practical exercises that provide vertical and horizontal integration and interoperability training as dictated by the specific system, and 4) completion of a certification process that establishes the attendee’s ability to perform the critical tasks for that system.  c.  Delta Training.  Delta training is that training required by modifications to equipment and changes in software that call for operator skills that were not trained in NET and New Personnel training.  PMs are responsible for delta training on their individual systems.  This training may be provided for all users in a classroom or field environment (in the case of major changes) or for unit-designated instructor and key personnel (for less significant changes).  It may also be provided in conjunction with updates to, and distribution of, software user’s manuals or technical manuals (TMs).  d.  Sustainment Training. Refresher training, to reinforce previous training or sustain/regain previously acquired skills, is needed to maintain a soldier’s proficiency.  It is primarily a unit responsibility with support from DTF personnel.  The DTF can provide Refresher Training as available or they can provide Programs of Instruction (POIs), facilities, equipment, lesson plans, and practical exercises to unit designated sustainment trainers from the Division and Corps for their use in conducting refresher training.Section/Cell Staff Team Training (Level II).  This training forms the basis for all collective battlestaff training and is the key venue for training leaders.  There are two courses for training at this level; they are Staff Interoperability and ABCS Executive Overview.  a.  Staff Interoperability.  Each ABCS system shares information with other systems on the Local Area Network (LAN) and throughout the Wide Area Network (WAN).  Staff Interoperability training, conducted by the DTF, describes how one battlefield automated system (BAS) workstation can access information from another BAS workstation (e.g., how an operator on an AFATDS workstation can obtain information from an MCS server).  The focus of this training is familiarization with the battlefield automated system (BAS) software and system interfaces, interoperability, and integration.  During this course, the battle staff receives hands-on instruction on the information products available and how to access them.  The purpose of the Staff Interoperability Training is to:(1) Familiarize the battle staff (leaders and operators) with ABCS components	(2) Demonstrate and train various ABCS/FBCB2 components	(3) Demonstrate and train the key interoperable products and processes with hands-on practical exercises and simulation-driven vignettes	(4) Allow time for discussion of current TTPs and development of the unit’s digital TACSOP.	(5) Develop a foundation for further collective training.b.  Leader Training--ABCS Executive Overview.  The ABCS Executive Overview is a staff level course and is the key component of the III Corps leader training program.  It is not an operator course and is conducted in the DTF.  (Although leaders are not required to attend operator-level courses, they will obtain a deeper appreciation of their equipment if they attend some courses.  The intended audience for this course is commanders and battle staff officers and senior NCOs.  This Executive Overview training explains the capabilities of the BAS individually and demonstrates how the capabilities of the individual systems, when used together, provide the force multiplier effect.  The purpose of the Executive Overview is to:(1) Familiarize the battle staff (commanders and key leaders) with ABCS components(2) Provide a hands-on demonstration of the ABCS with SME instruction and simulation-driven vignettes(3) Give Unit leadership a baseline understanding and orientation.Some Level II training may be provided by the PM or CTSF to complement NET or Delta training at Level I.  In those cases, III Corps will work with the trainer to insure that the same expectations emplaced for Level 1 training are emplaced to insure that III Corps participants are tracked, receive effective training on horizontal and vertical information integration, and are certified in the critical digital tasks established by III Corps at that time (some will be version-specific).Staff Drills Training (Level III).  Level III training focuses primarily on single battlefield functional areas (BFA) or on cells or sections of large command posts and consists of the Battle Skills Training course.  	This DTF-provided course provides knowledge about key elements of each BAS.  It offers an opportunity to perform functionality between two or more different C4I systems.  This training concentrates on critical digital battle tasks, showing the threads from system to system.  Scenario-based exercises, supported by a federation of simulations, are used to increase realism and accelerate the digital transition process.  Existing, proven staff functions are used for the basis of operations or operational context. The training allows time for discussion of current TTPs and their use or adaptation to the digital arena to facilitate TTP and TACSOP development.  It includes refining staff processes and building staff cohesiveness.Functional Command Post Training (Level IV).  Level IV training  begins the transition from single BAS training to cross-BAS training.  This training is conducted primarily in the DTF’s reconfigurable TOCs utilizing vignette-driven exercises and a federation of simulation and AAR tools.  Frequently, these will be the same simulation and AAR tools employed in level V training; however, they will be driven based on pre-built vignettes and not used in a free-play exercise support mode.	The Transitional Staff Skills Training course focuses on interoperability changes from previous versions (software drops) of ABCS.  It explores how these changes affect the way users access, present and exchange battlefield information between and among the BFAs.  Staff members are introduced to the techniques used to develop their Common Tactical Picture (CTP) as new or significantly changed information products become available. The Staff Skills program supplements but does not replace the prerequisite Delta training provided by PMs.  Also, this training does not replace the Staff Interoperability and Battle Skills courses.Full Command Post Training (Level V).  Level V training consists of full command post training where the entire staff and its subordinate units train.  Full CP training is conducted using high fidelity simulations providing high-resolution digital feeds and stimulations.  These allow the entire battlestaff to refine TTPs throughout the BFAs.  	This training would primarily be conducted during a field training or command post exercise (such as a BCTP Warfighter Exercise or Combat Training Center (CTC) rotation); it could also be conducted in the DTF’s reconfigurable TOCs or at the BSC or JANUS facility.  Level V training allows units to train the application of information technologies to acquire, exchange, and employ digital information throughout the battlespace. This level of training is a unit responsibility.  With the assistance of DTF staff, units should formulate training objectives and implement training plans that build on the skills acquired in Levels I-IV.  Staffs should capitalize on these major training events to capture, train, and refine TTPs, and incorporate these into viable digital TACSOPs.  Level V training events will serve as major events toward which digital training gates will be developed and unit “how to train” guidance will be developed.  The simulations and AAR tools are operated as free-play exercise drivers and require a support staff to respond to orders generated by unit commanders and staffs and an analysis staff to track unit orders, reports, and actions as they occur in real-time.6.  Scheduling and Reporting of Digital Training.One of the greatest challenges to commanders of units fielded with modern C4I systems is finding sufficient time and resources to conduct levels 1 through 5 training.  This challenge is magnified when the increased operational tempo of today’s units is taken into account and when the total number of III Corps soldiers requiring some level of sustainment training (estimated to be over 12,000 per year by Fiscal Year 2004) is considered.  	To support its units, Fort Hood will employ the Digital Training Management System (DTMS) to schedule and manage all digital training on the installation, provide tracking of individuals who participate in training by system and versions trained on, and maintain certification status of those individuals.  DTMS will be used for all III Corps soldiers and leaders trained, regardless of whether the training is provided by the DTF, PM, or CTSF.  This system was developed initially to support system fielding and is the only approved system for scheduling and managing training levels of digitally trained soldiers.  Each III Corps unit will have access to this system to schedule all levels of digital training.  Training for unit DTMS managers will be scheduled and conducted in the DTF.  The systems will also be used to prepare unit training status reports for mandatory quarterly, semi-annual, and annual training briefings.7.  Training Support System (Simulation and AAR) Requirements.The Army has recognized since its earliest experiments with battlefield automation that it “takes a computer to train on a computer”.  For example, the standard intelligence training simulation (the Tactical Simulation, or TACSIM) used by Army divisions and Corps grew out of test and training programs in the late 70s and early 80s for the Army’s automated intelligence systems that ultimately became today’s All Source Automated System (ASAS).  Similarly, many of the current after action reporting systems grew out of technical and operational testing instrumentation systems developed over the last decade to assess how and when information was communicated during ABCS test events.	Robust simulation and AAR tools will be a key component of training conducted by the DTF at venues across III Corps.  These tools are essential for providing the right kinds of information (messages, web page replication, data transfers, streaming video, etc.) that would be encountered during military operations.  This kind of information occurs much too rapidly on the modern battlefield to be generated via manual techniques and must be produced to exact protocol, format, and data standards.  Many of the ABCS individual and collective tasks are triggered by the requirement to generate or process this information, thus the simulations become key drivers for most training events.  Additionally, AAR tools that can monitor what information was available to system users, when it was transmitted and received, and whether it was displayed are also critical components of monitoring ABCS training – and this information cannot be collected through traditional means of just listening or observing.The DTF’s ability to employ the training support system tools for all five levels of training will be challenged by several different factors and conditions:The simulation and AAR tools must keep pace with technical evolution of the ABCS and other C4I systems (message formats and protocols, communications interfaces, database standards, and information transport processes) to insure interoperability and their ability to replicate the broad range of information sources on the battlefield.Simulations must replicate C4I operational TTPs to provide realistic environments for all levels of training.   Level 5 (full CPX events) typically depend on multiple controllers to replicate unit TTPs via simulation input; however, these actions must be implicit to the simulation when pre-built vignettes are developed and used for levels 1 through 4 training.AAR systems must facilitate the capture of a broad variety of information stored on and communicated between systems – and rapidly fuse that information into meaningful training feedback.  Many current AAR tools required large analyst staffs to manage data collection, reduction, analysis, and presentation; this level of staffing is not affordable for most unit-conducted training.The time and operational overhead for most current simulation and AAR systems is too great; repetitive training at levels 1 through 4, especially if conducted by units at unit training sites, require systems that are easy to set up and prepare and don’t require large amounts of hardware.The training tools employed across III Corps must be scalable and developed to operate as stand-alone training systems or federations.  A good example of this capability would be using the fire support simulation employed by DBST for training an AFATDS operator at level 1 and then federating that simulation with the ground model and intelligence simulation of DBST to drive a series of level 2 and 3 staff interoperability training events.  A common scenario, with training vignettes, would be employed in all cases but the training staff would be afforded the opportunity of using the most efficient combination and number of training tools.  The goal is not to have different tools based on the level of digital training but to have a common, scalable, interoperable toolkit that supports all five levels.These are but a few of the challenges faced by the DTF staff in establishing the training support systems for III Corps digital training.  It is anticipated that a majority of its simulation and AAR systems requirements can be met with tools currently in the Army’s testing and training inventories; shortfalls will be identified to the Army’s training systems combat and material developers to direct the development the evolution of current and future systems.  The National Simulation Center (NSC) and Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM) have permanent staff at III Corps/Fort Hood and will be involved in all aspects of simulation and AAR system planning, testing, integration, and employment at the DTF and across III Corps.  Lessons learned by III Corps as it stands up this unique training capability will be critical to the Army’s formulation and sustainment of its digital training strategy.8. BiographiesJohn W. Diem is Chief, Digital Training Division/ Director Digital Training Facility, U. S. Army III Corps Headquarters, Fort Hood, Texas.  Prior to 26 March 2001, he was Chief of the National Simulation Center Digital Integration Office, Fort Hood, Texas and was also the AMSO C4I Integration Standards Coordinator where he supported Army-wide simulation-C4I integration for test, training, and experimentation.  During his past 20 years as an Army Officer, defense contractor, and government civilian, he has been involved in the testing and training of automated command and control systems.  To perform these test and training activities, he has employed, developed, or managed a broad variety of simulation-C4I integration efforts to provide test and training environments, data collection and after action reporting, and scenario database development.  He earned a BA and MS from Texas A&M University and served 14 years in the U.S. Army on active and reserve duty as a Military Intelligence Officer in command and staff tactical and signals intelligence positions.Major Darran T. Anderson is the Simulations Officer for the III (US) Corps and is assigned to the Digital Training Division, U.S. Army III Corps Headquarters, Fort Hood, Texas.  In June 2001, he was assigned to the Army’s Functional Area 57 program, as a simulation operations specialist; in the previous thirteen years as a field artillery officer he held a variety of command and staff positions, most recently as a member of the 4th Infantry Division’s Fire Support Element participating in the Division Capstone Exercise, phase 1, at Fort Irwin, CA.  He holds a Bachelors degree from the University of Texas and is currently completing the Army Command and General Staff College.Norman L. (Lane) Allred is a Senior Military Analyst with Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute (IITRI).  He has worked the last five years in U.S. Army simulation support for testing and training and recently completed a U. S. Army Study titled “Standard C4I Components for M&S/C4I Interoperability Support.”  He served 27 years in the U.S. Air Force in intelligence and space related activities.  He earned a BS in communications from Brigham Young University, a MBA from the University of Montana and a Masters Of Military Arts and Science from the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College.Thomas R. (Randy) Ruhl, is a Senior Military Analyst with Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute (IITRI) and is the Digital Integration Manager for the Digital Training Division, III Corps, Fort Hood, Texas.  He served over 20 years in the U.S. Army in a variety of infantry command and staff positions, to include battalion command of one of the Army’s first digitized units.  His final active duty assignment was as the Deputy G-3 for Training and Support, III Corps, Fort Hood, Texas, where he oversaw the key planning elements of what will be the Army’s first Digital Training Facility.  He earned a BS from the University of Toledo, a Masters from the Syracuse Comptroller’s Program and is a graduate of the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College. 