Enhanced Representation of Acoustic Propagation Using the Synthetic Natural Environment in the Global 2001 War GameMichael D. MandelbergAlbert C. BiondoFred C. Newman The Johns Hopkins UniversityApplied Physics LaboratoryJohns Hopkins RoadLaurel, MD 20723-6099(301) 953-5000	HYPERLINK "mailto:MandeMD1@jhuapl.edu"MandeMD1@jhuapl.edu	 HYPERLINK mailto:BiondAC1@jhuapl.edu BiondAC1@jhuapl.edu 	 HYPERLINK mailto:NewmaFC1@jhuapl.edu NewmaFC1@jhuapl.eduKeywords:Simulation, Environment, Energy Propagation Models, Environmental Abstraction, Consistency, InteroperabilityABSTRACT: We describe the application of a methodology for the efficient use of energy propagation models in simulations.  An efficient representation of the effects of a synthetic natural environment on energy propagation was required by the Global2001 War Game.  In particular, acoustic propagation through the ocean environment was required for the anti-submarine warfare (ASW) component of the war game.  A strategy for improving the computational efficiency of the required energy effects model calculations was successfully implemented so that the war game could incorporate a more realistic ASW simulation than had been previously possible.  This methodology is extendable to other environmental effects models as well. 1.	IntroductionThe anti-submarine warfare (ASW) component of the Global 2001 War Game required the employment of an environmental effects model using a synthetic natural environment.  Passive acoustic propagation modeling was required in order to properly determine the detectability of submarines during the simulation.  The acoustic propagation modeling provided by the Multiresolution Interaction Validity (MIV) project was computationally efficient and more realistic than had been used in previous war games.  In advanced distributed simulations such as Global 2001, the simulated “natural environment” provides the context in which synthetic forces will operate, locating those forces with respect to each other and mediating their interactions. The synthetic natural environment (SNE) encompasses all physical aspects (both state and effects) of the natural environment, including the land, sea, atmosphere, and space. Modeling the complex effects of the natural environment on the warfighter, however, requires prioritizations and trade-offs that can result in reduced fidelity representations in simulations. Reduced fidelity representations can result from suboptimal employment of environmental effects models. Environmental effects models often involve complex algorithms to represent effects of the environment on some process such as the propagation of energy or the passage of a vehicle over a land or sea surface. In situations where environmental effects models (e.g., energy propagation models) must be run frequently to keep pace with changing circumstances (e.g., movement of sources and sensors), the computational complexity of the models requires a disproportionately large share of the available computer resources. To reduce the number of required calculations and improve model cost effectiveness, estimates of model output may be employed to replace actual model calculations. Currently, however, the rules used to determine whether to calculate or to estimate are often rather crude, based only on reducing the number of model calculations to an affordable size.  There is a need for a more comprehensive means of deciding whether to calculate or estimate based on knowledge of the model response to environmental conditions. The basis for this decision must include discrimination between those conditions for which estimates will be reliable and those conditions for which estimates will be poor.  In the latter case, actual model calculations must be made.The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Advanced Simulation Technology Thrust (ASTT) Program Multiresolution Interaction Validity (MIV) project was a 2½-year effort, aimed at developing a prototype methodology as well as prototype guidance products to support the enhanced representation of environmental effects in networked computer simulations. Although the MIV methodology is intended to apply to many types of environmental effects models, this project focused specifically on improving the capability to represent environmental effects on the propagation of energy affecting sensors in simulations.As an approach to a more general solution to the requirements for model cost effectiveness and improved consistency, the MIV project undertook to develop and evaluate prototype methodologies to identify important environmental effects model sensitivities. These methodologies were to be generated for applicability in multiple environmental domains, but they were developed initially in the ocean acoustic domain to test specific applicability and utility and support the development of prototype products for enhanced consistency and model cost effectiveness. Later, these methodologies would be extended to applications in other environmental domains.Earlier papers (References [1], [2], [3], [4], and [5]) provide a detailed description of the MIV project approach and preliminary results. This paper will detail the application of MIV to the Global 2001 War Game. 2.	Global 2001 Synthetic Natural EnvironmentThe MIV process, as it relates to the war game, began by acquiring all environmental data sets required to fully describe those aspects of the environment that impacted ocean acoustic propagation. The three crucial types of required environmental data were bathymetry, an acoustic description of the ocean bottom composition, and a three-dimensional ocean sound speed field. The bathymetry in the simulation area is shown in Figure 1. Global 2001 took place in the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman. Most of the Persian Gulf is shallower than 100 meters.  The bottom depth increases in the Gulf of Oman to values approaching 4000 meters.  The bathymetry data were obtained from the Naval Oceanographic Office (NAVOCEANO) Ocean Floor Depth Digital Bathymetric Data Base Variable Resolution (DBDB-V) Level 0 (Reference 6). The acoustic description of the bottom was obtained from the NAVOCEANO Low Frequency Bottom Loss (LFBL) Data Base for acoustic frequencies 1000 Hz and below. The High Frequency Bottom Loss (HFBL) Data Base was used for acoustic frequencies greater than 2000 Hz(Reference [6]).  A hybrid-composite of the two models was used for the frequencies between 1000 and 2000 HzThe third crucial type of environmental data was the sound speed field. The sound speed fields were calculated using the Modular Ocean Data Assimilation System (MODAS) by the Naval Research Laboratory/Stennis Space Center. MODAS produced a three dimensional gridded sound speed field, with a data point every 1/8th degree of latitude and longitude.  The depth resolution varied with more points close to the surface where sound speed variability is higher and fewer points down at depth where sound speed is more slowly and smoothly varying. MODAS fields were calculated for every possible day in which the simulation could take place, from 12 to 27 March. Three MODAS fields were selected as being most representative of the oceanographic conditions in the region – 13, 21, and 26 March – based on dataset similarities. 3.	Generation of Passive Acoustic Data Required for ASW SimulationOnce the required environmental data were obtained, a subject matter expert (SME) developed a simple division of the GLOBAL 2001 Southwest Asia playbox into “feature areas” with grossly uniform acoustic propagation characteristics. The final feature areas are shown in Figure 2, overlaying the bathymetry.. One can see the high correlation of the feature area boundaries with the bathymetry. Next, the SME selected propagation paths within and among the feature areas that were representative of the various acoustic propagation conditions likely to be encountered in the GLOBAL 2001 ASW simulation. These propagation paths included paths within single feature areas and paths across multiple feature areas.  Propagation paths greater than 100 nmi were not included since the sensor systems represented were assumed  not able to make detections beyond this range (under these environmental conditions). A total of 25 acoustic propagation paths were selected.For each selected propagation path, an acoustic model of choice (ASTRAL – Reference [6]) was then run for 20 source depths, 20 receiver depths, and 12 frequencies (the values are shown in Table 1) These values were selected in order to encompass all possible source depth/receiver depth/frequency combinations which might be required by the simulation.  This resulted in a total of 2400 model calculations of transmission loss (TL) versus range for each defined propagation path. Note that not all combinations of source depth and receiver depth needed to be included in the acoustic model calculations. Due to the relatively shallow water in much of the playbox, many combinations of source depth and receiver depth included depths deeper than the ocean bottom and thus no acoustic model calculations were made for those combinations. This resulted in a total of 40,564 acoustic model calculations in all.Source Depth (ft)Receiver Depth (ft)Frequency (Hz)25252050505075751001001002001251253001501505002002006002502508003003001200350350150040040020004504504000500500-600600-700700-800800-900900-10001000-12501250-15001500-Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 1:  Source depths, receiver depths, and frequencies used in acoustic model calculationsUsing cluster analysis, all model calculations for all selected paths were then grouped according to the shape of their respective TL versus range curves. Cluster analysis is a statistical method of grouping similar objects together. Details on the clustering algorithm as implemented by MIV can be found in Reference 3; further information on clustering can be found in References 7 and 8. Two of the clusters (or groups) are shown in Figure 3. The red and green groups represent two of the 250 different clusters. The red cluster includes many TL curves exhibiting duct-like propagation. The green cluster, includes TL curves representing more convergence-zone-like propagation. One transmission loss curve was selected from each group to be the representative curve for that group. Each representative curve selected was that curve which had the lowest average rms difference from all of the other curves in that group. The blue TL curve observed in the middle of the population of each cluster (see Figure 3) is the selected representative TL curve.  One can observe that the representative curve shows the same type of behavior as the other curves in their respective clusters.For the GLOBAL 2001 ASW simulation, 250 representative TL curves (one from each of the 250 clusters) comprised the compact Joint Simulated Automated Forces (JSAF) TL library, with each representative curve providing the approximate TL values for the particular range of contact-sensor circumstances encompassed by the corresponding cluster of TL curves. As a measure of accuracy. the mean RMS difference between the 250 representative curves and the other curves in their respective clusters was calculated.  The differences averaged approximately 2 dB.The JSAF TL library discussed above represented the passive acoustic TL environment for only 21 March.  It was still necessary to provide TL libraries for the other selected dates (13 and 27 March). Since two of the three environmental parameters which controlled the acoustic propagation, the bathymetry and the bottom composition, do not change temporally, and the MODAS sound speed fields did not change dramatically during the period 12-27 March, the cluster boundaries obtained by the method described above were used to generate the additional TL curves required to represent the acoustic environments for the other dates selected (13 and 27 March). Using the representative TL curve input parameters, only 250 acoustic model calculations were required for each additional acoustic environment rather than the 40,564 that were required for the first TL library. This enabled the inclusion of additional TL libraries to JSAF without another large computational effort, and  was employed for the two additional MODAS fields used in the creation of the JSAF TL libraries. It should be noted that this approximation allows for the rapid updating of simulation environmental effects when the simulation environment is required to change in step with the actual environment (e.g. for Navy Fleet Battle Experiments).A JSAF TL library directory was then constructed to enable retrieval of the appropriate TL value for any contact-sensor pair positions, separation range, geometry, and frequency.  These TL values were then inserted into the JSAF sensor model (developed by Logicon), as required,  for detection calculations during the ASW simulation exercise. The JSAF library directory was the same throughout the exercise, with the TL values to be  retrieved modified  to reflect the changing environmental conditions represented by the  MODAS fields from the 3 different time periods. 4.	Recommendations for Future ImprovementsAlthough the application of MIV to the GLOBAL 2001 war game was successful, there were several improvements which could be implemented. The mine warfare (MIW) component of the simulation was using a different environment, in particular a different sound speed field. The MIW component used sound speed fields which met the MIW simulation requirements, but had insufficient depth resolution for acoustic model calculations required in deeper water to support the ASW simulation requirements. In the future, a common environment could be specified which would meet both the ASW and the MIW requirements.Only three TL tables were provided to the simulation. However, MIV could easily calculate many more TL tables. In future war games, MIV could provide a separate TL table for each of the daily MODAS fields which were provided to the simulation.A better shallow water acoustic propagation model, such as FEYRAY or GRAB, could be used in place of ASTRAL, an earlier-generation Navy standard model employing approximations to accomplish speed of calculation.The ASW active acoustic JSAF module could be upgraded through the use of MIV. This would enable the use of a common acoustic environment for both passive and active acoustic propagation.5.	ConclusionsThe JSAF TL libraries provided by MIV were used successfully during the GLOBAL 2001 war game. The libraries were accessed during the simulation for each possibility of a detection of a submarine by a passive acoustic sensor and always provided a realistic result in a very quick and efficient manner. As an example, during the war game, a blue submarine protested a detection provided by thea MIV retrieval. In order to verify the result, a full model prediction was calculated. First the correct environment was extracted from the databases and then used as input to the acoustic model. After twenty minutes of effort, the nearly instantaneous MIV detection was confirmed by the independent acoustic model run.  The improvement in “computation” time afforded by the MIV-based methodology was then immediately evident.In summary, the computer storage- and processing- efficient MIV technique allowed the effects of the complex inhomogeneous Southwest Asia littoral time-dependent environment to be realistically reflected in the behavior of simulated ASW systems with minimum impact on the GLOBAL 2001 ASW simulation resources. References:[1]	F. C. Newman, Mandelberg M. D., Biondo A. C., and Croucher, A. R., “Progress on a Methodology to Support Enhanced Sensor Representation,” Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop Papers, Volume I (98S-SIW-237), March 1998.[2]	F. C. Newman, Mandelberg M. D., Biondo A. C., Croucher, A. R., and Matthews, C., “Progress on a Methodology to Support Enhanced Sensor Representations: Part II,” Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop Papers, Volume I (98F-SIW-174), September 1998.[3]	Mandelberg M. D., Biondo A. C., F. C. Newman, and Matthews, C., “The Utility of Cluster Analysis for Improving the Use of Higher-Fidelity Sensor Models in Advanced Simulations,” Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop Papers, Volume I (99S-SIW-117), March 1999.[4]	Biondo A. C., Mandelberg M. D., F. C. Newman, and Matthews, C., “Model-Dependent Environmental Abstractions (MDEAs) of Acoustic Transmission Loss to Support Synthetic Force Development,” Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop Papers, Volume I (99S-SIW-152), March 1999.[5]	Biondo, A. C., Mandelberg, M.D., Newman, F.C., and Mathews, C., “Enhanced Representation of Environmental Effects”, Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop Papers (00S-SIW-121), March 2000. [6]	Naval Oceanographic Office, “Oceanographic and Atmospheric Master Library Summary”,  OAML-SUM-21J, October 2001.[7]	Macnaughton-Smith, P. Williams, W.T., Dale, M.B., and Mockett, L.G. (1964), "Dissimilarity Analysis: A New Technique of Hierarchical Subdivision," Nature 202, 1034-1035.[8]	L. Kaufman and P. J. Rousseeuw (1989), Finding Groups in Data: An Introduction to Cluster Analysis, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 342 p.AcknowledgmentThis work was funded by the Naval Warfare Development Command (NWDC).Author BiographiesMICHAEL MANDELBERG is a mathematician and a member of the Senior Professional Staff at The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory (JHU/APL), Laurel, MD.  His areas of expertise include acoustic modeling, physical oceanography, and oceanographic data acquisition and analysis systems.  Albert  Biondo is a physicist and a member of the Senior Professional Staff at The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory (JHU/APL), Laurel, MD.  He has worked in the area of underwater acoustics for over 20 years, having been involved in both theoretical and experimental investigations of underwater acoustic propagation, ambient noise phenomena, and ASW systems assessment and evaluation. Over the past several years, he has been involved in acoustic sensor modeling for a variety of DOD simulation activities. Mr. Biondo is a member of the American Physical Society, the Acoustical Society of America, and the honor society Phi Kappa Phi.FRED NEWMAN is a physicist and a member of the Principal Professional Staff at The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory (JHU/APL), Laurel, MD.  He has done research in  physical oceanography and effects of the ocean environment on acoustic and non-acoustic submarine detectability, and was Principal Investigator for the DARPA Advanced Simulation Technology Thrust Multiresolution Interaction Validity Project at JHU/APL and is currently Principal Investigator for the JHU/APL role in development of the DMSO Integrated Natural Environment Authoritative Representation Process, Principal Investigator for application of MIV to support ASW simulation for the Naval Warfare Development Command, and co-chair of the SNE Working Group of the Navy M&S Standards Steering Group..  Dr. Newman is a member of the American Geophysical Union and the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization9876Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1:  Bathymetry (m) in the Global 2001 Playbox 5Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3:  Two of the 250 clusters of TL versus range curves  used in GLOBAL 2001Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2:  GLOBAL 2001 ASW Feature Areas104321 EMBED Word.Picture.8  