APPLYING THE VV&A METHODOLOGYStudy case: “Infantry “ study 1994Pierre BoucALEKTO études & Conseil37, traverse de la Serviane13012 MARSEILLE, Francealekto@wanadoo.frKeywordsVV&A, objectives definition, needs expression, validity, accreditationABSTRACT: For one year now, France and Great Britain have jointly carried out a study aimed at producing a methodology for the VV&A of simulations; Principles and concepts have been designed and formalized. Several specific cases were considered as a first stage to produce some “food for thought”, and then to make sure that the final method could be efficiently applied.As an example, we have re-visited a study carried out in 1994 by the CETEI in Montpellier which examined future infantry requirements, which gives the scope of the issues raised, produces a wealth of results, and above all makes use of the observations and conclusions of the ”rotation” of a French Mechanized Regiment at the Hohenfels, C.M.T.C, in the spring of 1993.This paper covers:The principles of the method with a special emphasis on those related to the requirements objectives.A description of the study carried out in 1994.How the present methodology could have been applied to that specific case and how it could have improved the quality of the results achieved.BackgroundA specific technical-operational scenario has been used in this case to compare what has been done in the past with the principles of the method at hand. And, in particular:to consider up to what extent the methodology being designed meets the problems related to VV&A.to check that the methodology is capable of covering the various aspects of problems and questions raised.To assess up to what extent applying the method can improve the study results.In the present case, we will focus on tasks that allow us to move from the problems raised by the operational requirement to the expression of the Measures of Merit (MoM).1   SOME PRINCIPLES OF THE METHOD1.1  The “3 pillars” conceptAt each stage of a simulation project and its related VV&A process, three aspects of the actions to take must be simultaneously taken into account:the products to implement (WHAT)the organization to set up to do them (WHO)the process to apply (HOW).We emphasise that not only can these “3 pillars” not be separated, but that they are also interdependent:the products depend on the current state of  the development of the project, its field of application and the problem to be addressed.the organisation depends on the activity to be accomplished, the  products required and the resources available.the process must be adapted to the elements < product – organisation>.The proposed VV&A approach is driven by products, and can be represented by the following diagram:1.2  The Products.During the complete life cycle of a project (from the objectives of operational requirements up to the use of final results), the products required  are of many different types. We will limit ourselves to the following types:The expression of the operational problem and the required useA formal statement of the questions to be addressed and the expected resultsA definition of validity requirements ofA formal statement of the Measures of Merit (Measures of Merit).1.3   The Organisation (the actors of the project).When considering a complete simulation project, 4 families of actors come to play:Those who own the problemThose in charge of developing the simulationThe VV&A agentsThe Subject Matter Experts (SME).Given the nature of this case study, we will limit ourselves to the actors of the first category.Definitions and roles.“Problem owner”: Authority responsible for the operational use who initiates the project, defines the aims and objectives and is ultimately responsible for the success of the project. He is also responsible for the institutional formal decisions required for its successful completion.“Sponsor”: Authority which allocates the means (financial or human, hardware) required to carry out the project.He may, (or may not), be involved in the operational objective of the project.“Beneficiaries” (Beneficiaries/Clients/Customers): People expecting that the project to be developed produces results helping them to fulfil the missions allocated to them.The beneficiaries stand at the first stage of identifying the functions of the system to be developed. They only expect results that have been interpreted and consolidated.In the framework of the project, the sponsor plays the role of the leader for the beneficiaries; however there is not necessarily any hierarchical subordination between them.“Users”: These are the individuals who interact with the system, it through specific interfaces. They include the following categories:Operators directly interacting with the simulation by producing computerised commands. The operators often make up for  the limitations of the simulationThe players, (individuals or general staff), who command one or several represented units without having access to the computer systems. They take decisions and send operational ordersThe controllers, who make sure that the players and operators respect their roles and use the appropriate scenarios, doctrine and game conventions which are the guarantee of a valid usage.The simulation director who controls the whole progress of the exercise. This actor, with the players and beneficiaries, is involved in creating scenarios that will be used.1.4   The process: from the definition of operational requirements to Measures of Merit.Although the process has not yet been fully established, in this case study, we will adopt the following approach:To start with, the problem owner defines the objectives and the operational problem to resolveThen the beneficiaries, depending on what they expect from the project, raise derived questions which will have to be dealt with by simulation, and define the expected resultsThen, the users and some beneficiaries define the required validity and the requirements for a suitable use of the simulationFinally, all the information supplied in the appropriate terminology will be analysed to create supporting the validation and accreditation activities.The evaluation of the necessary requirements to satisfy these needs is based on Measures of Merit. This term includes, in a generic sense, the measures (expected or observed) which describe the characteristics or qualities regarded as essential to assess fitness for purpose. These Measures of Merit must be characterised so that it is possible to assess properly the risks to a successful use of the simulation or identify critical aspects of the use. We have chosen to represent the Measures of Merit using the representation due to Kiviat2   The study carried out in 1994.This study took place at a time when reductions in Service had been proposed  and it was necessary to modernise the forces . In addition, the new LECLERC tank was being introduced into the armoured units and studies were under way regarding the structure and doctrine of such units. Finally, the excellent results achieved by the 8th Infantry Mechanised Regiment during their rotatation at Hohenfels in the spring of 1993 gave the opportunity of carrying out a study on future infantry, making use of simulation.2.1  The question raised.The study was carried out following a request to CETEI from the Inspector of Infantry for a study of an enduring nature. The request was to propose solutions to improve the infantry efficiency in the years to come and three categories of questions were put forward:What are the likely operational capabilities of future equipments, (mainly weapon systems)?How effective are new unit structures likely to be?What are the impacts of different doctrines?Infantry combat always involves four types of engagement (which have all been played out in real life at Hohenfels):Reconnaissance by ForceeDelaying operationsAttritional operationsDeliberate defence.The study has been carried out applying the directives without the “use” actors defining in more detail the questions asked or the results expected.2.2  The use of the simulation in 1994.2.2.1 Making use of the Hohenfels results.The tactics and the results, (quantitative as well as qualitative), recorded at Hohenfels were considered as representative of real life to the extent that they can be used as a reference base for the study.The first step was to analyse the limit of validity of such results, (for example with regard to the hit probability of the MILES or the efficiency of the artillery firings).In these conditions, there were two ways of using this base reference (two case studies):Starting from the knowledge of what took place on the ground, it is possible to simulate different cases of the same scenario and to compare a the results achieved with the corresponding values of the base referenceExamining the results produced by simulation,  to find out if they match, (or not),  similar events in the base reference.2.2.2 Replaying the Hohenfels scenarios in JANUS.This took place in two phases:“Calibrating” JANUS (actually trying to validate the simulation)Considering other tactics that could have been used.In the first case, the scenarios played in the simulation were obviously identical to those which actually took place on the ground.The results produced by the simulation were similar to the ones observed at Hohenfels. JANUS was therefore considered “good enough” to carry out the next stages of the study: except for questions relating to dismounted infantry combat.In the next stage other possible tactics were played for two types of missions:  reconnaissance by force  and delaying operations. In each case, three different tactics were played and the results were cross-checked.The base reference used was the actual world observed at Hohenfels.2.2.3 Future Infantry StudiesSince this preliminary work had been done previously, it was then possible to consider potential developments for infantry combat.In order to do this, the base reference used previously was expended by the insertion of new equipment, (under construction or proposed) and the expected outcomes predicted.These insertions were essentially:Replacing the AMX30 tank by the LECLERC tank (in development)Assumptions concerning the new ICV (under development)New  missiles and anti-tank rocketsDifferent tactical structures based on combined arms groupings, (infantry & tanks).Here, the confidence in the results obtained depends on:The JANUS simulation validationThe relevance of assumptions about future equipment.2.3  The results obtained.Given the remarks above, people responsible for the study judged that:The absolute results supplied by JANUS,  (for example “number of destroyed tanks”), were not sufficiently valid.But comparing quantitative results of two scenarios is a valid representation of the difference of effectiveness between the two.This study produced many conclusions, (18 pages). However, it did not totally meet the addressees expectations. This is a consequence of the question not being formally identified and the Measures of Merit being non-existent.We can now see how applying our methodology might improve the relevance of obtained results and be better accepted by the beneficiaries.3   POSSIBLE APPLICATION OF THE METHOD.Let us therefore revisit the 1994 problem and examine how we would have proceeded if we had been applying our proposed approach to the same problem.3.1  Restructuring of the initial question and of the actors.The initial question described in 2.1 is the result of a mandate giving general guidelines. our proposed method suggests a more formal launching of the project. The Inspector of Infantry therefore becomes  personally involved as the Problem Owner, and sets the objectives and limitations of the project thus:Operational objective:  to assess the operational characteristics of infantry regiments which might be applied in the medium term, (less than 10 years).Project context: the study will have to take into account:the “LECLERC tank” programme under developmentthe need to replace the current ICV by new equipment, the characteristics of which are still to be definedforeseeable developments of anti-tank missiles.Question raised: What organisation, as standardised as possible for future infantry units, would be most efficient in the medium timeframe?.The question will need to address the following:EquipmentDoctrineUnit  structures.Any proposals must allow for the 4 main types of infantry missions:Reconnaissance by FireDelaying operationsAttritional operationsDeliberate defence.Definition of the base reference to use:The Hohenfels ’93 exercise will be used as a reference for:The enemy, (structure, equipment and action modes)The groundCurrent performances of units and their equipment.The future equipment to take into account will be the result of technological improvements of present hardware while keeping the same operational functionalities. The expected characteristics will be supplied by the technical services in charge of the programmes.Limitations of the project: the study will only deal with the effectiveness of the infantry in high intensity engagements. Combined arms groupings can also be considered but they will be limited to those for which an infantry regiment is the main constituent.Peace Support Operations or Humanitarian Interventions will not therefore be considered.The study will limit itself to the aspects of operational effectiveness; the economic aspects will not be taken into account.Expected results from simulation:  The expected results will cover the following aspects of an infantry unit:ManningEquipmentStructuresDoctrineand address the best  trade off between the 4 mission types.These results will be used:To build up files of military characteristics for development programmes of future materielAs a starting point for tactical studies aimed at defining the rules of engagement of future infantry units at subordinate levels, (company and platoon)To contribute to  studies on higher formationsAs a reference for drafting future programmes of infantry training.The results must allow the assessment of various solutions in terms of:Ground gained (in time and space)Force ratiosCasualties incurredDamage inflicted to the enemy.Too the study should assume that previous results are correct in the  following aspects:The general evolution of the tactical situation, (force ratios and ground gained)the relative values of the exchange ratios between the various envisaged solutions.The Beneficiaries of the project:CETEI (Doctrine cell )The infantry training schoolThe general staff collegeProgramme Managers, (infantry, tanks and anti-tanks)Head of the army doctrine cellHead of the armed forces (“training” cell)etc.3.2  Secondary or derived questions.The beneficiaries assisted by experts in the operation field and specialists in the M&S are in charge of detailing the issues to be sorted out.In this presentation we will limit ourselves to the mission “offensive reconnaissance”, since the same work will have to be done for the three others.The study assumptions are:The present infantry regiment (like the one used in Hohenfels), will be used as a reference for comparing resultsThe following variations will be studiedAn infantry regiment equipped with the new ICVA unit composed of the present infantry regiment plus a squadron group of LECLERC (GE40) type tanksA unit composed of infantry regiments fitted with the new ICV plus a squadron group (GE40) of LECLERC type tanks.Two variants of the new ICV armament will be considered:A 30 millimetres burst firing gunA 20 millimetres burst firing gun plus an anti-tank type AT5 missile launcher (4000 meter range), in super structure.Secondary questions:Within the different studied cases compare:The position reached relative to the assigned objective, (in time and space)The casualties incurred to reach these positions and the remaining operational potential for the next missionThe casualties inflicted on the enemyThe evolution of the force ratio during the action.Quantitative results to be recorded and analysed :Losses incurred, (by types of destroyed weapon systems):Numbertype of weapon system used by the enemy gunner.Losses inflicted, (by type of destroyed weapon systems):numbertype of weapons systems used by the gunnerFiring range.The systems to be assessed are:TanksICVAnti tank missilesHelicopters (for OPFOR only)Infantrymen.Qualitative results required:Knowledge of the enemy positions, (vs. Fog of war); role played by the reconnaissance elements.Capability of reacting against unforeseen events.For all these, it is imperative to differentiate between cases where Infantry fights dismounted and cases where the engagement is carried out with infantrymen on board the ICV.3.3  A first attempt of conceptual model and required validity.This next stage in expressing the requirements is only e illustrated by a few examples to show the principles of the approach.The following aspects must be representedFor the vehicles (tanks and ICV):mobility depending on the type of groundchoice of weapons depending on targetsobservation capabilitiesvulnerabilityFor the dismounted infantry men:time required for reaching a combat positionchange of combat positionloss of contact and evasionfiring capabilityvulnerabilitydiscretion capability (camouflage and stealth).For weapon systems:Kill probabilities as a function of distanceNumbers of shots without reloading the weapon, ( or insignificant gaps between firings)reloading timequantity of ammunition used.3.4  Example of Measures of Merit representations.Here we give examples of cascading Measures of Merit3.4.1 Top Level – Arising from the Operational Objective. EMBED Word.Picture.8  3.4.2 At the Derived question Level EMBED Word.Picture.8  3.4.3 Tertiary Issues  EMBED Word.Picture.8  These definitions are by no means complete, since they still require more appropriate definition of the Measures and methods of quantification. Nevertheless the diagrams above do give an idea of the type of Measures of Merit which could be presented both to the Problem Owner and potential developers.4   Using the Measures of Merit.Applying the method in this example allows us to derive three levels of Measures of Merit, which represent the required validity at that level. These then defineThe overall questionThe types of output which must be supplied by simulationThe phenomena which must be represented in the simulation.We can use this approach for the VV&A once the development is complete:Firstly by studying the functions shown in simulationThen by assessing the validity of the results achievedLastly by assessing to what extent the original question received a reply and how much reliance to place on it.To go back to the specific case, we show the analysis of a “Deliberate defence” type of mission using the JANUS-France simulation: EMBED Word.Picture.8  It is pretty obvious that the modelling which appears in simulation does not match with the required validity derived by applying the method.The problem owner and the beneficiaries then have to make a decision:either to modify the simulation, (or select another one)or to limit the scope of the study by excluding analysis of the dismounted infantrymenor to content themselves with the reduced validity of the simulation, feeling that this meets the “just good enough” criterion.5   Conclusions.Although the method is still under development, this preliminary study has shown that the application of these general principles will allow a better understanding and definition of the problem and its context.It seems possible therefore to develop simulations in a more formal manner, thus allowing, on the one hand, a more precise definition of the product and the organisation, and, on the other, to define comprehensible outputs for all those concerned.AcknowledgmentsTo Brigadier General Hubert BODIN (Ret) for his contribution and knowledge of the Hohenfels rotation and subsequent study.  The General was Chief of the French controllers at Hohenfels during the 1993 rotation.  He was also the Director of CETEI from 1992 to 1995. To Dr Robin Miller and Mr Mark Dumble for their efforts in translating the original French paper.About the authorPierre BOUC (LTC Ret) was assigned to the French Army General Staff - Operations Research & Simulation Centre from 1990 to 1998. He was responsible for the data gathering for JANUS and the BBS databases, and was involved in the studies to increase simulation validity.He has managed ALEKTO, a consultancy organisation, since 1998  when he retired from the army.Currently he is part of the French team conducting the Franco – British VV&A study. Centre d’Etudes Tactiques et d’Experimentation de l’Infanterie “Turn” in US speak Combat Maneuver Training Center tbd UK terminology (Offensive Recon) UK terminology In this paragraph we give examples of some MoM which are associated with simulation stages discussed above