Integration of Chemical and Radiological Weapons Effects and Sensors into CCTTDavid M. JodeitITT Industries2560 Huntington AvenueAlexandria, VA 22303(703) 329-7146david.jodeit@itt.comDennis L. JonesITT Industries2560 Huntington AvenueAlexandria, VA 22303(703) 329-7181dennis.jones@itt.comMichael O’ConnorITT Industries 600 Boulevard SouthSuite 208Huntsville, AL 35802(256) 650-2732michael.oconnor@itt.comScott StaffordITT Industries2560 Huntington AvenueAlexandria, VA 22303(703) 329-7163scott.stafford@itt.comJude TomaselloU.S. Army STRICOMAMSTI-PMCATT12350 Research ParkwayOrlando, FL 32826-3276(407) 384-3829Jude_Tomasello@stricom.army.milKeywords:CCTT; Sensor; Chemical; Weapons of Mass Destruction; Fox; NCBRAbstract: The use of weapons of mass destruction, including chemical, biological, and radiological hazards, is an increasing threat to US forces. To support realistic maneuver training in a contaminated environment, a simulator for the M93 Fox NBC reconnaissance vehicle was added to the Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT) facility at Ft. Hood. CCTT is a networked system of manned simulators that is supported by emulators and semi-automated forces for use in collective training on a synthetic battleground..  The key part of the manned Fox simulator is the realistic representation of the sensors that are carried on the Fox vehicle. The simulated sensor package  includes chemical point sensors (MM1 and ACADA), chemical standoff sensors (M21), and a radiological point sensor (AN/VDR-2). In order to provide stimulus to the sensors the ITT-developed Nuclear, Chemical, Biological, and Radiological (NCBR) Environment Server is used to propagate a threat hazard within the synthetic environment. The integration of these systems into the CCTT facility presented many challenges, including: the addition of chemical and radiological threats; terrain representation; control of the Fox-specific simulators; and presenting a look and feel that consistent with the rest of the CCTT system. The inclusion of the Fox simulators required the successful integration of components not originally built specifically for CCTT into the CCTT architecture. The topics covered in this paper will include these items as well as possible ways to add increased WMD effects capability into CCTT.1. Introduction and BackgroundChemical agents were first used as weapons of war during World War I, and their threat and possibility of their use is an ongoing concern.  The first chemical agents and methods of delivery were rudimentary by today’s standards but, as is inevitable with time there has been great progression in agent lethality and delivery methods.  Luckily there has also been great progress made in the advancement of technology to enable the detection of and protection against these weapons of mass destruction (WMD).  The United States Army has well-established doctrine for detection and avoidance of WMD but there still remains the issue of training the troops in those doctrines.  In the past this has been done by using live training and simulated agents, such as kaolin dust, or even with live agents such as tear gas.  But this approach can be both time-consuming and costly.  The optimal solution would to be able to do training on a virtual battlefield.The Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT) is the United States Army’s premier simulation facility for conducting collective training. However, until recently, CCTT had no capability for the training of WMD doctrine.  When ITT industries was contracted to provide III Corps and 4th Infantry Division at Fort Hood Texas with M93A1 Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical Reconnaissance System trainers we first looked at the facilities that were available at Fort Hood to see where we might make use of existing capabilities.  The most obvious place of possible collaborations was with Fort Hood’s CCTT installation.  This possibility was discussed with III Corps, 4th ID and U.S. Army STRICOM and all parties agreed that the addition of two M93A1 simulators to the CCTT facility would be of benefit to everybody.  The design task then became one of how to integrate the M93A1 simulators and simulated threat environment into CCTT without negatively impacting the rest of the CCTT system.1.1 M93A1 Fox OverviewThe M93A1 Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical Reconnaissance System (NBCRS) is intended to improve the survivability and mobility of Army ground forces by providing increased situational awareness and information superiority to supported headquarters and combat maneuver elements.  With the ability to provide rapid and accurate chemical and radiological contamination information to these elements, the NBCRS vehicle forms a key portion of the full-dimensional protection concept.Figure 1.  M93E1 Fox NBCRS1The mission of the lightly armored, wheeled NBCRS is to detect, identify, mark, collect samples, and report chemical and radiological contamination on the battlefield.  The three-man NBCRS crew accomplishes these missions by using a sophisticated suite of nuclear and chemical alarms and detectors integrated within the vehicle chassis.  The crew can perform chemical and radiological reconnaissance operations while operating in a shirtsleeve environment inside the NBCRS vehicle, even while the vehicle is operating in a contaminated area.  The normal operating mode of the NBCRS is to have two Foxes operating together.Units and soldiers must be aware of NBC hazards within their area of concern. Both the presence and absence of NBC hazards is of interest.  When NBC hazards are located, they must be marked on a near-real time basis.  This allows units to avoid the hazard, or to protect themselves in order to minimize casualties if they cannot avoid it.  Commanders must also be made aware of the absence of NBC hazards in their areas of immediate operational concern.  This allows them to lower their protective posture and minimize degradation.In the main battle area, the NBCRS supports the forces behind the direct fire battle.  In the direct fire battle, lines between forces are indistinct and change rapidly.  The enemy is unlikely to employ NBC weapons in this area to avoid their effects on its own units, and the battle is too intense and fast moving for NBC reconnaissance to be effective in detecting contamination from previous strikes.  Additionally, lightly armored systems such as the NBCRS are not very survivable in this area, and a low-density, high payoff system like the NBCRS should not be put at such a risk.21.2 CCTT OverviewThe Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT) is the first member of the Combined Arms Tactical Trainer (CATT) family of virtual, distributed interactive simulations (DIS) for collective training.  It supports the training of armor, mechanized infantry, and cavalry units from platoon through battalion/squadron echelon, including the staff.  The primary training audience operates from both high fidelity full-crew simulators and mock-up command posts.  The crewed simulators -- M1A1, M1A2, M1A2SEP, M2/3A2, M2A3 (Aug 02), FIST-V, BFIST, M113A3, HMMWV, and FOX NBC Recon -- are of sufficient fidelity to require individuals and crews to correctly perform their respective tasks in order to successfully accomplish their collective tactical maneuver missions. Figure 2.  Typical CCTT Manned Module Currently, the CCTT simulators at Ft Hood, Texas have implemented Force XXI Battle Command Brigade and Below (FBCB2) to support the Army's First Digitized Division, the 4th Infantry Division, and the FBCB2 operational test community.  Infantry platoon and squad leaders can also exit their battlefield vehicle and move to Dismounted Infantry Manned Modules where they can control their virtual dismounted elements.  Commanders and staff members of the training audience use computer workstations located in mock-up command posts to provide artillery, mortar, combat engineers, and logistics units to the synthetic battlefield.  The units created and controlled from these workstations require the training audience to plan for and coordinate the battlefield operating systems in support of their tactical maneuver units. semi-automated forces (SAF) workstations provide additional supporting units (i.e., aviation and air defense artillery) and all opposing forces.  Thus, while maneuver units constitute the CCTT primary training audience, all Battlefield Operating Systems are represented in the simulation to ensure quality training within a combined arms training environment - under daylight, night, and fog conditions.  Currently, there are five terrain databases implemented in CCTT: Desert (National Training Center), Temperate (Germany), Ft. Hood Texas, Kosovo, and Korea.  CCTT will field nine Company/Team fixed sites at seven CONUS and two OCONUS locations and twelve mobile platoon sets for National Guard units.2. Integration of the Fox into CCTTIn addition to incorporating a Fox manned module and sensor suite there were some components of  CCTT that would have to be upgraded to increase capability or added to in order to have full training effectiveness for a Fox Reconnaissance System.  For example,  CCTT had no initial capability at all for WMD effects and minimal weather functionality.2.1 CCTT Synthetic EnvironmentIn any distributed simulation exercise, it is critical that there is a common, consistent, representation of the environment for all participating simulations; CCTT is no exception.  The environment items that were of particular importance in CCTT were weather, ground truth terrain and the chemical and nuclear events.  The CCTT Environment Manager provides the capabilities to support simulation of dynamic environment objects such as pre-positioned objects, relocatable objects and tactical smoke, but does not have the capability for the chemical and nuclear clouds.As was previously noted, units and soldiers must be aware of NBC hazards within their area of concern.  In the real world this is achieved by marking the area with NBC markers and by sending out NBC reporting messages through the MICAD.  In the beginning CCTT had no representation of hazard markers so this was another place were functionality would have to be added.2.1.1 WeatherIn CCTT the weather settings are sent to all modules once, upon initialization, and are then static for the rest of the exercise.  The weather variables that were initially available (and of interest) were: Humidity -- % relative [0 - 99]Wind Speed -- meters/second [always 0]Temperature -- degrees Celsius [-10 - 100]The additional items that were necessary for the operation of the NCBR environment simulator were:Wind Direction -- radians from true northBarometric Pressure -- milligrams mercuryIt is interesting to note that while CCTT had initialization values for wind speed that there was no initial direction.  This was not a critical omission for normal CCTT operation because none of the existing modules used this value.  Therefore in usual operation the wind speed would always be set to a value of zero.  But for the purposes of transporting and dispersing chemical agents a wind speed of zero is not realistic.  It is also worthwhile to note that one temperature value is used to represent both ground and air temperature.2.1.2 TerrainThe CCTT simulator system operates on one visual database and five correlated terrain (ground truth) databases.  The visual database is displayed to the participants in an exercise by the visual system’s image generator and is in Evans & Sutherland General Database Format (GDF).  From this GDF file the five correlated ground truth database are generated.  These are:Model Reference Terrain Database (MRTDB) -- Provides a full 3D representation of the terrain,Multi-Level Routing Support Terrain Database (MRSTDB) -- Provides abstract representations of the terrain environment (used by cross country routing and road routing, for example),Plan View Display Database -- Used for top-down displays such as After Action Review (AAR),Communication Database -- Used for line-of-sight calculations and propagation effects in the SINCGARS radio communication simulation, andDestructible Object / Environment Manager Database -- Used by the environment manager to maintain placement and states of destructible and relocatable objectsFigure 3.  CCTT Terrain Database GenerationTwo of the ITT provided systems require ground truth databases.  The NCBR environment server requires ground truth and surface roughness for hazard calculation and the M21 simulator for terrain intervisibility.  It was necessary to use one of the existing databases or to create a new correlated database.  We first investigated the possibility of using an existing database but the lack of easily usable, existing, programmer’s interfaces made going this route more difficult.  The databases that the existing M21 and NCBR simulators were built upon are OneSAF Version 7 Compact Terrain Databases (c7b) so the decision was made to build new correlated c7b databases.  OneSAF is provided with documentation on the c7b format and also libraries with which to build the databases so it is not too difficult to write a compiler for c7b.  The only major design issue was in what form the input data would have.  Working with STRICOM and its post-production support team an ASCII file format was developed that contained all information needed to create c7b databases for the M21 and NCBR simulators.  This input file is created from one of the MRTDB databases and then fed into the ITT-developed c7b compiler.2.2 NCBR Environment ServerFor the chemical and nuclear threat environments it was decided to use the NCBR environment server.  The NCBR provides simulated prompt and persistent nuclear weapon environments and chemical, biological, and radiological environments using DIS protocols or the HLA run-time infrastructure (RTI).  The NCBR is an on-going development effort whose development is supported by a CBR Consortium led by the Army’s Chemical and Biological Defense Command.  It provides real-time transport and dispersion of chemical, biological, and radiological agents over complex (3-dimensional) terrain with 3D, time-varying meteorological inputs, and provides prompt nuclear environments. The NCBR uses the Vapor, Liquid, and Solid Tracking (VLSTRACK) computer model developed by the Naval Surface Warfare Center in Dahlgren, VA and can accommodate multiple simultaneous agent events.  VLSTRACK predicts contamination areas for a wide range of chemical, biological, and radiological agents using complex three-dimensional wind fields that are created from ground truth data and provided to VLSTRACK from the Wind Over Critical Streamlined Surfaces (WOCSS) mass-consistent flow model. 2.2.1 Chemical Threat RepresentationThe NCBR provides 3D chemical concentration clouds and 2D ground deposition grids to the distributed simulation network.  The NCBR uses the DIS Environmental Process PDU to send the cloud concentration data, which are modeled as Gaussian puffs. The state of the cloud is updated by the NCBR at a user-specified interval -- typically 20 seconds. The Environmental Process PDU contains enough information to allow the receiver to dead reckon the cloud between updates.  The ground deposition data is transmitted on the simulation network via gridded data PDUs.  Complete threat information is conveyed by several gridded data PDUs that are subsequently ingested by the sensors and reassembled into the representative grid.  The grid update interval is user specified but because the ground deposition does not change rapidly it is not necessary to dead reckon these grids and a 60 second update is usually sufficient.2.2.2 Radiological Threat RepresentationThe radiological threat is designed to be a single-instance, single-grid event.  It is assumed that the delivery device would be a so-called “dirty bomb” -- a high explosive device packed with radioactive material.  There is no prompt or blast threat, only radiological.  Working with PM-RADIAC three hazard grids were developed to represent high, medium, and low yield hazards.  These grids could then be scaled by the NCBR to a user specified size before transmission to the CCTT network.2.3 M93 FoxThe decision to subcontract the M93A1 Fox manned module software to Lockheed Martin Information Systems (LMIS) was based on their depth of experience with CCTT and their excellent working relationship with STRICOM.  It was felt that by having them do the manned module all of our time could be focused on providing the sensor simulations and threat environment.  The manned module hardware was fabricated by ITT and then integrated with the LMIS provided software.  The manned module is designed to provide near real-world physical fidelity.  In addition to simulating the vehicle dynamics the manned module also features weapons systems (only smoke grenades for Fox), night vision capability, and Single-Channel Ground-to-Air Radio Systems (SINCGARS) with three radios per Fox module.In addition to the manned module there were also updates required to the visual database packages.  The existing Fox visual model consisted of an insufficient number of polygons and didn’t have an M21 representation.  The customer felt that having the capability for the Fox model to display an attached M21 was critical because it aids in the recognition of the Fox vehicle as a friendly force.  The M93 without the M21 mast has an unfortunate likeness to an enemy armored personnel carrier.  Also, there was no representation at all for chemical and radiological hazard markers.  Evans & Sutherland was therefore contracted to update the Fox visual model and to add a chemical marker model to the CCTT visual database package.2.4 SensorsFigure 4.  M93A1 Sensor PackageThe Fox vehicle is primarily just a method for transporting the various sensors around the battlefield.  This realistic sensor suite is the heart of the Fox Simulator System and includes chemical point sensors (MM1 and ACADA), chemical standoff sensors (M21), and a radiological point sensor (AN/VDR-2).  In addition to the sensors the suite includes a Multipurpose Integrated Chemical Agent Alarm (MICAD) simulator to do the integration of the NBC detection and the warning and reporting.The MM1 Mobile Mass Spectrometer is a battlefield tool used to analyze the chemical compounds that are encountered by the Fox vehicle. Using a mass spectrometer the MM1 breaks a chemical sample into ions and then counts each ion in that sample. These ions are sorted by their atomic weights, providing a unique signature for each chemical substance. The MM1 graphically displays the relative intensities of selected ion patterns to the operator’s screen.  Since a spectrum for each chemical taken under the same conditions is unique, using a mass spectrum to identify a chemical substance is similar to identifying a person by using a fingerprint.The MM1 uses a double-wheeled sampling system to take samples from the ground and also has the capability to detect agents in the air.  Therefore the MM1 simulator ingests both environmental process PDUs for air concentration and gridded data PDUs for ground deposition.  Any radiological deposition grids, if present, are ignored.  The amount and type of agent (if any) presented to the simulated spectrometer is calculated from these two sources.  The spectrometer then calculates what the ionic activity would be and graphically displays the activity to the operator. The M21 Remote Sensing Chemical Agent Alarm (RSCAAL) was the first stand-off chemical agent detection system to detect both nerve and blister agent vapors at distances up to 5 kilometers using passive, infrared spectrometry and an on-board computer for agent/no-agent decisions.  The system provides early warning of the presence of nerve agents (GA, GB, AND GD) and blister agents (HD and L) in vapor form.The M21 scans through a 60-degree horizontal field-of-view in seven discrete segments.  It is solely looking for air concentration so therefore only ingests the environmental process PDUs.  For each scan segment five shot-lines are drawn to approximate a cone with each shot-line being clipped to the 5 kilometer maximum range or to ground intersection.  Each shot-line is then used to calculate a concentration length through the hazard before all five shot-lines are combined for one result.  This result is then compared against known thresholds to determine whether there is a detected agent in the scan segment.  Any positive scan is presented graphically and, if desired, audibly to the operator. Figure 5.  M21 Operators DisplayThe M22 Automatic Chemical Agent Alarm (ACADA) is an "off-the-shelf" automatic chemical agent alarm system capable of detecting and identifying standard blister and nerve agents. The M22 system is man portable, will operate with no human interface after system start-up, and provides an audio and visual alarm. Another critical feature of the M22 system is a communications interface to support battlefield automation systems.The ACADA is a simple point detection system and doesn’t require any complex operations.  It is sensitive to air concentration so therefore ingests the environmental process PDUs.  The ACADA simulator compares it’s position on the battlefield against the threat cloud positions and decides how many ‘bars’ should be lit up on the system display.  If the concentration is sufficiently high the system will enter an automatic clean-down phase.The AN/VDR-2 can perform ground radiological surveys in vehicles or in the dismounted mode by individual soldiers as a hand held instrument. The set can also provide a quantitative measure of radiation to decontaminate personnel, equipment, and supplies. Components of the Radiac Set include the Radiacmeter IM-243, Probe DT-616, and pouch with strap. Installation kits are available as Common Table Allowances (CTA) items for installation of the Radiac Set in various military vehicles. The set includes an audible and/or visual alarm that is compatible with vehicular NBC protective systems in armored vehicles and also interfaces with vehicular power systems and intercoms.The AN/VDR-2 simulator uses operational, government-provided, hardware that is stimulated through its data port.  The software ingests the radiological threat grid and calculates Gy based on the sensor location.  This value is then sent to the hardware that treats it as a real-world value and reacts accordingly.Using DIS signal PDUs each of the above sensors communicates their operational status and any threat detection and agent amounts to the MICAD.  The Multipurpose Integrated Chemical Agent Alarm (MICAD) is a near real-time integrated NBC detection, warning, and reporting system that is employed in area warning, combat and armored vehicles, and tactical van and shelter mission profiles. The MICAD automates the laborious NBC warning and reporting process throughout the battlefield by automating the gathering of NBC contamination data from fielded NBC detector/ sensors and automatically formats and transmits alarms and NBC-1 and NBC-4 Reports up the chain of command throughout the battlefield.  The MICAD simulator uses Joint Variable Messaging Format (JVMF) messaging to communicate these reports to FBCB2 that then propagates the reports to every other FBCB2 equipped module in the exercise.3. Changes to the CCTT Baseline SoftwareOne of the primary goals while designing the Fox Simulator System was that its operation should be as similar as possible to every other manned module in CCTT.  To the operators perspective there should be little difference between the Fox and a HMMWV, for example.  STRICOM worked with us to provide support in modifying the CCTT baseline software to include the Fox.3.1 Master Control Console (MCC)The Master Control Console powers up and initializes workstations and modules, provides built-in test (BIT) execution, performs exercise monitoring and control (including the insertion of stochastic module failures, weather and other effects into a specific exercise), and displays and prints the current status of the CCTT network, modules and workstations.  It provides the MCC operator with an effective environment managing one to five exercises.3.1.1 Adding Fox to CCTT MCCThe previous versions of CCTT had no representations of a Fox vehicle so at the very least these would have to be added to the MCC.  Also, the MCC allows the operator to look at the status of each module’s individual components (radio, FBCB2, image generator, etc.) to help in the decision of if that module is a ‘go’ or a ‘no-go’.  Status fields were added to this display to show a ‘go’ ‘no-go’ result for each of the Fox sensor systems.  This way if the mission did not require an M21 the operator could look at individual sensor status and still assign that Fox even if the M21 were not operational.  Another area where there were some changes made was in the transmitting of the initial weather values.  The usual CCTT manned modules do not use the initial weather values so they were not sent to them, but the Fox requires that values for initializing the MICAD so the MCC had to be modified so that these values would be sent to the Fox.It is worthwhile to note that even though the sensor systems are operating on distinct computers that they are not controlled separately.  All MCC commands are sent via DIS PDU.  Each simulator is aware of which vehicle they are currently ‘attached’ to and listen for MCC commands that are sent to that vehicle and react appropriately to each command. 3.1.2 Adding NCBR to CCTT MCCIn adding the NCBR to the MCC, it was decided that the NCBR would be treated in a manner consistent with the CCTT environment.  Representation of the NCBR was added to the MCC and the NCBR was modified to react appropriately to each MCC command and to reply with the correct handshakes.  If there is an exercise that includes the Fox then the exercise palette will also include the option to add the NCBR.  It was also necessary to add the extra weather variables into the MCC for initializing the NCBR.  Since the initial weather values are stored in the exercise file is was essential that this be done in such a way as to ensure that previously existing exercise files were still valid.3.2 Semi-Automated Forces (SAF)The SAF workstations provide the graphical users interface (including a PVD map) from which the operator observes the battle and commands the computer generated maneuver units.  CCTT has two types of SAF workstations, opposing force (OPFOR), and the friendly or Blue Force (BLUFOR).  An operator knowledgeable about enemy tactics uses OPFOR workstations to control the simulated entities comprising the opponent that a training unit will engage.  Similarly, operators use the BLUFOR workstations to control emulated friendly units, which the training units would expect to find in their area of the battlefield.3.2.1 Chemical Threat Laydown from SAFThere are two ways in which the NCBR can be triggered with a hazard event.  The first is to initiate a laydown manually from the NCBR user interface and the second is from a DIS network detonation PDU.  Because of the extra manpower that would be needed to manually initiate a threat the preferred method was to use the network detonation.  One way of providing this was to use a SAF workstation.  Because of the implications of WMD it was decided to have both BLUFOR and OPFOR workstations be capable of providing the detonation.  This way there is no suggestion a particular theoretical enemy might have the means or desire to use WMD.From a SAF workstation the operator would choose:One of six laydown sizes -- two each for small, medium, or largeOne of three agents -- HD, GB, VXLocation -- either enter a coordinate or click on PVD mapThe SAF workstation then sends out the appropriate number of detonation PDUs.3.2.2 Radiological Threat Laydown from SAFBecause the radiological threat is a pre-calculated static threat the laydown mechanism does not have to be as complex.  The operator would choose:One of three contamination levels -- low, medium and highA relative size -- 1 to 10 which is approximately 100 meters to 1 kilometerLocation -- either enter a coordinate or click on PVD mapThe SAF workstation then sends an action request PDU to the NCBR with all required data.3.3 After Action Review (AAR)The CCTT After Action Review system enables the AAR operator to monitor, record, play back, analyze and report on the CCTT exercises.  This station is comprised of a main display, a plan view display (i.e., map), three visual monitors, four radios, a tape drive, and a printer.  The visual monitors provide a panoramic 120-degree three-dimensional view of the battlefield.The AAR provides a visual view of the battlefield through displays that are controlled by the operator.  The stealth eye-point can be freely moved around the simulated battlefield both during recording and playback.  The operator can see all or any portion of the battlefield and listen to voice communications.3.3.1 Threat Display in AARThe AAR was modified to show an outline on the PVD of the ground threat.  It was felt that it would be prohibitively expensive to modify the AAR to show a representation of the 3D air concentration threat so only the ground threat is shown.  The AAR ingests the gridded data PDUs and uses the grid location and boundary records to draw a rectangle on the PVD that represents the maximum extents of the ground deposition threat.  The PVD was also modified to include an icon for the NBC marker flags.  With these two modifications the ground hazard and the marking of that ground hazard can be tracked.3.4 GatewayThe CCTT system is built around a FDDI network but none of the ITT systems were initially FDDI capable.  A decision had to made as to which, if any, Fox computers would be on the FDDI network.  The two NCBR computers would require FDDI network cards but we decided to place the sensor computers on a separate, distinct, network isolated behind a gateway computer.  The sensor computers are Intel Pentium IIIs, of which two are running Windows 2000 and two are running Redhat Linux.  The fear was that the Windows 2000 operating systems would not be able to handle the loading of the CCTT network so we wanted to isolate them from the rest of the network as much as possible.  The solution was to use the CCTT gateway software that had been minimally modified to allow for environmental process and gridded data PDUs and also to only pass through entity state PDUs that originated from the Fox host.  The gateway software not only acts as a filter, but also does the necessary conversion from FDDI to fast Ethernet.4. Lessons LearnedIn putting a system of this complexity into CCTT it was necessary to have the cooperation of both STRICOM and the LMIS CCTT team.  We were provided with the CCTT Interoperability Control Document early on, but as CCTT is a living system there were some items that were not exactly as described in the ICD.  Most notably in the MCC control structures.  We were able to overcome all of these difficulties by working with the CCTT development team but it would have been very useful to us to have data logs of the CCTT interactions.5. Possible Future EffortsThe Fox Simulator System has provided CCTT with valuable capability, but there is much that can still be added to the system.5.1 Contamination ServerNone of the CCTT manned modules or SAF workstations have been programmed to allow for the possibility of nuclear and chemical agent contamination.  As it stands now these modules can be contaminated with no ill effect, but it would be a massive effort to change each and every module to ingest environmental process and gridded data PDUs.  One option might be to have a contamination server that tracks each vehicle and their contamination levels and then informs each vehicle via DIS PDU (or HLA equivalent) as to what those levels are.  The modules would then only have to be modified to accept these messages and to make a decision as to whether or not they are impacted. 5.2 Sensor PackagesEach of the sensor systems is designed as a standalone system that does not require any other sensor system to operate.  This makes it relatively simple to replace one sensor simulation with another sensor simulation.5.2.1 JSLSCADThe Joint Services Lightweight Standoff Chemical Agent Detector (JSLSCAD) is land-based vehicle-mounted system that can operate on the move with a 72-Hz scan rate in a repeating 360-degree horizontal rotation.  Its physics are very similar to the M21 but doesn’t require the vehicle to be stationary and has the capability to scan 360 degrees around the vehicle.  The JSLSCAD is an anticipated replacement for the M21.6 References[1]	The M93E1 was the test variant of the M93A1.  The primary difference is the height of the M21 mast and the direction the hatch opens.[2]	Fox M93A1 Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical Reconnaissance System (NBCRS);  HYPERLINK "http://www.fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/land/m93a1.htm" http://www.fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/land/m93a1.htm[3]	See also: 98F-SIW-140, Fall 98 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 1999; 99F-SIW-033, Fall 99 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 1999.Author BiographiesDAVID M. JODEIT is a Software Engineer for ITT Industries. He was the lead software engineer on the BSDS Training System, the BDT Simulator, the Chemical Standoff Detection Server (CSDS) System and most recently the CCTT Fox Simulator System. He has a 7-year background in software engineering and training systems.DENNIS L. JONES is the Manager of ITT’s Simulation Systems Section in Alexandria, VA. He manages programs dealing with modeling and simulation tool development and application for WMD environments, effects, and sensor systems. He has a 16-year background in strategic and theater missile defense, counterproliferation, system integration, and weapons of mass destruction effects.MICHAEL O’CONNOR SCOTT STAFFORD JUDE TOMASELLO  SAVEDATE  \* MERGEFORMAT PAGE  