The Requirement For Effective Military TrainingLieutenant Colonel Nigel P. Gallier GH MBEBritish Liaison OfficerUS Army Simulation, Training and Instrumentation Command12350 Research ParkwayOrlando, FL 32828407-384-3645 HYPERLINK mailto:GallierN@stricom.army.mil GallierN@stricom.army.milKeywords:Military Training, Operational Requirements, Training EffectivenessABSTRACT: The application of simulation technology to support training will not be successful unless the aim and purpose of that training is fully understood. There is a danger that, whilst striving to master state-of-the-art tools & techniques, the simulation community may be distracted from recognising effective training. Whilst expanding the boundaries of science the most suitable application of technology may be overlooked. In order to best satisfy military training requirements the simulation community needs a comprehensive awareness of not only how the military identify and meet those requirements, but also of how training effectiveness is measured.The aim of this paper is to outline current military thinking with regard to the methodologies and metrics used in the requirements process. The aim and purpose of military training are explained, as are the principles and characteristics of training needed to maintain operational effectiveness across the whole spectrum of future conflict. The training process and training environment are examined in order to ascertain what is meant by ‘effective training’. Whilst not identifying any technical standards necessary for simulation interoperability the rationale of this paper is to improve communication between the user and the provider of simulation based training systems.1.   IntroductionTechnology is great. Like many other infantry officers I readily embraced technologies that allowed me to shoot straighter, see at night, and have a reliable radio. Technology really has changed warfare, and the application of simulation has assisted in making training better, faster, cheaper and possible. But technology does have enemies who could prevent its full and successful application to improve military equipment. Unwitting enemies include sceptical soldiers, greedy industrialists, and short-sighted scientists. The sceptical soldiers, who ask “why is my pack heavier?, why do I still get wet feet?, and why does a civilian contractor accompany me into the field to maintain my weapon?” perform a healthy criticising role. Even though their numbers are decreasing I for one welcome their input but also smile at their subsequent conversion. Since the greedy industrials are being increasingly controlled by SMART Procurement, it is the scientists that I worry about most.This paper is aimed at those scientists. Some scientists if left unchecked would pursue research only for the sake of pursuing research. Whilst I admire the intelligence and dedication required to expand the boundaries of science and master state-of-the-art tools & techniques, I am saddened by the frequent lack of a vision of how technology can be effectively applied. As a young officer I was advised to “know the enemy”, it was excellent advice then and is relevant now to the developers and providers of simulation systems. They need to know what the military want, why they want it, and how they intend to use it. The context of this paper is training and simulation: this is because I have been involved with military training for a long time, and with writing requirements for military training/simulation systems for some time. I am typical of the human obstacle that simulation developers will have to overcome in their desire to provide training solutions to the army.This paper contains my opinions and thoughts on training, the requirements process, and what on earth we mean by ‘effective training’. I will not identify any technical standards for simulation interoperability, but I do hope to improve communication between the soldier and the scientist by assisting the latter to know the former.2.   Why does the Army Train?“Thorough training is one weapon that every nation can give its soldiers before committing them to battle, but since war usually comes as an unexpected emergency, this training must be done in peace. Until world order is an accomplished fact it will always be a crime to excuse soldiers from the training that will give them a decent chance of survival. Many of the crosses on this battlefield are witnesses to this truth” Eisenhower [1].What is training?The definition and purpose of military training can be condensed to 11 words: the preparation of soldiers for war in order to ensure success. There are many other and longer definitions but this one is easy to remember and should be used as the first yardstick against which the performance of simulation systems should be measured. If your system doesn’t prepare soldiers for war then it is no use to the army for training.One can also read detailed definitions with regard to the differences between training, education and development. I don't believe it is constructive to dwell on the differences; to me military training involves all three. Military training develops individuals and groups so that they can contribute to success in the fullest way. Training provides the means to practice, develop and validate the practical application of a common doctrine; it also provides the basis for schooling commanders and staffs in the exercise of command and control respectively. [2].Why is training important?The Army exists to produce FIGHTING POWER when needed. Training is vital to the production of FIGHTING POWER and is the Army’s most important activity when not actually engaged in combat. British Military Doctrine [3] holds that FIGHTING POWER has three components:A PHYSICAL COMPONENT, which is essentially the means to fight, and has the elements of manpower, logistics and equipment.A MORAL COMPONENT, which is essentially the will to fight, and has the elements of motivation and leadership.A CONCEPTUAL COMPONENT, which essentially gives the method of fighting, the elements here are doctrine and structure.Training is vital because it alone is the means by which the components and their elements are fused together to produce fighting power. Manpower needs to be trained to use equipment effectively and to provide logistic support efficiently. Equipment often fails to deliver its designed potential because of ineffective training.  Commanders have to be schooled and practiced in the arts and sciences of leadership so that they can enhance their abilities to get people to fight willingly. The whole army has to be trained to fight together so that they become certain that their doctrine and structure will lead to success.The differences in effectiveness between armies of the world are mostly attributable to differences in training. Weapon and technology proliferations make it much harder nowadays to achieve great equipment superiority; the key to a more effective army is in achieving and maintaining training superiority. [4] EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  The training environment Training is a process that should result in an increased skill level for an individual or group ability. It is therefore a positive process aimed at building confidence through learning. As every classroom teacher knows it is important to create an atmosphere which is conducive to learning – this is the required training environment. The environment should be encouraging since this will enable confidence building. The environment should never undermine this positive nature of training but making errors in training can be a powerful experience for learning. Errors generally stand out more than successes and are therefore more easily using as teaching vehicles. The environment should therefore allow and recognize errors. Any training simulation must create a good training environment.Types of trainingTraining can be categorised into many types, but for the purposes of this paper the main ones are:Individual:  aimed at giving every soldier the skills and qualities needed to operate on the battlefield. Examples include: understanding camouflage, shooting straight, keeping fit, and recognising the importance of discipline.Team:   aimed at producing an effective team, often centred on a crewed weapon system. Examples include training a tank crew to move and shoot simultaneously, and training an infantry section to move tactically at night.Collective: aimed at ensuring that the all arms battle-group can operate effectively. The prime example is executing force on force live training.Command: aimed at enabling commanders to learn the necessary skills and knowledge, and to give them and their staffs practice at exercising command and control. An example is a command post exercise without troops following a study day.Simulation can be applied effectively to support all types of training, but should be wary of attempting to do so simultaneously.  In my experience the best training systems have been designed to cater for a single training audience and for a single type of training. If this is to change then the system developer must demonstrate that his system can deliver effective training to multiple audiences. 2.5  The training processA simulation must also embrace and enable the 4 distinct activities that are generally accepted as making up the training process:The acquisition of skills, competences and knowledgeThe practicing of skills and competences and the exercising of knowledgeThe testing of skills, competences and knowledgeThe review of training methods for their effectiveness with the targeted training audience, generally against a set of given standards, I will return to the ‘training process’ when examining effectiveness.3.   How does the Army get Equipment?3.1   The Capability ManagerThe army requires equipment in order to produce the physical component of fighting power.  Since equipment enables capability – for example the capability to destroy an enemy target, or to move soldiers safely across the battlefield – the equipment  required will be apparent from any identified capability gap.  In the United Kingdom’s Ministry of Defence it is the responsibility of four 2-star ranked military officers known as Capability Managers to identify the capability gaps. Once done they have then to ensure that sufficient funding exists to commence the procurement action that will fill the capability gap. The military and civilian staff supporting the Capability Manager maintains Capability Risk Registers. The key process by which ‘risks’ are identified as being unacceptable and therefore become ‘gaps’ to be filled by ‘equipment requirements’ is complex and continuous, and involves military requirements staff, subject matter experts, and scientific civil servants. The methodology and weighting that drives the taxonomy of risk is necessarily classified. 3.2   Equipment for TrainingA potential problem regarding the provision of equipment for training is that training is not a capability. Thus Capability Managers are not generally responsible for identifying Training Requirements.When a Capability Manager raises a requirement for equipment to fill an identified capability gap, he is responsible for ensuring that all necessary individual & team training is catered for. Thus system or platform specific training equipment that is needed to ensure the successful deployment of the equipment is well cared for. The execution of that training to ensure that the equipment is effectively employed is another matter.No one Capability Manager has overall responsibility to address issues with regard to equipment required only for training. Collective and command training requirements, and for non weapon platform specific training requirements could therefore be overlooked. These requirements are generated elsewhere and only allocated to a Capability Manager when it becomes clear that FIGHTING POWER is being affected. The simulation training equipment developer must realise therefore that his equipment will be critically assessed as to its contribution to fighting power. See ‘The Main Gate’ at 3.4.3.3   The procurement process.In the late 1990s the United Kingdom’s Ministry of Defence underwent an Acquisition Organisation Review, similar to that currently being carried out in the US. Following the Review the UK’s procurement process, which is concerned with managing the development and production of a system and its whole life cost, was altered. The current process has 6 phases:Concept Phase.  In this phase the Capability Manager and his military requirements staff write the User Requirements Document. This document identifies the capability gap, user need, and also technology options which merit investigation. The document is generally available to industry and is used by the Integrated Project Team (the team which will actually manage the procurement) to assemble an initial business case.Assessment Phase.    Here the Integrated Project Team (mostly acquisition specialist civilians) produces a System Requirements Document and identifies the most cost-effective technical and procurement solution to the requirement. Interface with industry is essential. Modelling and simulation is used wherever possible to aid the construction of a business case. The business case will generally recommend a single technical and procurement option. The phase ends with approval being sought for the business case. This approval hurdle is referred to as The Main Gate, see 3.3.Demonstration Phase.   During this phase a prime contractor will be selected and a contract placed. The ability to produce a solution will then be demonstrated. The Capability Manager will have to agree that the demonstrated solution meets his requirement.Manufacture Phase.    The Integrated Project Team delivers the solution to the military requirement, completing development and production. The Capability Manager conducts Systems Acceptance.In-Service Phase.   The equipment is used, maintained and upgraded when appropriate.Disposal Phase.    Plans are executed for the safe disposal of the system and its associated support.3.4   The Main GateThe Main Gate is an exacting approval hurdle. In my experience the key criteria which must be successfully addressed in order to ensure approval are threefold:Does the system improve fighting power?Is the system the most cost-effective solution?Does the system involve acceptable risk?Not only does the system need to meet the criteria; it also has to be proven that the system meets the criteria.  It is in the equipment developer’s interest to ensure that he assists in the production of such evidence. Scientists in the simulation community can produce valuable support in this respect.Does the system improve fighting power, and how do we prove this for a training system?  A very relevant example was the analytical work done to support the approvals process for the Combined Arms Tactical Trainer (CATT). CATT in essence is a network of 100 crewed vehicle simulators, enabling a battlegroup to fight together on a virtual reality battlefield. Several battlegroups were tracked over 2 years. Fighting power was measured by analysing performance on field exercises (real men, real equipment, real ammunition, and a live opposing force – the closest we can get to war in peacetime). The performances of battlegroups that had prior training experience in an embryonic CATT (essentially borrowed US Army simulators) were then compared to those which had not. The results were striking and were key to proving that the introduction of CATT would increase fighting power. The work was done by scientific civil servants guided by military requirements staff.There are other ways to improve fighting power: do more live training, buy more equipment, and recruit more men. Thus the next step in the approvals process for CATT was to cost alternative methods of producing the same increase in fighting power. Accountants within the Defence Procurement Agency, guided by the Integrated Project Team did this work. The work has to be detailed enough to pass thorough independent scrutiny, but sufficiently concise and striking to get the support of the busy high ranking members of the approvals board. The ‘do more training with current equipment’ option is often the hardest to argue against, and is usually the one supported by the military. Why is using a pc-based programme to teach the principles of First Aid necessarily better than using chalk and a blackboard? The final criterion is does the system involve acceptable risk? All kinds of risks need to be analysed: financial, technical, production to time, environmental and physical. The equipment contractor could do much of this work – and it is in his interest to do so. The work again needs to be detailed enough to stand up to thorough independent scrutiny. Teams outside the Ministry of Defence often carry out such scrutiny – for example by the National Audit Office.Where does Simulation Figure?What’s new in war and peace?The dispersed, multi-faceted, unpredictable and complex nature of future warfare will call for a more rapid and flexible use of forces. The forces will need utility across the whole spectrum of warfare. To enable this utility individuals and units will need careful and specific preparation. Forces will normally operate within an allied coalition; force structure will need to be modular and composable. Dispersion and increased operational tempo is driving improvements to command and control through the digitization process. [5].When not engaged on operations the military are increasingly finding that they have diminished resources available for training. Money is scarce; fuel and ammunition are expensive; soldiers are involved in force protection. Environmental and health & safety issues restrict the size, scope and location of training. Large exercises restrict operational flexibility. The need to rest soldiers and to give them time with friends and families limits time available for training.How is training affected?The army will do less training, but it needs to be better trained- hence training has to be more effective. Training has to be tailored, available and deployable. Training will need to be repeated as forces change and skills erode. Training should require the minimum amount of supporting infrastructure and manpower. Training for commanders must give them, more than ever before, opportunities to think ‘outside the box’.The aim of training is unaffected and remains ‘to prepare the soldier for war’. The scope of training is also unaffected and will still include all 4 types. The balance of training type may change however. For some time the large-scale force on force live training exercise has been seen as the most important because it is closest to actual combat. It will remain important and the live enemy ingredient will continue to be essential; but as equipment complexity increases and the use of live enemy and injected problems becomes widespread, the balance may tip towards individual and team training. These types are more deployable and composable, and are less resource hungry.Digitisation will have a major affect on the army’s future training needs. A full analysis of those needs covering network, operator, user, and exploitation skills is required is required to enable effective training for the Digitised Force.Can technology assuage the effects?Technology is emerging that can support the necessary training transformation. Sadly though there is no one laboratory, establishment, or capability manager with sufficient authority to foster the change. The relevant technologies include high bandwidth wireless communications, robotics, component miniaturisation, and increased electronic processing power. Commercial need is the largest driving force behind technology change and so the military should adopt a pragmatic stance. A technological edge is not required in training systems; it is of course essential in operational systems. Availability and reliability will be as important as fidelity and processing power in designing training systems - as long as the systems remain modern enough to satisfy a young computer literate training audience. This balance could change if embedded systems become more widespread. In the face of rapidly changing technology a sensible balance must be struck between cost and performance.  EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  4.4   What are the implications for simulations?Simulation will need to replace existing training media, improve the value, quality and realism of training, and increase throughput. Simulations will need to host activities not otherwise possible because of safety considerations. Simulation has to offer a means of offsetting budgetary pressures. It can do all this.Simulations should use common components and data to reduce infrastructure and ownership costs, and so improve value for money. As equipment and therefore equipment specific training simulations both get more sophisticated, there will be a need to take their fidelity into collective training simulations, if training is to remain progressive. This will drive a convergence of individual, team and collective training simulations. Since mastery of operational command and control systems will be one of the keys to the success of the digitized force, simulations must incorporate the use of these systems within their structure. The convergence of communication and simulation technologies and processes make it necessary for all data to be widely available throughout the digitized joint battlespace, on operations and whilst training. This availability and re-use of data is reinforced by the fact that resource constraints on field training make it likely that the data on which operational decisions are based will come from simulation applications. [6].Since training has to become more effective, simulations must enable this if their use is to increase. The key question to the simulation training community is therefore ‘will the introduction of my system save soldiers’ lives?’5.   How do we Measure Effective Training?We don’t. I have referred many times to the need for more effective training, and to the need for cost-effective training systems. Many Army Publications use similar phrases. If we want to improve cost-effectiveness then it is clear that we need to measure training effectiveness. We do not currently do this. Given that the reason for training is to ensure success in war, it could be said that the only real measure is whether we win or lose. This is a shortsighted approach that leads to complacency: we haven’t actually lost a war for some time, but we do know our training could be better.Training transfer & the training process.Training Transfer is the extent to which operational performance is affected by a prior training experience. Thus the effectiveness of the training can be gauged by comparing the operational performances before and after training. This is not difficult to do and is actually part of the training process I outlined in 2.5. Once the skills have been acquired and practiced, if the testing is done with regard to the performance required under operational conditions, then the subsequent review can ascertain a measure of the effectiveness of the training.What are the difficulties?To my mind there are 3 major problems associated with measuring training effectiveness. The first is the need to carefully state the performance required and under what conditions it is to be met. For some tasks this is easy: hit a specified target with 1st round from a rifle at 100m at night without vision aids. For other tasks, such as a dismounted infantry company night attack, it is much harder and requires a thorough analysis of the mission requirements. For example the requirements to: move to within small arms’ range without taking casualties; and execute continuous fire and movement after contact. This can be done – as long as there is direction and will– as was shown in the CATT approvals case.The second difficulty is keeping records. It is essential that these are kept since measurement involves comparing successive performances. This is something schoolteachers take meticulous care over but which many commanders ignore – to them the practicing of skills is the end of the training process. Units and sub-units are often loath to maintain records concerning their performances on exercises. This difficulty can also be overcome, but again needs direction and will. The third difficulty is in educating commanders and soldiers that the review part of the training process is necessary. All accept the acquisition and practicing elements and most accept that testing is necessary – some even relish it! The review of training (not to be confused with the after action review of performance) has to be done if effectiveness is to be measured.5.3   What about balance?Only once a system to measure effectiveness is in place can the debate over training balance be settled. The key issues to be resolved are: the live versus simulated training balance; the balance between training types; the balance between quality and quantity; and the balance between cost of a system and training value.5.4   Who should measure training?The principle that training is a function of command is accepted throughout the army. It is clear to me that commanders must direct that training is measured – only then can they assess the effectiveness of the training and the readiness of their troops for war. Training the army (and providing the necessary resources and equipment to do so) is as important as manning and equipping the army, but no figure is in authority. A director general within the Ministry of Defence should be charged with the review and oversight of training performance and measurement thereof. He would report to the Chief of the General Staff. A single Capability Manager should be given the responsibility for providing the capability to execute effective collective training. 6.   ConclusionsTechnology can offer the military many benefits, especially in the field of training, but it will only be applied successfully when scientist and soldier fully understand each other.Training is the preparation of soldiers for war in order to ensure success. It is vital to success because it is the process through which men, equipment and doctrine are fused together to produce fighting power. If an army wants to be superior, it needs to have training superiority not just equipment superiority.The need for simulation to support all types of training is greater than ever before, but so is the need for a methodology to prove that its use is cost-effective. Models & Simulations can contribute much to the procurement process, and to the assembling of a taut business case.The military requirements staff need assistance from scientists and industry to gain Main Gate Approval for equipment.  The case needs to be able to stand up to independent scrutiny. A training system must be shown to have the potential of cost-effectively increasing fighting power.In the face of rapidly changing technology a sensible balance must be struck between cost and performance. Simulations can enable a transformation to more effective training. Their application must be as a result of  a thorough training requirements analysis. Training effectiveness can be measured but commanders must be educated as to the essential need of doing so. Scientists and educators should assist commanders by providing relevant methods and techniques. The drive to review training performance and measurement must come from the very top.Simulation systems utilise some great technology and can be a real fun experience to use, but if they don’t enable training that saves soldiers’ lives they are no use to the military.**********************7.   References[1]. General Dwight D Eisenhower, on a Tunisian Battlefield, Europe, 1943.[2].  British Army Doctrine Publication – Volume 4 – Training. Army Code 71621.[3].  British Army Doctrine Publication – Volume 1 – Military Doctrine. Army Code 71615.[4].  US Defence Science Board, 2000 Task Force on Training Superiority, Final Report.[5].  British Army Doctrine Publication – BA 2000 –. DGD&D Code 5143/34/17.[6]. British Army Simulation Equipment Strategy Paper.  –. DDOR(LS)  Code 15/4/V5.**********************Author’s BiographyNIGEL GALLIER is a British Army infantry officer currently attached to STRICOM. He was born in Lancashire and educated at The Manchester Grammar School and Trinity College Cambridge. He is a graduate of The Royal Military Academy Sandhurst and The Army Command & Staff College Camberley.  He has two masters’ degrees (engineering and guided weapons systems) and holds a PostGraduate Certificate of Education.  As a soldier he has been greatly involved with training for and deployment on operational duties worldwide. He has commanded troops at platoon, company and battalion levels. As a general staff officer he has been involved in logistics and light weapons’ requirements. As a lieutenant colonel he was appointed in 1996 to head the Operational Requirements (Simulation) Office in the Ministry of Defence Main Building, Whitehall.  **********************