Developing A SIMULATION-BASED CONCEPT FORMULATION PLAN FOR THE OICW Primary Author:	Dan MullallyInstitute for Simulation and TrainingUniversity of Central Florida Orlando, FL Secondary Author:  Jeff MaxeyMadison Research CorporationOrlando, Florida	Third Author:  Ron Wolff	Fourth Author:  Dr. Richard Dietzel	Naval Air Warfare Center	Institute for Simulation and Training	Orlando, Florida	University of Central Florida		Orlando, FloridaAbstractUS Army, STRICOM is tasked to participate in the design of a total weapon training system for the Objective Individual Combat Weapon (OICW). This weapon has a dual 5.56 KE weapon and a 20mm HEAB round delivery capability.  The expense of the 20mm rounds must be offset by simulation-based marksmanship and tactical engagement systems. This Concept Formulation Plan (CFP) project presents a unique opportunity to influence the design and development of all aspects of the OICW weapon training system starting from the initial weapon design. This revolutionary weapon will give the user the ability to select the exact point of burst of a high explosive round out to 1 k.  The CFP decision process in support of training will be described. The impact of this weapon on the analysis, design, and development of the simulations ranging from basic individual to advanced collective marksmanship will be described in detail. Biographical Sketch:Dan Mullally has been a Research Scientist at the University of Central Florida, Institute for Simulation and Training, since joining in 1982 after retiring from 23 years of service as a Marine Infantry Officer.  He is currently involved in the development of the Advanced Tactical Engagement Simulation (ATES) system Science and Technology Objective (STO) project for STRICOM, the Concept Formulation Plan development for the Objective Individual Combat Weapon (OICW) for U S Army PM Small Arms and STRICOM, and the IRT3 project for the USMC.   He has an M.A. in Human Resources Management from Pepperdine University and a B.S. in Business Administration from Western Carolina University.Jeff Maxey is a Research Scientist at Madison Research Corporation. He has over 30 years of training research experience.  He has supported U.S. Army training, operations research, and engineering activities at Fort Benning, GA, and Fort Hood, TX. Currently he supports the Dismounted Infantryman Survivability and Lethality Testbed (DISALT) program for NAWC-TSD, the ATES STO program for STRICOM and the OICW CFP for PM Small Arms and STRICOM. He has an M.S. in Operations Research from the University of Central Florida and an M.S. and B.S. in Experimental Psychology, both from the Georgia Institute of Technology.Ron Wolff is a Senior Research Engineer with NAWC TSD in Orlando Florida.  He has worked extensively in the area of small arms weapons simulation for the last 15 years with seven patents to his credit.  He holds an M.S. in Electrical Engineering from the University of Central Florida.Richard Dietzel is a Research Scientist at IST, UCF.  He has been an Instructional Designer and Curriculum Developer for the past 14 years at Carley Corp., GlobalNet Federal, and at UCF.  He holds a B.S. in Chemistry, an M.Ed. in Educational Leadership, and an Ed. D. in Curriculum and Instruction, all from UCF.Introduction The Objective Individual Combat Weapon (OICW) system (Figure 1) is a revolutionary new weapon. The introduction of the first shoulder-fired weapon incorporating a computer-assisted Fire Control System requires a focused training developmental approach.  The Training Concept Formulation Plan (CFP) described in this paper is designed to apply the systems approach to training requirements determination to aid in the decision-making process for the OICW Integrated Product Team (IPT).The unique aspect of the CFP approach is that it was recognized, in the initial stages of the weapon development cycle, that application and extensive use of simulation would be required to train this weapon.Figure 1. A Candidate OICW DesignBackground and ObjectiveThe OICW is a radically new and different weapon from those it is designed to replace.  The OICW capability to optionally select either a 5.56 mm direct-fire kinetic energy round or a 20 mm bursting round presents a new cognitive decision process to the user.  The underlying assumptions driving a simulation-based OICW training system with a focus on marksmanship training include:High cost of ammunition, The potential of a dud-producing round being used in training, andThe impact of the dual ammunition (HE & KE) on the land warrior of the future.The CFP must provide an analytical basis from which an effective training system(s) for the OICW can be developed.  The CFP will provide STRICOM, PM Small Arms, and the TRADOC proponent decision-makers with the data needed to support OICW training program and support training system design decisions.Defining the Training Concept Formulation PlanThe CFP was designed to:Examine current rifle and grenade marksmanship training in order to establish a baseline for comparison with the OICW,Identify and describe the OICW tasks and performance capabilities,Examine emerging technology supporting ranges, instrumentation, and targetry and Tactical Engagement Simulation Systems (TESS),Analyze emerging marksmanship training technology, andDevelop a state-of-the-art concept for a OICW marksmanship system.The CFP accomplished these objectives via a:Work plan,Task identification and descriptionMarket survey, and theTraining assessment.It included the completion of a Trade-off Determination and development of a Final Report to document the methodology, procedures, and findings of the various analyses completed during the CFP effort.Task DescriptionDue to the OICW’s state of development at the inception of the CFP process, an incrementally stepped approach was initiated.The first step taken in determining the requirements for OICW simulation was to examine the existing OICW operator manuals, operational requirement document (ORD), system training plan, and training materials used to support testing during Phase IV of the OICW ATD. In addition, as information about collective and associated supporting individual tasks became available from analyses being completed by other OICW IPT members, this data was included in the task identification process. The objective was to identify the tasks that operators were suppose to be able to complete using the OICW at both the individual and collective levels. This had not been accomplished as part of the ATD process since the major concern of the ATD was proving the feasibility of the OICW weapon concept and identifying system issues that needed to be resolved before further developing the weapon.The intent of the task identification process was to produce a task inventory sufficiently detailed so that a simulation engineer would have no difficulty in determining the weapon and operational environmental characteristics and attributes that would need to be simulated in an OICW training system. The task identification process produced 84 OICW individual soldier tasks, 34 collective tasks, and 17 individual soldier tasks that support these collective tasks. These collective and supporting tasks involved five basic combat activities: develop intelligence, deploy/conduct maneuver, employ firepower, protect the force, and perform combat service support and sustainment.At a top level, three major individual soldier task categories emerged: combat tasks, stability support tasks, and checks and services tasks. Within the combat task category, three basic tasks were identified:Place fire on a target,Gather intelligence, andDesignate a target.The first of these involved joint operation of the fire control system (FCS) and the munitions delivery system. The other tasks only involved system capabilities housed in the FCS.Stability support tasks chiefly involved use of the OICW to support patrolling or operating a checkpoint in an urban area. Checks and services tasks involved five sub-categories that focused on keeping the weapon in an operational state: mechanical operation, preventative maintenance, FCS checkout, calibration, and pre-firing set-up tasks. As a group these are tasks that are completed by the operator to ensure the OICW’s safe and normal functioning.A very complete analysis of the individual steps required for task completion was possible in some cases (e.g., Fire on a defilade target using the High Explosive Air Bursting (HEAB) firing and NIGHT viewing modes) and not so in others (e.g., Isolate faults in the OICW system). This happened because some tasks were well described by the manuals and other documentation. Other tasks could not be well described because the details for these tasks have not yet been worked out. This was especially true for maintenance tasks since the weapon maintenance concept has yet to be selected.The OICW task description and identification will need to be updated as the weapon concept evolves. The details of task completion will likely change as new capabilities are added to the weapon, tasks are simplified or eliminated, or weapons components are modified or relocated. Tasks will be expanded or modified as tactics, techniques, and procedures for use in combat and stability operations are developed, tested, and approved.Further, it is expected that various OICW tasks will be examined by human factors and combat experienced personnel who will suggest changes to streamline, combine, or eliminate steps to reduce the time needed to complete tasks. The latter is especially important in stressful situations such as combat since the fewer the task steps, the less likely an important step will be forgotten and missed being performed.Figure 2. OICW Training Using SAST II.OICW Performance DataAs part of the task description process, OICW performance data was requested. It was discovered that there is a very limited database of information about how the typical user is able to use the OICW effectively. This comes from the Phase IV ATD test completed in late 1999. Prior to the live firing portion of the test, a sample of 16 soldiers were trained to operate the OICW in the HE mode via the Small Arms Simulator Testbed (SAST II), a validated, reconfigurable, high-fidelity small arms simulation system. This simulation device was configured with a high fidelity, ergonomically correct mockup of the OICW (Wolff, 2000).The soldiers engaged typical (i.e., stationary and moving three dimensional man sized) targets exposed for three to five seconds on a virtual test range representative of the actual range to be used for live fire testing.The experience with the SAST II training suggested that a per soldier minimum of 3 hours of distributed practice spread over a period of five days was needed to achieve a level of competence sufficient to safely operate the OICW in the HE mode during live fire. Competence was measured in terms of hit probability. Evidence of skill improvement was increased hit probability with time and asymptotic performance toward the later training sessions.This training, however, was limited to shooting from a single firing position and the kneeling supported position (since this was the principle position to be used during live firing). Targets varied from 12 by 12 foot windows located at ranges from 100 to 300 meters to single man-sized, three dimensional targets exposed for three to five seconds at ranges from 140 to 520 meters. Some targets were stationary, some moving, and some moving to defilade.Figure3. OICW Training Using SAST II At ARLWhile this training was thought to be sufficient to prepare the soldiers for the ATD live firing, some problems did appear. Some soldiers used the wrong sighting reticle during an engagement. There is one reticle for lasing and one for aiming (located below the lasing reticle). One would sometimes be used when the other was appropriate, which would result in a target miss. This happened especially when long range targets were fired on and the aiming reticle dropped out of their foveal view. The opinion was expressed that this problem could be solved with appropriate training.Observation of the soldiers also revealed that some had difficulty making judgements about which laser settings to use when multiple lases were made for a three to five second exposed target, especially when there was considerable variability among the readings. The conclusion was made that aiming the laser at distant targets and selecting the correct range to use required considerable practice and feedback as part of the training process. This was also true for target that were briefly exposed and then went defilade.Another area that training will have to address, that was not considered in the ATD testing, was deciding when to switch between the KE and HE modes of operation. During the ATD testing, the soldiers never had to decide when and why to make a switch between firing modes. Further, the ATD testing only involved firing a single HE round per target so there were no multiple target engagements or requirements to shift fire and re-lay on a new target as there might be in a combat situation. Finally, the ATD testing focused only on daylight engagements. There were no thermal or TV mode firings so there was not any training and practice for these modes of OICW operation.A final limitation is that there have yet to date been any tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs) developed for operational use of the OICW. Many and varied ideas have been expressed. The OICW ORD implies that the weapon will be used frequently during night operations against targets that cannot or would not be engaged with a rifle (especially defilade targets) as well as targets that are long range (in excess of 500 meters). “Crawl, walk, and run” scenarios are needed to support the training and post-training evaluation for these uses of the OICW. The TTPs and their associated scenarios are typically produced by the user community just prior to or during introduction of a new weapon. However, in order to be able to have a simulation system ready to dovetail with the operational weapon, TTP development may have to be accelerated to keep up with training development.One way in which this may be accomplished is to use the SAST II to support validation of OICW operational concepts. As noted by Wolff (2000), in the last 24 months, the SAST II device significantly reduced the need for live fire ammunition, range instrumentation, and range support personnel for various test and evaluation activities. The SAST II is a validated system for the OICW as well as the M16 and the M203 grenade launcher. It provides an environment in which soldier-in-the-loop performance with the OICW can be evaluated to determine, for example, how best to engage moving targets in both the KE and HE modes, when to switch from KE to HE or from HE to KE firing modes, or what is the best scheme for engaging multiple, dispersed targets.Market SurveyThe second step in the CFP was an OICW market survey. The focus of the OICW market survey was to identify the industrial capacity and related technology sufficient to provide state-of-the-art solutions to support the creation of a simulation based training system for the OICW. There were five responses to the survey from commercial companies as well as a completed survey from the Project Manager for Training Devices (PM TRADE) at STRICOM.Only one respondent provided sufficient information to support the conclusion that they had a technology solution that would support OICW training. This solution focused on an upgrade of the EST 2000, a multi-lane system designed to support initial marksmanship, sustainment, collective, and shoot-don’t shoot training. PM TRADE’s response noted that there is currently no methodology in existence for the play of grenade or grenade-type weapons in a tactical engagement system  field environment. However, their response noted that improvements in location determination via GPS, advanced RF-techniques, or ultra-wide band technology may support an upgrade to the MILES SAWE approach that would work for the OICW.A major difficulty with the OICW market survey was that it is not certain that it reached all of the organizations that it should have reached. Initially, a version of the survey was published in the Commerce and Business Daily, a publication of the U.S. Government. Responses to this announcement plus contacts made at various tradeshows were then used to create a roster of organizations to contact for the final survey. It is possible that there might have been more interest in responding to the survey had it been published through a government web site such as the one operated by STRICOM. It is hypothesized that this approach would have generated more interest in the survey across the industry both in the United States and abroad. Alternatively, it is possible that the number of companies that have the capability and interest to produce simulation based training systems for small arms marksmanship is relatively small. Given a weapon such as the OICW, it may be that the technical problems inherent in simulating the use of a laser rangefinder and the effects of exploding munitions are beyond the capabilities of only the most technically competent companies who do business in the area of marksmanship trainers. With the development of a comprehensive task inventory for the OICW and the resolution of the current risk reduction effort for the OICW, it may make sense to revisit the market survey effort to seek additional simulation based solutions to verify that all feasible solutions have been identified.Training Assessment Process DescriptionThe third step in the CFP effort was to identify the tasks that required training and then identify which of these should be trained via simulation. The approach for this assessment was to have subject matter experts (SMEs) review each OICW task and provide a judgment with respect to the following questions:Would the task be performed during a combat engagement?To what extent is the task difficult to perform during a combat engagement?To what extent is the task critical to mission success?How frequently is the task performed during a combat engagement?How much schoolhouse/garrison training is required to acquire initial task proficiency?How much schoolhouse/garrison training is required to maintain task proficiency?At which skill level should the task first be trained?What safety hazard is associated with task performance?Tasks were selected for training based on the SMEs’ answers to the first four questions above using the decision process shown in Table 1.This decision process is an application of the DIF model for task selection (TRADOC, 1979). If a task is judged to be critical to combat success, the model always selects it to be trained. For tasks not critical to combat success, the model selects a task for training (or over training) only if it is very difficult to perform and it is performed moderately often or very frequently during a combat engagement. Finally, the tasks selected for training were examined to identify those that required over-training via the DIF model. Tasks selected for training may be selected for over-training if they are moderately or very difficult to perform, and if they are performed infrequently or moderately during combat. The rationale is that critical tasks that are not performed too often may be forgotten.  Hence they are not available for recall unless they are over-learned (practiced substantially beyond the achievement of asymptotic performance).CRITICALITYDIFFICULTYFREQUENCYIMPLICATIONS FOR TRAININGYesNotInfrequentTrainYesNotModerateTrainYesNotVeryTrainYesModerateInfrequentOver TrainYesModerateModerateOver TrainYesModerateVeryTrainYesVeryInfrequentOver TrainYesVeryModerateOver TrainYesVeryVeryTrainNoNotInfrequentNot TrainNoNotModerateNot TrainNoNotVeryNot TrainNoModerateInfrequentNot TrainNoModerateModerateNot TrainNoModerateVeryNot TrainNoVeryInfrequentNot TrainNoVeryModerateTrainNoVeryVeryTrainTable 1. Task Selection Process Tasks requiring over-training were considered to be important candidates for simulation-based training. SME input about safety hazard severity identified tasks that were hazardous to perform in the real world, and were therefore candidates for training via simulation. The levels of training required for initial skill acquisition and maintenance of skill proficiency were also examined to determine the amount of time that should be allocated for training.SME SelectionAt the time the CFP effort was being completed, there were no OICW-experienced SMEs available to support the task assessment process. The soldiers that participated in the Phase IV ATD firing test (the only pool of experienced operators) were not available for interviews since they had already returned to their units or had been reassigned to other duties.However, many of the members of the OICW IPT either had a long association with the OICW development program or were highly experienced in military small arms research, development, and testing (RD&T). Ten of these individuals were selected to be the SMEs for the task assessment effort. Of the ten, eight had prior military experience and six of these had infantry experience and held the rank of major or above. The military experience of the SMEs with prior military experience ranged from 4 to 24 years in service. The two SMEs with small arms RD&T experience worked with the Army for at least 25 years.Preliminary Task Assessment ResultsAt the time this paper was prepared, the task assessment process identified 11 individual soldier, 10 supporting individual, and 15 critical collective tasks as important candidates for simulation-based training. These are listed in Tables 2, 3, and 4. These will be analyzed to identify specific simulation requirements (scenarios, targets, and weapon fidelity). Table 2. Individual Soldier Tasks Selected For SimulationTask #Task TitleFCS System Checkout Tasks35Configure the Startup Switch SettingsCalibration Tasks41Calibrate the CompassSystem Maintenance Tasks47Troubleshoot the FCS with the Attached PCGeneral Firing Mode Tasks57Engage a Target with the Tracker and SteererKE Firing Mode Tasks62Look and Fire Around a Corner at a Close-In Personnel Target (less than 150 meters) Using the KE Firing and NIGHT Viewing Modes During Offensive OperationsHE Firing Mode Tasks64Suppress an Area Personnel Target During the Day or Night Using the HE Firing Mode65Suppress an Area Personnel Target Located at an Extended Range (greater than 300 meters) Using the HE AIR BURSTING Firing and NIGHT Viewing Modes During Offensive Operations66Suppress an Area Personnel Target Located at an Extended Range (greater than 300 meters) During the Day or Night Using the HE AIR BURSTING Firing Mode During Defensive Operations68Fire on a Bunker/Point Target (greater than 35 meters) Using the HE PD Firing and NIGHT Viewing Modes69Fire on and Destroy an Unarmored Light Enemy Vehicle Located at an Extended Range (greater than 600 meters) During the Day or Night Using the HE AIR BURSTING  Firing Mode70Defend Against Slow, Low-Flying Aircraft (less than 1000 meters) During the Day or Night Using the HE PDD Firing Mode During Defensive OperationsTable3. Supporting Individual Soldier Tasks Selected For SimulationTask #Task TitleDeploy/Conduct Maneuver103Support a Hasty Ambush104Support a Point Ambush105Support an Area Ambush106Deny an Enemy a Route of Withdrawal107Support a Platoon Raid109Cover the Withdrawal of a Squad/PlatoonEmploy Firepower111Support a Breach of a Building112Engage a Defilade Target113Engage Light Armored Vehicles117Suppress a Fortified PositionTable 4. Critical Collective Tasks Selected For SimulationTask #Task TitleDevelop Intelligence202Conduct Area/Zone Reconnaissance (Platoon/Squad)203Conduct Route Reconnaissance (Platoon/Section)205Conduct a Screen (Platoon)Deploy/Conduct Maneuver209Conduct a Raid (Platoon/Squad)210Conduct an Ambush (Platoon/Squad)211Clear a Building (Platoon/Squad)212Knock Out a Bunker  (Platoon/Squad)213Clear a Trench Line (Platoon/Squad)214Conduct a Delay (Platoon/Squad)216Conduct Infiltration/Exfiltration (Platoon/Squad)217Secure a Route (Platoon/Squad)225Disengage from an Enemy ForceProtect the Force229Breach an Obstacle (Platoon/Squad)231Conduct Active Air Defense Measures Against Hostile Aircraft (Platoon/Squad)Perform CSS and Sustainment234Operate in an Electronic Warfare Environment (Platoon/Squad)Future PlansAt the time this paper was prepared, the trade-off determination phase of the CFP had yet to be completed This final step in the process will integrate the results of the task identification and description, market survey, and task assessment steps to produce an approach to simulation-based training for the OICW. However, a preliminary assessment of the results to date support the simulation-based training approach summarized in Tables 5, 6, and 7.Table 5. Initial Entry (IET) ActivitiesPersonal Computer,Lecture,ManualsHands-OnRangeSafety (M-16, OICW)Basic Marksmanship (M-16, OICW)Weapon Maintenance (M-16, OICW)Safety (M-16)Basic Marksmanship (M-16)Weapon Maintenance (M-16)Individual Live Fire (M-16)Table 6. Advanced Individual Training (AIT) ActivitiesMultipurpose Arcade Combat SimulatorESTRangeBasic Marksmanship (M-16, OICW)KE (M-16, OICW)HEAB (OICW)Night Vision (OICW)TV Mode (OICW)Point Detonating (OICW)Individual Live Fire (M-16)Table 7. Unit Level Training (AIT) ActivitiesFieldRange and FieldRange and FieldForce-On-Force (M-16, OICW)Individual Live Fire (M-16, OICW)Collective Live Fire (M-16, OICW)Verification of the adequacy of the final simulation-based training approach will need to be accomplished to demonstrate its effectiveness. How might this be achieved? One solution is to train groups of individuals comparable to the target population for OICW training using the various identified simulation approaches, and then have them demonstrate their proficiency with the OICW in the SAST II system. If the various simulation approaches are in fact effective, then this will be evident from the degree of proficiency demonstrated in the SAST II system while firing various standard combat scenarios. High levels of proficiency will imply adequate training while low levels of proficiency will indicate ineffective training transfer. To quantify transfer, the SAST II firer proficiencies will be compared to the proficiencies of subjects who learned to fire using only the SAST II system.Small Arms Simulator Testbed (SAST II)As mentioned earlier, the SAST II (Figure 4) is a validated, reconfigurable, high-fidelity simulator for small arms. It was developed at the Naval Air Warfare Center Training Systems Division (NAWCTSD) in Orlando, Fl under the sponsorship of both the Army Armament Research, Development, and Engineering Center (ARDEC) and the Office of Secretary of Defense/Live Fire Test and Training (OSD/LFT&T) program.Figure 4. SAST IIThe SAST II device provides a validated man in-the-loop synthetic environment from which real-time high-fidelity performance data can be collected and analyzed. The SAST II device is unique in that it simultaneously addresses the needs of both the live fire testing community and the small arms training community by actively supporting conceptual design, developmental testing, operational testing, and small arms weapons training. During FY98 through FY01, the SAST II system has provided a cost avoidance of over $10M dollars by providing simulated live fire test and training data to ARDEC, ARL, STRICOM, IST, and weapons contractors to support the development and testing of new weapons systems. The SAST II device is technically classified as a virtual simulation system denoting a real person performing within a simulated environment.  In the SAST II device, the real person/user is provided with a high-fidelity physical model representing the weapon or weapon concept under evaluation.  The user engages simulated live fire targets presented on a virtual test range. The virtual test range is presented to the user via a large screen, high resolution visual display system from approximately 12-18 feet. Virtual test ranges are created in conjunction with ARDEC and ARL personnel who are responsible for implementing the virtual and live fire test plans.  Data collection is semi-automated and can be viewed during After Action Review (AAR) and/or stored to disk for further analysis.It is clear from this description of the SAST II that this device is the ideal environment in which to support the design and evaluation of simulation training systems for the OICW. It provides the perfect transfer task to determine effectiveness since there are no actual weapons or training facilities in existence for the OICW at the present time. Further, as the OICW evolves, the SAST II will support reconfiguration to reflect the physical and functional design of the evolving OICW. This will continue to support the design and evaluation of new or modified training approaches required to match the OICW’s evolution as it approaches maturity and becomes ready for fielding.ConclusionsAn affordable and achievable training concept will be a key factor in the next OICW milestone decision. This is currently scheduled for April 2002. The OICW Training IPT plans to accomplish this through an emphasis on a simulation–based training concept. The OICW IPT has proposed a 20mm Marksmanship training program that has five phases: Pre-Fire, Basic, Advanced, Decision, and Qualification Firing. The Basic, Advanced, and Decision Firing phases are envisioned to be simulation-based. During the qualification phase, the pre-qualification will be completed via simulation while live fire, qualification will be completed via live fire only. This concept will result in savings in ammunition of more than $37,000 per soldier per year when compared with a similar training program for the OICW 20 mm using live ammunition. The STRICOM CFP effort will provide PM Small Arms and the TRADOC decision makers with simulation alternatives for a cost effective training concept for the next OICW milestone decision. 