Collaborative Engineering Enterprise for WARCONLCDR. Dylan Schmorrow, Ben RileyOffice of Naval ResearchArlington, VA 22217Henry Ng, Suleyman Guleyupoglu, Frank SegariaNaval Research LaboratoryWashington, DC 20375Keywords:  Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA), Collaborative Engineering Environment (CEE), HLA, Integrated Model Environment, Virtual Enterprise.ABSTRACT: The Defense Department is seeking to emphasize the use of technology experimentation and cost analysis before weapons systems enter full-rate procurement. The Warfighting Concepts to Future Weapon System Design (WARCON) initiative, sponsored by the Office of Naval Research (ONR), is looking to provide a link between the experimentation and acquisition communities. The growing emphasis on war-fighting experiments by the military implies that acquisition programs cannot work in isolation from those experiments. The major objective of the WARCON program is to provide a bridge between the engineering acquisition realm and the operational analysis realm. Integrated Product Teams (IPTs) were formed for supporting the different aspects of the WARCON work. The various IPTs included Program Management; Joint Synthetic Battlespace (JSB); WARCON Integrated Data Environment (WIDE); Trade Analysis Environment (TAE), Requirements and Analysis, and Quality Assurance/Process Improvement. One of the biggest challenges facing the WARCON program is the ability to bring together a very diverse group of participants, from government and industry, which by virtue of their background and experiences, have a different approaches for addressing the problem and implementing a solution. The challenge is to take this diverse group and find a means to “visualize” the problem to gain a common understanding and find a solution by leveraging the varied expertise found within the IPTs. In order to facilitate communication, collaboration, and coordination among the members of the WARCON IPT team, a Collaborative Engineering Enterprise (CEE) is being developed. The CEE is a system by which a multi-tiered enterprise such as the WARCON product teams with government and industry partners are linked electronically. Going far beyond a simple integrated email and web system, the CEE will seamlessly distribute and manage the documentation and data associated with a large scale enterprise as well as provide common tools and management support capabilities for participants. In this paper, we describe WARCON lessons learned, critical factors that drive the CEE development, design philosophy, technology employed, and the CEE architecture.1.  BackgroundThe ONR WARCON program integrates engineering, physical and behavioral models associated with design of complex warfighting platforms such as a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier, with operational performance models within a joint synthetic battlespace (JSB) [1-3]. This is done with a level of validity suitable for performing trade studies of operational effectiveness versus cost as an independent variable. WARCON provides a simulation-based system for assessing the relative capabilities of various platform physical and behavioral system configurations to meet current and postulated operational requirements.  This must support warfighters’ and platform designers’ collaborative efforts to develop a design that will “satisfy” postulated operational capabilities within an acceptable range of costs. The WARCON team consists of personnel from government activities including Office of Naval Research (ONR), Washington DC; Navy Warfare Development Command (NWDC), Newport, RI; Naval Undersea Warfare Center, Newport, RI; Naval Research Laboratory (NRL), Washington, DC; and the Naval Air Warfare Center Aircraft Division (NAWCAD) Lakehurst, NJ.  Industrial partners include Newport News Shipbuilding (NNS), Newport News, VA; MTS Technologies, Arlington, VA; BMH Associates, Inc., Norfolk, VA; and Lockheed Martin Information Systems (LMIS), Boston, MA; Technology Systems, Inc. (TSI), Wiscasset, ME.  Simulation applications include engineering design models, computer generated synthetic forces, synthetic natural environment representations, cost models, engineering optimization programs, visualization, and data collection and analyses models that have been integrated and employed over computer network.  The major objective of the WARCON system is to provide a bridge between the engineering acquisition world and the operational analysis world. This bridge integrates three primary elements; program management functions, systems engineering functions and modeling and simulation functions.  These elements are briefly described below.Program Management Elements are deployed to manage program control areas such as work breakdown structures, program workflow processes, program rules and standards, data access, and data configuration management. These elements are defined by the WARCON Management IPT.Systems Engineering Elements are deployed to enable the systematic development, capture, decomposition, allocation, verification, validation, synthesis and documentation of WARCON system requirements.  These elements are applied to both the development of the WARCON system as well as to its eventual operation.Modeling and Simulation Elements are deployed utilizing synchronous and asynchronous technologies from both the operational analysis realm and the engineering acquisition realm. All modeling and simulation activities are deployed within the context of the systems engineering elements.  Integrated Product teams (IPTs) were formed to support the different aspects of the WARCON work. The various IPTs include Program Management; Joint Synthetic Battlespace (JSB); Requirements and Analysis, WARCON Integrated Data Environment (WIDE); Trade Analysis Environment (TAE), and Quality Assurance / Process Improvement (QA), to name the primary IPTs, as well as a Red Team. Many valuable lessons have been learned during the WARCON Phase I and II operations, and these are:It was difficult to coordinate the work of all IPT teams and their activities;It was difficult to communicate and to work efficiently among the team members due to their different disciplines and/or level of expertise;There was no system support for collaboration between members or IPTs for distributed team operations. There was not enough capability to deal with sharing information and data in accomplishing a task by an IPT in an Internet-based system.It was difficult for team members to coordinate their work for different teams, to find needed information in a timely manner, and be fully cognizant of the progress of the program.The M&S systems and infrastructure developed must be easily and quickly adapted to use for any other new future WARCON applications in different domains.Without understanding the important issues for a Collaborative Engineering Environment (CEE), earlier efforts to employ NetMeeting and Web-based data warehouse to support the IPTs was attempted by another group to provide a minimal level of capability in the absence of an existing CEE capability suitable for use in WARCON. It was quickly discovered that a tool-centric approach does not provide needed CEE capabilities. This situation points to a need for capabilities that automate tasks and foster the communication, coordination and collaboration within a product development group (PDG), as well as among different PDGs. To be successful, a CEE must be designed to easily communicate its capacities and its role in the task to its users at all stages and at all levels. A CEE development for WARCON was initiated in FY01 to provide a limited capability that could be used in the future by WARCON. 2.  CEE ObjectivesThe strategy for CEE development is to establish a collaboration framework instantiated with existing and emerging domain specific resources to support scientific and engineering collaboration between distributed government and industry teams. When two or more enterprises form a team to design and build a complex system, one of the first tasks that must be performed is the exchange of information required for design, specification generation, document review, and system performance evaluation. Complex projects are usually executed by multi-skilled teams, whose members are often made up of personnel from both inside and outside of the organization. Coordinating a complex project across the country or even around the globe is common.  Resources and status reports should be available whenever they are needed, not just during traditional “business hours.” Collaboration across time zones can be critical to the success of the project. The CEE is a system that electronically links government and industry partners who are members of a multi-tiered enterprise. Going far beyond a simple integrated email and web system, a CEE can be used to distribute and manage documentation and data associated with a large scale enterprise, serve as an on-line meeting place for team collaboration and tasking support as well as providing common tools and management support capabilities.3.  CEE Architecture and Development ApproachThe CEE will require significant investment in order to realize its full capabilities. In fiscal year 2001 (FY01), the major objective of the CEE development was to design a sound architecture and deploy the first version of the CEE in order to provide an initial capability that could be evaluated by WARCON participants. This limited-capability version was disseminated for evaluation in January 2002. A “walk-before-run” strategy was adopted for CEE development. This strategy allows members of the PDGs to use it without waiting for it to be completely developed. This will also permit participant feedback while still early in the development cycle, so we can assess/adjust priorities based on WARCON needs. The CEE employs a client-server paradigm as shown in Figure 1. Users can access the CEE through the Internet or a classified network. The CEE reference architecture includes the layers shown in Figure 2. It includes the user access layer, application layer, the data repository and CEE services. The system is implemented using Java [2]  programming language and is designed to run on any computer and operating system that runs the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). The system is intended to run on a range of hardware from desktop computers to hand held wireless personal digital assistants. The data repository is implemented with distributed databases so the system will scale to serve a large number of users simultaneously. The application layer is used to embed different tools for the enterprise to employ. We envision there are some common tools that would be needed regardless of the project or program. The common tools are identified on the left hand side in the application layer shown in Figure 2. Also, there are some common tools that would be unique for the Defense applications as shown at the middle of the application layer. In addition, there will be some customized tools that a particular program would require (shown on the right in the application layer). What this means is we have to design an architecture that can accommodate this kind of requirement. The goal is to use the CEE tools under development for other programs in addition to WARCON in the future so it will be necessary to formally document and prioritize the specific CEE requirements for each of these programs in order to determine the CEE development plan.To support the operation of these programs, some of the needed CEE functions include the following: Unified workspace -- Incorporates a seamless management of shared data resources located throughout an enterprise along with an intuitive, cohesive and context-sensitive view whereby people, components and agents can interact, communicate and collaborate.Authentication -- Confirms the identity of system users or agents and generates a unique session key. This key can be used to encrypt any information transfer, such as database access, document download and real-time collaboration.Notification -- Routes messages between participants and to participants from autonomous processes, such as meeting managers. It accepts messages or signals directed to participants, determines the status of the user (on or off line) and directs storage for appropriate notification (immediate for on-line and stored for off-line).Database and query engine -- Transforms and transports enterprise information into database engines. Transparent means of incorporating several possibly distributed relational and object databases that form the backbone of data storage and management for the collaborative enterprise. In addition, the engine acquires appropriate information from external databases.Presence factory -- Generates and delivers a personalized interface to remote users of the system including storing configuration information such as shortcuts, preferences, specific graphical widgets (i.e., PDA), along with tracking messages received while a user is off-line.Context factory -- Centrally maintains context-specific information, such as schedule messages used by shared calendars, files stored for sharing in collaborative workspaces and document profiles, thereby allowing consistent and separable data to be accessed by the user.Application integration and management -- Embed internal and external user applications (e.g. simulations, analysis tools, etc.) in the enterprise that are capable of automatically launching and setting the collaboration if needed. Facilitate integration of different tools.Meeting session management – Establishes meeting sessions and brokers messages directed to the meetings. Generate a meeting ID, which is unique to each meeting when a new meeting is initiated and ensures that messages are directed to the correct meeting.Transformation -- Translates documents, data and multi-media files from one format to another, such as Rich Text Format (RTF) to simple text.Transportation -- Distributes documents, data and multi-media files. through the entire domain of the collaborative enterprise, regardless of the hardware domain wherein it is stored. Embedded within these concepts are the capabilities to communicate (notifications, real time discussions including audio, video and shared whiteboards), create documents (e.g. requirement specification, analysis plan, analysis report, etc.) with people at distributed sites, manage documents (proposals and reviews, meeting minutes, engineering documents, multimedia documents, financial documents, project management documents, configuration management), collaborate (distributed workspace, annotation), access data repositories (transparency, distributed, tracking), and provide a feeling of location  independence, round the clock access, and on-line help. Figure 1.  CEE OperationFigure 2.  CEE Reference Architecture4.  CEE GUI Considerations It is important to understand that the CEE user interface must support the different needs required by each of its users. Using the result from another ONR basic research program called Effective, Efficient Collaborative Engineering Environment (E2C2E2) which investigated technologies and methodologies that will support natural human to human communication and interaction for a collaborative engineering environment, we have found that there are three different views needed to support the users. These are (a) general information display and navigation; (b) self-oriented view and (c) team/task-oriented view as shown in Figure 3. The general information displays like the Web-based system for data and document navigation and retrieval. The characteristics for self-oriented view are self-project management and self-activities management for each CEE user. The characteristics for team/task-oriented view are information sharing among the team members or across different IPT/PDG teams to collaborate both concurrently and non-concurrently.  For WARCON Phase II, which was complete in December 2001, an Integrated Data Environment developed served this purpose. Without duplicating the effort, we plan to use agent technology to access database repositories to gather needed information for the users. A virtual personal office paradigm is used for the self-oriented (personal view) activities. Figure 4 shows the virtual office interface where each user can store data and manage his or her activities. Each user will be directed into their virtual office when she logs into the system. A status window, which displays action items, notifications, reminders, chat request, and scheduled messages directed specifically to this individual, will be automatically displayed to enable this user to manage her tasks and activities for the teams and projects that she is involved with. A personal digital assistant (PDA) icon (as shown in the bottom right in Figure 4) consists of different collaboration tools, such as chat, white board, desktop VTC, etc. to support individual-to-individual communication and collaboration.  A team view icon is located at the bottom of the window to allow the user to jump to the team view from her virtual personal office view.   Figure 3. Three different views needed for CEEFigure 4.  Use of Virtual Office Paradigm for CEE personal operation.As for the team/projects-oriented view, we have found the building, floor, and room paradigm serve this purpose well. The metaphor of a building with rooms and floors provides the representations of the team collaborative space within the CEE. Each room provides context for team collaborations within it. Floors and rooms may be named as appropriate, and room descriptions can be used to provide additional context for the room. We have leveraged the effort of Collaborative Virtual Workplace (CVW) developed for DARPA to support the team/project view for our CEE. Figures 5 and 6 show the Graphical User Interface (GUI) that the user can use to navigate through the environment. The interface displays only those buildings, floors, and rooms for which the user has access privileges. Two users may see entirely different views of the campus consisting of different buildings, floors and rooms when they log in the system.Figure 5. Use of Building, Floor, Room Paradigm for CEE Team Operation and collaborationFigure 6: Rooms within a floorThe building, floor, and room paradigm provides a persistent virtual space within which applications, documents, and people are directly accessible. From a technical point of view, it is a framework for integrating diverse collaborative capabilities. To a user, a building is divided into floors and rooms, where each room provides a context for collaboration, communication and information and document sharing. It also serves as an on-line meeting place to support the team in accomplishing a particular task. Defining rooms as the basis for communication means that users are not required to set up sessions or know user locations; they need only to enter a room. If users choose to communicate through audio, video or text, then the communication session is established automatically for them. Users can also lock rooms and communicate privately within and between rooms. The CEE provides the ability to restrict room access, based on an access control list. Specific individuals may be added or removed from the room's access control list. This is especially important for protecting the proprietary information by different companies participating in a joint venture. This would reduce the reluctance for making sensitive information available within a shared, but controlled access, environment. Figure 7 shows a room view.Figure 7: Team collaboration space represented as a conference roomRooms are also the basis for document sharing and distributed operations for conducting analysis and study. Users can place documents of different types into a room, allowing anyone else in that room to read the document or view information about the document (such as creator, description, creation date, modified date, and last modified by, etc.). Persistence is supported because the rooms exist even when no one is in them. Consequently, the document remains in the room for future visitors to see until some authorized user moves or deletes it. The room paradigm of the CEE supports groups of people engaged in a common task. This has brought to teams the ability to work distributed at any time. The two-by-two grid shown in Figure 8 depicts the four combinations of time and space involved [3]. The CEE should provide capabilities to support these time and place combinations. The room can also use as the place to embed the COTS tools and applications. Above the room view a toolbar represents internal and external application tools available to the user. These tools are designed for team operation. As members in the room initialize these tools the system will automatically set up a meeting session and link the users in the room together without the need to perform a lengthy procedure manually. As a new tool is developed for the enterprise, it can be embedded here for the teams to use. Currently, we are developing the Process Flow, Integrated Model environment, and spider chart analysis and visualization tools that will each be made accessible through the CEE. We’ll describe these tools in detail in the next section.Figure 8: Four combinations of Time and Place5.  CEE Application ToolsIn addition to develop the common basic collaborative tools, such as chat, special tools are developed. These special application tools that are envisioned to be useful for the first version of CEE include Process Flow and data analysis and visualization.	Process Flow	One of the major difficulties found in WARCON Phase I was that it was challenging to communicate and work together efficiently due to the distributed nature of the program.  For this reason, a Process Flow capability was developed that can be employed to aid team operations. The Process Flow application will enable the members of the IPT/PDG to collaborate, define and develop the process for a given task that is part of the WARCON process.  More importantly, it is used as a vehicle to foster communication within the team so that consensus can be reached on how to complete the task at hand at the beginning in order to minimize the misunderstandings regarding individual roles and responsibilities for each team member. The Process Flow provides capabilities for the IPT/PDG members to create the process that shows the steps to accomplish a particular task assigned to the IPT team. Figure 9 shows an example and graphical interface of the Process Flow. The team members, each at different geographical locations, will be able to formulate the Process Flow together. In addition, the Process Flow is used as a vehicle for team member to submit their completed work. The work completed by one member will be automatically uploaded and saved in the CEE servers after her submission into the system and a copy is automatically routed to the next responsible member(s). Notifications will be automatically sent to each member of the team to inform them of the completion. Reminder messages can be set in the Process Flow to automatically send to the members for their assigned actions as the time approaching their deadlines. In addition, the Process Flow includes the capability for the team to view and monitor the process execution so that the status of the task progress is available to everyone in the team. Software agent technology will be used as needed for the process execution and monitoring.  The type of agents include; notification agents; data query agents; task monitoring agents; reminder agents; document upload and download agents; attachment agents; display agents and archival agents.  Figure 9: Process Flow ExampleThe major advantage of the Process Flow is its ability to function as the “glue” for different IPT/PDG teams. With its hierarchical capability, the overall process for a particular project can be formulated as a high level Process Flow task that includes subtasks for different IPT/PDG teams. Each IPT/PDG team can formulate its own subtasks in a separate Process Flow and link them back with the high level Process Flow task. An example is shown in Figure 10.Figure 10.  Process Flow as glue for different WARCON IPT Team activitiesAnalysis and Visualization ToolThe WARCON program is focused on the creation of an analysis capability that provides the methodology necessary to draw conclusions about the impact of design decisions on cost and operational effectiveness of military platforms and systems. The means to understanding the tradeoffs involved in this process can be provided by analysis and visualization tools. The goal is to provide readily understood information that reflects the tradeoffs and impact of various system designs.  If one considers the baseline simulation and the subsequent trade studies each as an excursion, then the high-level visualization objective is to enable the comparison of excursions in a readily understood manner. Spider Graph visualization was developed and integrated in the prototype CEE as an analysis and visualization tool. Figure 11 shows an example of a spider graph plot generated as part of a WARCON analysis. The metrics of interest are arranged as axes emanating from a central point on the plot. For each excursion of the analysis, the resultant measures are plotted on each axis, the points are connected, and the central area is color filled. Multiple excursions can be viewed at the same time, and instant comparison of excursion suitability along multiple domains is possible. Metrics can be added/deleted/scaled to reflect the specific interests and requirements of the intended audience. The Spider Graph tool is used by the WARCON to view results to support analysis. We are integrating the Spider Graph application into the room so it can be used as shared resource for the team. One component of the Spider Graph is used to access the analysis results stored in the distributed data repositories as shown in Figure 12. Another component has been modified to provide a distributed capability to allow team members to conduct concurrent interactive analysis as well as asynchronous distributed data analysis. EMBED PBrush  Figure 11: Spider graph exampleFigure 12. Spider Chart Analysis6.  SummaryThe Collaborative Engineering Enterprise is currently in the early stage of development. There is a lot of work yet to be done including identifying and documenting specific requirements for each program that will employ the CEE. The first version of the CEE has been completed and is undergoing tests with a Virtual Private Network (VPN). It will be disseminated to the WARCON IPT/PDG teams to use as soon testing is successfully completed.Hardware, software, telecommunication and network technology advances enable us to create the virtual enterprise; however, technology by itself does not ensure the coming of the virtual enterprise. Rather, it is an enabler. The CEE will provide capabilities to enhance the IPT/PDG team operations.ReferencesRiley, B., Schmorrow, D., Harvey, E.; Kollmorgen, G; “ Warfighting Concepts to Future Weapon System Design (WARCON)”, Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 00F-SIW-108, Sept 2000.Roberts, E; Newton, R; “WARCON JSB Testbed: A Case Study for Interoperability of Disparate Simulation Architectures”, Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 00F-SIW-075, Sept. 2000.Hofer, R., “WARCON: Warfighting Concepts Experimentation Enterprise and Enabling Technologies,” The MSIAC’s M&S Journal Online, Winter 2001 Issue, v.3, no. 2: http://www.msiac.dmso.mil/journal/sp0123/warcon23.htmlThe Source for Java Language: http://java.sun.comJohansen, R.; “Groupware: Leading Business Teams.” Addison Wesley, Reading, MA, 1991. Author BiographiesHENRY NG is the Head of the Visualization and Computing Systems Section of the Advanced Information Technology branch in Naval Research Laboratory. He has been actively involved in simulation and modeling over twenty years. Prior to joining NRL, he was the Head of the Simulation and Modeling branch of the Warfare Analysis department of NSWCDD in White Oak, Maryland. He was the architect of a large-scale sea, space, and land battle force level simulation model known as MARS (Multi-warfare Assessment and Research System). Henry was a member of the Technical Support Team to support DMSO Architecture Management Group  (AMG) to develop High Level Architecture during 1994 –1996. He was awarded with a Navy Meritorious Civilian Service Award for his contribution in Modeling & Advanced Distributed Simulation in December 1994.  LCDR DYLAN SCHMORROW, serves as a scientist and program manager at the Office of Naval Research (ONR) and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). He is responsible for interdisciplinary research into breakthrough information and human systems technologies for use in advanced defense applications. In these roles, he conducts, manages and coordinates virtual environment, augmented cognition, biomedical, neural science, and modeling & simulation program development and implementation that results in rapid transition of ONR and DARPA science and technology to the Armed Forces. Additional duties include advising and evaluating naval science and technology programs and serving as strategic planner.  LCDR Schmorrow received a commission in the U.S. Navy in 1993 and completed naval flight training in April of 1994. He initially served at the Naval Air Warfare Center Aircraft Division, Warminster, Pennsylvania from 1994-1996 as both a branch head of the biomedical support branch and an acceleration research project officer in the crew systems department. During this time, he deployed to USS Dwight D. Eisenhower in support of Deny Flight and Provide Promise Operations in the Former Yugoslavia. He was subsequently selected and served as the John G. Jenkins Postdoctoral Fellow in Applied Cognitive Research at the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, CA from 1996-1998. His academic training includes study at Western Michigan University and the Naval Postgraduate School. He holds a Ph.D. and four masters degrees.BENJAMIN RILEY is a Senior Research Associate with Georgia Tech Research Institute and Program Director for WARCON.  He is assigned to the Office of Naval Research and is the Program Director for WARCON.  He is a retired active duty naval officer and P-3 anti-submarine aircraft tactical Coordinator, squadron commander, and wing commander.  Navy staff assignments included tours on the staffs of the Office of the Secretary of Defense and Chief of Naval Operations.  He has a Bachelor of Arts from the University of Virginia and Master of Arts from the Naval War College and Salve Regina University.SULEYMAN GULEYUPOGLU is a research scientist of ITT Industries, Inc., working at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory as an on-site contractor. He received his Ph.D. degree in Engineering Science and Mechanics from The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL. His current research interests include distributed simulations, virtual reality, collaborative engineering, and expert systems.FRANK SEGARIA is a computer scientist at the Advanced Information Technology Branch at NRL. Frank has extensive experience in the modeling and simulation, mission planning and software engineering. For the past two years, Mr. Segaria has conducted performance assessment on the HLA RTI in supporting of Naval applications for the Navy Modeling and Simulation Program Office (N6M). Specifically, he was responsible for the design, develop, and testing of an Aggregation/Deaggregation minefield Federation.  This allows different abstraction levels of simulations to interoperate in joint simulations.  In addition, he was also part of the Consistent Network Information Stream (CNIS) team, which used agent technology to develop a system to gather information for many different sources to provide a consistent tactical picture for different level of commands. Mr. Segaria received a B.S in Computer Science from the University of Maryland in 1993. References PAGE 9