Modeling and Simulation Support to Enduring Freedom Mobility Planning and Crisis ResponseMaj Thomas H. Irish, PhDRandall G. Johnson.Lt Col Michael D. ShirleyCapt Kenneth S. BrowneUnited States Air Force, Air Mobility CommandStudies and Analysis Division402 Scott Dr.Unit 3L3Scott Air Force Base, IL  62225618-229-4306, 618-229-4314, 618-229-4303, 618-229-4301tom.irish@scott.af.mil, randall.johnson@scott.af.mil, mike.shirley@scott.af.mil, kenneth.browne@scott.af.milKeywords:Modeling and Simulation, Mobility, Transportation, Military Analysis. ABSTRACT:  This paper describes how modeling and simulation (M&S) was used to support crises response decisions at the United States Air Force (USAF) Air Mobility Command (AMC).  In particular, the paper will focus on M&S efforts used to provide decision support to the senior leadership of AMC in the early weeks of Operation ENDURING FREEDOM.  The primary M&S tools used were the Airlift Flow Model (AFM), the Airlift Cycle Analysis Spreadsheet (ACAS) and the SimViewer.  AFM is a highly detailed, stochastic discrete event simulation model of the strategic airlift system.  It has primarily been used to perform long term force structure and infrastructure analysis, not near real time crisis response analysis.  ACAS is a moderately aggregated spreadsheet that implements an expected value model of the strategic airlift system.  ACAS primary usage has been as a “first look” approximation at the beginning of large studies concentrating on future force or infrastructure requirements.  Finally, SimViewer is a commercial visualization tool for global transportation systems recently developed by the Daedalic corporation.  AMC used SimViewer to visualize AFM output to rapidly validate and troubleshoot networks and AFM inputs.  SimViewer was also used to visually demonstrate the flow of aircraft and resources to decision makers throughout AMC.  This paper will provide examples of how each of these models was used to perform the analysis described.IntroductionAs with many other aspects of American life after September 11, 2001, the activities of the Studies and Analysis Division, Plans and Programs Directorate of the United States Air Force Air Mobility Command, radically changed.  Prior to September 11, the military and civilian operations research analysts assigned to this division performed studies taking several weeks or months to complete concerning projected force or infrastructure requirements in the next two to twenty years.  Immediately following September 11 both timeframes changed and the analysts began to focus on issues ranging from the next day or two to at most one or two months in the future.  Further these new “studies” were being completed in hours, instead of months.  This paper describes how the authors used the available modeling and simulation tools to aid AMC senior leaders with crisis response decision making.The paper is organized in the following manner.  We begin with a brief description of AMC’s role in Operation ENDURING FREEDOM and the authors’ role in providing analysis support to AMC and other DoD senior leaders.  A primer follows this on AMC airlift networks and airlift terms.  A brief description of the three primary M&S tools used by the authors:  the Airlift Flow Model (AFM), the Airlift Cycle Analysis Spreadsheet (ACAS), and the SimViewer is then presented.  The remaining sections of the paper provide examples of the analysis conducted by the authors.AMC and ENDURING FREEDOMENDURING FREEDOM is the United States military response to the attacks on New York and Washington D.C. on 11 September 2001.   The AMC role within Enduring Freedom is to provide air mobility support to all deploying Department of Defense (DOD) forces and their allies.  This role includes strategic airlift of personnel and equipment using AMC owned aircraft, contracting civilian air carriers as required to airlift personnel and bulk cargo, aerial refueling of deploying aircraft, as well as the providing of airlift and aerial refueling forces to the warfighting commander.The following sections begin with a description of an AMC airlift network with definitions of the pertinent terms.  This is followed by a discussion of the authors’ role in support of ENDURING FREEDOM using M&S tools.AMC Airlift NetworkWhen directed by the United States Transportation Command (TRANSCOM) to airlift personnel and cargo in support of a contingency operation or war, AMC establishes an airlift network.  The network consists of cargo and passenger aircraft, the aircrews required to operate the aircraft, airfields, and support equipment and personnel.The size and composition of the aircraft fleet, as well as the airfields utilized, are determined in large part by the Time Phased Force Deployment Document (TPFDD), which is created by the combatant forces.  The TPFDD identifies the forces (cargo and personnel) that are to be airlifted, their pick-up location, their drop-off location, when they are available for pick-up, and when they are required to be delivered.  Thus the TPFDD defines the level of effort, required to meet its movement requirements.   From this information, AMC determines the size of the airlift fleet and the number of assigned aircrews required.The TPFDD explicitly defines two types of airfields within the airlift network.  The first is the aerial port of embarkation (APOE) where the cargo and personnel are loaded on aircraft.  APOEs are often, but not exclusively, located within the continental United States (CONUS).  The second type of airfield is the aerial port of debarkation (APOD), which is where the cargo and passengers are off-loaded.  APODs are typically located near the operations theater.Typically, the long distances between APOEs and APODs preclude direct flights.  Therefore, AMC establishes en route airfields where aircraft can stop, refuel, be repaired, and change aircrews if necessary.  AMC has a number of established en route locations and the specific locations utilized are determined by the routes necessary to service the APOE and APOD pairs as well the number of aircraft flowing within the network.A subset of en route airfields  is the aircrew staging base, or simply stage bases.  AMC employs a “pony express” operations concept during strategic airlift deployments.  Aircraft move non-stop through the network, while the crews are replaced at selected en route bases.  These bases are the stage bases.  Crews are also staged within the CONUS at “home stations” on the east and/or west coast depending on the direction of the TPFDD flow.  The home stations are those bases where the AMC cargo aircraft are permanently stationed.Thus, a typical aircraft cycle begins at a home station with its first aircrew.  The aircraft flies to an APOE, on loads cargo and/or passengers and then moves on to a coastal stage base.  A new crew will then take the aircraft to one or more en route locations where it is refueled, repaired if necessary, and manned with a new crew when required.  The aircraft will continue in this manner until it reaches the designated APOD to off load its cargo and/or passengers.  From there it will flow back to another APOE stopping at en route bases and a home station as required for fuel or new aircrews.Of course none of the airfields described have unlimited ability to service arriving aircraft.  The necessary resources include material handling equipment (MHE), servicing equipment, support personnel, and fuel.  Within AMC these resources (except for fuel) are typically aggregated within working maximum on the ground (working MOG).  Working MOG is defined as the maximum number of aircraft that can be serviced (worked) simultaneously so that all of them can depart the airfield within their scheduled ground time [1].  Fuel is typically accounted for by a daily allocation to AMC aircraft.ENDURING FREEDOM M&S Decision SupportFrom September 11 until the initiation of Enduring Freedom, the authors employed M&S tools to evaluate the feasibility of alternative deployment plans and airlift networks as they were developed.  Among the many factors that were evaluated were the required number and staging locations of airlift air crew members, numbers of airlift aircraft required, aircraft routing, en route support locations, and off-load mobility enabler requirements.  The results of the analysis were provided to the appropriate deliberate war planners, logistics planners, and the AMC Tanker and Airlift Control Center (TACC). This paper provides unclassified examples of the analysis performed in support of the developing and constantly changing ENDURING FREEDOM mobility plan and provided daily to AMC’s senior leaders.During the first several weeks of the actual operation, AMC analysts continued their analysis of the airlift network, providing invaluable information and insight to AMC leadership.  Among their many contributions, their analysis was the basis of the AMC-approved aircrew staging plan.  They also identified potential choke points (fuel, mobility handling equipment/personnel, diplomatic clearances, etc.) within the airlift network before they occurred so that the appropriate mitigating actions could be initiated.  Their daily analysis of ENDURING FREEDOM mobility support rapidly gained attention at the highest levels of AMC and evolved into a daily briefing provided to the AMC commander and his staff of general officers.  The AMC commander termed the daily AMC analysis briefing his “Long Pole in the Tent” analysis.M&S ToolsAs previously mentioned, the M&S tools used in support of ENDURING FREEDOM analysis were AFM, ACAS, and the SimViewer.  The following sections discuss each model or tool in turn.Airlift Flow ModelAFM is a government owned, UNIX-based model that simulates the airlift network.  It is a stochastic discrete event simulation model capable of modeling AMC policies, procedures, operations, aircraft, air bases, cargo, passengers, and support resources [2].  Using an actual TPFDD as an input, AFM simulates a given fleet of aircraft moving the required cargo and passengers from the appropriate APOE to the required APOD, through any needed en route stops.  The simulated aircraft will then transit the airlift network and pick up a new mission to move cargo.  The model can continue the process for up to 180 simulated days, or until all requirements have been airlifted to their destination [2].AFM performs three major tasks:  simulation control, mission planning, and mission execution.  Simulation control includes random number generation control and input and output functions.  During mission planning, AFM prioritizes movement requirements by available to load dates and required delivery and then marries a specific aircraft to the next eligible requirement.  Based on the routes input to the model, AFM plans the entire airlift cycle for the selected aircraft by reserving fuel and MOG at each of the air bases visited at the time it is planned to arrive.  If insufficient resources (fuel or MOG) exist when required, the model will attempt to route the aircraft differently, or select another requirement, until it finds a feasible route for the selected aircraft [2].  Once a mission is planned, the model will move the aircraft through the network during the mission execution phase.  During execution, the aircraft will be subject to any number of stochastic events such as winds, servicing delays, or aircraft equipment failures.Any number of output statistics is available from AFM.  These include network performance statistics such as cargo/passengers delivered by day or unit force closure statistics.  Resource utilization statistics such as fuel consumed by location or maximum number of aircraft on the ramp per location are also readily obtainable.Airlift Cycle Analysis SpreadsheetACAS is a moderately aggregated representation of a single airlift cycle implemented as an Excel spreadsheet with macros.  It was developed by analysts assigned to the Studies and Analysis Division of AMC and has been modified and improved over the years.  ACAS implements an expected value solution of an airlift cycle using standard airlift planning factors [1]. ACAS inputs include the number and type of aircraft to be utilized, APOE and APOD, and any en route locations.  Based on the distances involved, the aircraft utilized, average cargo payloads, MOG at each location, and planned ground times, ACAS can calculate the mean tonnage and passengers delivered per day in an airlift cycle.  Or if given a specific amount of cargo and passengers, the model will determine the mean time required to move it all.  Other statistics available to the modeler include mean aircraft inter-arrival times and the number of aircrews required at a stage base to meet the demand.SimViewerSimViewer is a PC-based application for visualizing mobility model outputs.  SimViewer is a commercially available product developed and distributed by Daedalic Industries Inc.  SimViewer requires data in an xml format, so that any mobility model output properly formatted in xml can be graphically displayed.  SimViewer provides a view of the globe that can be rotated or zoomed as the user desires.  As the simulation progresses, aircraft are depicted on the globe moving from base to base.  The viewer has a full selection of filters and switches to allow the user the capability of drilling down into the data and view many levels of detailed information.  Other views include individual airfield ramps and cargo delivery information.M&S Analysis ResultsProvided below are several examples of the mobility planning and crisis response support conducted by the authors since September 11.  The examples are grouped by the model or tool used to conduct the analysis.AFM Modeling ExamplesDue to its capability to model the entire airlift network with a high degree of fidelity and detail, AFM was used extensively leading up to and during the first several weeks of ENDURING FREEDOM.  It was used to provide and/or validate operation-specific mobility planning factors as well as to conduct rapid “what-if” analysis.  Several examples of these studies follow.Mobility Planning FactorsPrior to any aircraft actually moving any cargo or passengers, mobility planners at AMC, TRANSCOM, and US Central Command (CENTCOM) spent several weeks building the ENDURING FREEDOM TPFDD and designing an airlift network capable of moving the cargo and passengers in the required time frame.  Essentially, the commands agreed to build a TPFDD and airlift network that could transport on average A stons/day and B passengers/day.The AMC contingency planners used “rule-of-thumb” and standard planning factors [1] to establish an airlift network to meet the desired throughput levels.   In order to validate the contingency planners’ solution, the authors modeled the airlift network as defined by the planners, including the number and types of aircraft, aircraft routings, and airfield MOGs at the APOEs, APODs, and en route locations.  In order to determine the full capability of the network, the authors “inflated” the ENDURING FREEDOM TPFDD cargo and passenger numbers by a constant value.  Since AFM will only move the cargo as it exists in the TPFDD, additional cargo had to be added in order to move more than A stons/day.Upon performing several replications of AFM using the planned network and inflated TPFDD, it was determined that the expected mean capability of the network was 1.02A stons/day and 1.01B passengers/day.   Based on these results, the network was implemented as planned.Of additional concern, was the amount of jet fuel that AMC would require at the en route and off-load locations.  The Defense Energy Support Center (DESC) of the Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) is responsible for ensuring that sufficient fuel stocks are bought and maintained to support day-to-day as well as contingency or wartime operations.  Again prior to the execution of the ENDURING FREEDOM, (and during the operation as plans changed and evolved) the authors used AFM to model the airlift network as designed by the AMC contingency planners and the most current TPFDD in order to provide a fuel usage forecast to DESC.  AFM is particularly well suited for fuel usage forecasts because it accurately fuel plans each flight leg, using Air Force technical publication data and methods, based on the cargo on-board and the leg distance.  The DESC fuel purchases and stockage levels were then based on the AFM forecasts until sufficient actual usage data became available.As described above, MOG levels are an integral part of any airlift network and as expected, the equipment and personnel that comprise a certain level of MOG are a valuable limited resource.  Obviously, it is desired that sufficient equipment and personnel deploy to the APODs in order to off-load the cargo and equipment within the required timeframes.  However, since these are valuable limited resources, AMC doesn’t want to deploy excess capability either, since the additional resources may be required else where at some time in the future.  Therefore, the authors were tasked to provide estimates of required MOG levels at certain APODs.In one particular instance, a proposed TPFDD required approximately 90% of all cargo and passenger throughput to be off-loaded at a single APOD, say base X.  The authors performed a sensitivity analysis to determine the sufficient MOG level at that location.   Using the proposed TPFDD and the defined ENDURING FREEDOM airlift network, we varied the MOG level at the APOD at 3, 5, and 8.  Figure 4.1.1 graphically provides the results.  It is clear that a MOG of 5 was adequate to meet the requirement and that a MOG of 8 was not required.Figure 4.1.1 Cumulative Cargo Delivery Profiles for Various MOG Levels At APOD X What-if AnalysisAs mentioned above, during the first several weeks of the actual operation, the authors continued their analysis of the airlift network, providing invaluable information and insight to AMC leadership.  Below is one example of the type of analysis conducted on a daily basis for the AMC commander and his staff.The authors, in response to questions from the AMC commander and his general officers, conducted the following what-if examples.  The excursions were modeled in AFM and completed within a six hour period before the daily commander’s meeting.  In this specific example, the AMC senior leadership was concerned about the effect on cargo delivery caused by unfavorable weather conditions at two locations.  The first location of concern, case one, was Ramstein Air Base, Germany.  Originally the assumption was to shut down the airfield for 18 hours.  However, after running the simulation with Ramstein closed for 18 hours, it was observed that the delivery profile differed little from the baseline.  An increase in down time for Ramstein was then implemented.  The simulation was re-accomplished with Ramstein being unavailable for 60 hours.  This increase in down time showed little decrease in the delivery profile as well, concluding that the system is robust enough to absorb the stress case one presented.Case two concerned Lajes Air Base, Azores, Portugal which is periodically closed due to excessive winds.  The assumption here was that Lajes would be shut down every 8 hours for a period of 4 hours over an 18 hour period.  Again the simulation was completed and as before the results showed little deviation to the delivery profile from the baseline.  Just as in the Ramstein case, the stress to the system was increased.  Lajes was shut down for 6 hours every 10 hours for a period of 72 hours.  And again, as with the Ramstein case, the system proved that it was more than capable of handling the deviation.The final excursion, case three, concerned fuel.  The AMC fuel allocation was decreased by 50% at one of the major en route locations.  As before, there was little to no change in the delivery profile from the baseline.Figure 4.1.2 shows the impact in the delivery cargo of all three cases versus what was required. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 4.1.2. Cargo Delivery Profiles for What-if AnalysisThis figure emphasizes the point that the network used at this point of ENDURING FREEDOM was robust and able to absorb changes to the system based on the published TPFDD.  It also illustrates the flexibility that AFM possesses in its ability to handle quick “what-if” situations.ACAS Modeling ExamplesThe availability of and proper positioning for crews was an area of concern from the very beginning of Operation ENDURING FREEDOM.  With over half of the AMC crew force in the Reserve Component, the prospect of Reserve activation as well as the extent and timing of a potential activation had to be considered.  Without an operations plan that had been through the deliberate planning process, these issues had to be resolved as the operation developed.A critical question that had to be addressed was “Will the Reserves have to be activated?”  The need for Reserve activation could be generated by two events.  One event is a lack a crews to meet the day-to-day requirement of the command’s operation concept.  The second event would be a lack of crews to keep the operation going over the long term.Due to its ability to perform rapid analysis on crew requirements and the independent nature of the different airlift cycles utilized during ENDURING FREEDOM, the analysts chose ACAS to model the aircrew requirement.Crews Required To Activate The NetworkRecall that AMC employs a “pony express” operation for their aircrews during strategic airlift deployments.  Aircraft move non-stop through the network, while the crews are replaced at selected en route bases.  The requirement in this case is to ensure that sufficient crews are in place at the en route bases such that there is always a crew available to take an aircraft when it arrives at an en route base.  If this objective could not be met with the active duty crews and Reserve volunteer crews, some portion of the reserves would have to be activated.The number of crews required at an individual base is governed by the expected inter-arrival time of aircraft coupled with the minimum ground times that crews must have to allow for adequate crew rest and mission preparation.  At the time this analysis was conducted, the Operation ENDURING FREEDOM airlift had evolved into basically three cycles that were essentially independent of one another.  One C-5 and commercial carrier cycle was in operation from the United States to Diego Garcia via Guam.  Another, a completely C-17 cycle, was in operation from the United States to Central Asia via Lajes AB, Sigonella NAS, Sicily, and Incirlik AB, Turkey.  Another combined C-5 and C-17 cycle was in operation between the United States and Southwest Asia via Moron AB, Spain.After allocating aircraft to each of the cycles proportionately according to the tonnage that was tasked to that region at the time, the intermediate statistics in ACAS provided the number of crews required by aircraft type for each base in each cycle.  Since these numbers are expected values, the number of crews required to meet the demand at increasing levels of certainty could theoretically be calculated using queuing theory.  However, the planners who were provided the data were satisfied with applying “profound insight”  (expert judgment) to the numbers straight out of the model to arrive at the number of crews to position at the en route stage bases.  Results from the spreadsheet model indicated there were sufficient crews to operate the network.Crews Required For Sustained OperationsAMC aircrews are limited in the total number of hours they can fly over rolling 30-day and 120-day windows.  Therefore, another concern was ensuring that the number of crews was sufficient to prevent the crews from exceeding their monthly flying hour limits.  The number of crews required in the system to prevent crews from exceeding monthly flying hour restrictions is governed by the number of flying hours that will be flown.  For Operation ENDURING FREEDOM, the number of aircraft that would be allocated to the operation was known and the expected utilization rate AMC planned to achieve from each aircraft type was based on standard planning factors.  From these two facts, the total flying hours to be flown on a daily basis was determined by:Daily Flying Hours = Committed Aircraft X Utilization Rate (Flying Hours/Day)Chart 4.2.2.a shows the average number of flying hours each C-5 crewmember would have accumulated at any point during the first 30 days of the scenario.  Assumptions included the number of crews available, the number of aircraft involved, and the Utilization Rate (Flying Hours per Day) on each aircraft. EMBED MSGraph.Chart.8 \s Figure 4.2.2.a.  C-5 Crewmember Cumulative 30 Day Flying HoursChart 4.2.2.a also shows that augmenting crews increases the rate at which crews accumulate flying hours.  Usually, if a mission segment cannot be completed in less than 16-18 hours, the normal crew compliment will have to be augmented with extra crewmembers in each crew position to allow crewmembers to rest during the mission.  If this practice is necessary, crewmembers accumulate flying hours more rapidly and the need to activate Reserve forces comes more rapidly. A similar chart (Chart 4.2.2.b) was created for C-17 crews.  EMBED MSGraph.Chart.8 \s Figure 4.2.2.b.  C-17 Crewmember 30 Day Cumulative Flying HoursWith the upper limit for acceptable crewmember 30-Day Cumulative Flying hours set at 125-150 hours, the charts demonstrated that there were sufficient crews available to AMC to fly the required hours without exceeding the flying hour limit for crews.  This conclusion assumed that AMC would not augment crews more the half the time.Estimating Cumulative Flying HoursThe next concern of AMC senior leadership was whether the current level of effort would require Reserve activation.  In other words, would the effect of the higher level of effort required for ENDURING FREEDOM drive aircrew cumulative aircrew flying hours over the monthly limits at a rate that would require a Reserve activation.Current AMC data systems do not provide a means of tracking the cumulative flying hours on the crew force.  Each individual keeps track of their own time and reports results at the squadron level.  The unit then will only report difficulty to the higher headquarters if squadron or wing leadership perceives a problem in meeting future tasking.  Maintenance systems provide aircraft flying time, but these systems require input from aircraft maintenance forms.  This data is usually not submitted to computerized systems until the aircraft returns to home station.  Relying on either of these systems for aircrew flying hours would have put AMC in a reactive mode.Since cumulative aircrew flying hours could not be measured directly, a method had to be found to estimate the metric based on what was known.  “Tons delivered” is a metric that is reported daily and gets heavy scrutiny in the headquarters.  This metric became the basis for the cumulative aircrew flying hour statistic.  Results from the Airlift Cycle Analysis Spreadsheet showed the number of flying hours in a cargo delivery cycle.  Average payload data from standard planning factors [1] coupled with total tons delivered each day yielded the number of cargo delivery cycles completed each day. Using the following formula:Tons Delivered (by Aircraft)/Average Aircraft Payload = Cycles completed per dayIn the next step, the number of cycles per day was multiplied by hours per cycle to derive the number of flying hours flown by day.Cycles Completed X Hours per Cycle = Total HoursA spreadsheet was created to tabulate the number of cumulative 30-day flying hours for the crews.  Constructing charts from this data showed the trends over time in flying hour demands on the crews.  The spreadsheets also enable projections to be made concerning flying hours that would be accumulated with an anticipated future demand.  Chart 4.2.3 shows a sample of the output from this spreadsheet for Day 40.  The data for dates prior to Day 40 was an estimate of cumulative flying time based on actual cargo delivered data while data after Day 40 was projected cumulative flying hours based on an assumed cargo delivery profile.  This chart indicated that the crews were not accumulating hours very quickly prior to Day 40 and even if the demand increased dramatically, the cumulative totals would plateau out at less than 120 hours by day 70. EMBED MSGraph.Chart.8 \s Figure 4.2.3.  Estimated 30 Day Cumulative Flying HoursSimViewer Analysis ExamplesThe SimViewer tool was an invaluable aid in setting up and troubleshooting AFM excursions.  While the authors were able to work as a team and rapidly build AFM input files for new scenarios, AFM has many complex and interacting input files and input mistakes or overlooked necessary changes were common.  The authors used SimViewer to perform rapid validation of input values and rapid troubleshooting of problems.Additionally, by using SimViewer, the authors discovered a logic error within AFM that could bias cargo throughput results.  To prevent aircraft from over flying restricted countries, AFM routes include user specified waypoints that direct aircraft around the restricted areas.  When AFM output was displayed within SimViewer it was discovered that aircraft were not flying through the appropriate waypoints when they were flying from an APOD to the next en route location.  Depending on the distance required to fly around restricted areas, the cycle time of aircraft could be significantly reduced thus increasing the amount of cargo delivered within AFM.  Because of this discovery, the AFM maintenance contractor was able to make a simple modification that solved the problem and eliminated the possible bias problem.SummaryDue the terrorist attacks on September 11, the analysts of the Studies and Analysis Division of HQ AMC found themselves conducting rapid mobility planning and crisis response studies at a rate and planning timeframe that they were unfamiliar with.  However, they were able to meet the demands of AMC senior leaders to provide the required analysis for several reasons.  First, the analysts were familiar with the capabilities and limitations of their models and tools since they used the models daily.  Therefore, there was no “ramp-up” time required to get the models set-up and operating.  Secondly, the analysts were proactive in their approach.  Rather than wait for questions to come down to them, they anticipated the questions that might be asked and began working on setting up the models and were therefore ahead of the game when the actual questions came down.  Also, the models themselves were capable of the rapid analysis.  Graphical user interfaces for AFM that were developed over the last couple of years permitted rapid set-up and output analysis.   ACAS has a straightforward user interface that also allows for rapid input and output analysis.  Finally the user controls on SimViewer are easy to use and understand.Given all that, the work completed by the authors still could not have been done had it not been for the teamwork exhibited by each author and the other analysts assigned to the Studies and Analysis Division.  Often all four authors would work on the same excursion, inputting data into different input files or gathering required data.  This teamwork made the work not only possible, but enjoyable and rewarding as well.References[1]	Air Force Pamphlet 10-1403, “Air Mobility Planning Factors”, March 1, 1998.[2]	Boeing, “Mobility Analysis Support System (MASS) Migration”, Technical Report 059D009, Defense Enterprise Integration Services, Joint Requirements Analysis and Integration Directorate, 1996.Author BiographiesMaj Thomas H. Irish, PhD is an Operations Research Analyst at Headquarters Air Mobility Command, Directorate of Plans and Programs, Studies and Analysis Division, Scott Air Force Base, Illinois.  He has experience as an aircraft maintenance and fuels officer.  His current duties include airlift analysis and infrastructure modeling. Randall G. Johnson is an Operations Research Analyst at Headquarters Air Mobility Command, Directorate of Plans and Programs, Studies and Analysis Division, Scott Air Force Base, Illinois.  He has experience as a rated airlift crewmember and his current primary duties include airlift analysis.Lt Col Michael D. Shirley is the Modeling Branch Chief at Headquarters Air Mobility Command, Directorate of Plans and Programs, Studies and Analysis Division, Scott Air Force Base, Illinois.  He is responsible for identifying the modeling requirements for the Studies and Analysis Division then building and managing programs to meet these needs.  He is a former combat missile crew commander and participates as an air mobility functional expert representing Air Mobility Command in war-gaming exercises.Capt Kenneth S. Browne is an Operations Research Analyst at Headquarters Air Mobility Command, Directorate of Plans and Programs, Studies and Analysis Division, Scott Air Force Base, Illinois.  He is the Senior Analyst for Strategic Air Mobility Systems.  His past duty stations include Lajes Field, Azores, Portugal and Wright Patterson AFB, OH. EMBED Excel.Chart.8 \s 