 Towards a Methodology for the VV&A of simulationsR Jacquart R Miller Guy Zanon D Giradot and M DumbleAbstract:A previous contribution by the Jacquart and Miller was devoted to a clarification of VV&A processes, putting the emphasis on Accreditation and Validation.  Some problems with the VV&A processes of that time were specifically mentioned. The current processes are characterized by the important on-line documentation on the DMSO web-site (http://www.msiac.dmso.mil/vva/).These new reference documents are discussed in this article with respect to their internal consistency and ability to address the main problems of VV&A. A framework for VV&A is then proposed, based on the nature, products and organization related to VV&A. In essence , a distinction is made between  3 areas : problem-solving, M&S, and Systems/Software Engineering.. The proposed framework is specifically aimed at supporting the first two areas listed above and we discuss their relationships to VV&A and, more generally, to customers satisfaction.IntroductionBackgroundThe United Kingdom and France have begun a study, in order to produce a more comprehensive Validation, Verification and Accreditation (VV&A) framework for modelling and simulation (M&S).  This work is being conducted under the auspices of the Anglo-French Defence Research Group (AFDRG).This VV&A framework will be used as the context for two different M&S applications.  The UK study team will apply the framework to Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA), while the French participants address an Operational Analysis (OA) application.ContextThis paper is a description of work in progress and is deliberately aimed as an input to a workshop i.e the Simulation Interoperability Workshop. Our thoughts are still immature but we believe that there are three crucial areas:Problem DefinitionMeasures of validity Organisational aspectsWe are tentatively proposing how these might be combined to form an overarching framework.A considerable amount of work has been This analysis resulted in the observation that most of the VV&A documents were “process” description oriented, i.e. they were describing “what to do” not “why”. The description of activities and sequences of activities were formalised by diagrams representing what was considered as the full FEDEP process and its accompanying VV&A process.  However, when we consider the “why” of using or indeed constructing M&S, we find there are a number of crucial questions: What is the overall problem which the M&S is supposed to alleviate?Who is the beneficiary of the activity?How is the benefit measured?What are the delivered products at each stage of the lifecycle?Who are the Stakeholders?What are their roles and activities during the whole M&S life-cycle?What are the essential processes of the VV&A activities?MethodologyIntroductionGiven that the point of the M&S activity is to alleviate a problem, the final stage of VV&A is the agreement of the problem owner that his problem has been alleviated. This essentially is the Accreditation process. From this point of view Accreditation is only valid for that problem and can only take place after using the M&S.  However, complex simulations do not deliver knowledge, decisions, or actions in a binary mode (i.e. valid / non-valid). Rather, complex simulations have to inform decision-makers and to balance between confidence, usefulness, cost and time. It is therefore crucially important to determine the “just good enough” factor and to manage both time and costs. Problem DefinitionThe first step is therefore to extract from the problem owner a precise statement of his problem and the context.  This should be independent of any M&S connotation to avoid imposing a solution on the problem at the beginning.  This approach was developed by Hone and Moulding, who proposed that there are two domains which both have to be addressed in the validation process (Figure 1). Figure 1These domains are defined as:The problem domain is the world environment in which the problem exists.The application domain is the business environment in which the problem owner operates It is only through consideration of both of these domains that the proper understanding of the requirements of M&S can be achieved.  These requirements can be defined as the Conceptual Model (CM) from which the M&S development can proceed.This approach then goes on to propose that a CM should be developed for each of the two domains, such that the requirements for each could be formally captured.  Combination of these two CMs will provide the overall CM for the M&S (Figure 2.).A key concept in this approach is that VV&A activities start immediately.  There is, therefore,  a validation step that confirms that the CM for the two domains are indeed consistent with the descriptions of the two domains, and a validation step  that confirms that the overall CM is consistent with the individual domain CMs (Figure3).Measures of MeritWithout a mechanism for quantifying validity it is difficult to see how validation could be achieved.  The use of Measures of Merit (MoM) is the suggested approach to capture the requirements / objectives at all stages We start in the problem domain by establishing quantitative targets which, if achieved, will fulfil the problem owners requirements. Essentially the problem owner defines the measures and acceptable quantity of each measure.  The output can be show graphically by a Kiviat Diagram, where the axes are associated with the MoMs, and the required and achieved measures can be plotted (Figure 4).From these quantitative measures further lower level quantitative measures can be derived as the development of the simulation proceeds.  In turn these lower level measures can be plotted as Kiviat diagrams. EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure 4Organisational AspectsAbove we enumerated a list of questions including those about products, activities and processes.  To address these the proposed VV&A methodological framework has three essential components: products, organisations and processes (Figure 5).Figure 5This must not be taken too literally as a strict chronology (there are many internal iteration steps between the specification of products and the specification of the organization before we begin to implement the process).Nevertheless, this approach suggests that we start with the products and then the organisations within a specific project and for a specific intended use. This diagram is not inconsistent with the current DMSO RPG which states that the VV&A processes have to be tailored with respect to the specific context. The Organisation When considering a complete simulation development, 4 groups of people have a stake:Those who own the problemThose in charge of developing the simulationThe VV&A agentsThe Subject Matter Experts (SME).The ProductsThe first product is the CM and we could therefore combine figures 3 and 4 as shown below (Figure 6).Figure 6Constraining the Conceptual ModelThe Conceptual Model at this stage is the ‘ideal’ CM, unconstrained by cost, time or any other requirement (e.g. to use existing components). The organisations first activity is to produce a realisable CM this can then becompared with the MoM originally agreed with the problem owner, Figure 7.  This is the framework for assessing how good is good enough. EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure 7We can therefore develop Figure 6 to show the evolution of the overall CM to the achievable CM, Figure 8.Figure 8This is turn can be developed to produce a specification and hence simulation product, Figure 9.Figure 9ProcessDisappointingly in our VV&A contribution our methodology does not propose or suggest a built-in process! We believe that the process will be the outcome of:- the definition of the products-	the specification of the organization: actors, roles, activities.The process will “simply” be the definition of the chronological execution of the activities shown by the previous specifications.We believe that this is not an inconvenience but an opportunity for the program manager and the application sponsor to actually tailor this process. Examples of this tailoring for specific application domains and realisation constraints are discussed as an example in [Miller & Allen, 96].Case StudiesIn the following two papers we describe the current state of two case studies for an acquisition problem and an analytical problem respectively Summary This paper is deliberately aimed as an input to a workshop as a description of thought and development in progress. We stress that the rationale for Modelling & Simulation is to alleviate problems and the final stage therefore of the the VV&A process, Accreditation, is the acknowledgement by the problem owner that such alleviation has occurred. A formal description of the problem and its context are therefore essential.However, the required alleviation is unlikely to occur unless there is a clear (but evolving) understanding of the product, organisation and process required at any given stage in the M&S project.Finally we would add that ‘the best is the enemy of the good’ and that the key to the successful development and use of M&S is a continuous evaluation of ‘How good is good enough’.AcknowledgementsThis research is being conducted by a working group under the auspices of the Anglo-French Defence Research Group. In France the research leading to this paper has been sponsored by the DGA/DSP/STTC and controlled by the DGA/DSP/CAD. and is directed by Daniel. Girardot.In the UK the research is sponsored by the MOD Corporate Research Programme and is directed by Robin MillerThe AuthorsDr RENE JACQUART is Research Scientist at ONERA/DTIM and has 30 years experience in computer science studies and applications. His research activities covered CAD/CAM systems, Software Engineering with a specific emphasis on Formal Techniques and Methods and, currently, Modelling and Simulation techniques related to VV&A. His work in VV&A put the emphasis on socio-technical aspects related to Requirements Engineering and Organizations modelling.Dr Jacquart is vice chair of the NATO IST panel, chair of the IST Technical Group TG006 on Organizations and Decision Architecture, and Editor in Chief of IST.	Dr ROBIN MILLER, after taking an Honours degree in Physics at Imperial College began his career with the Atomic Energy Authority. During this period he gained an MSc in Plasma Physics from Queen Mary College at London University, and obtained his Doctorate from Imperial College .He then moved to MoD Main Building where he managed part of the scientific research programme before moving into operational research. After a series of major Armoured Warfare studies, he set up the field trials in Germany and Canada and conducted the subsequently analysis which led to the purchase of the Combined Arms Tactical Trainer. This led to his current interest in VV&A. He is currently leading a MoD/industry team in developing a Business Game to show, practically, how Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) can support Smart Acquisition.DANIEL GIRARDOT is a Software Quality Engineer of the French Centre d'Analyse de Défense (CAD).  After a master's degree in physics, he became involved in operational analysis studies.  There, he worked on different domains of information science (systems, networks, graphics software…) and software methods and quality. In charge of VV&A for CAD since 1996, he is currently a member of a number of working groups, in particular with the UK and NATO.MARK DUMBLE is a self-employed Defence Consultant with over 12 years of experience in this field.  He graduated from University with an Honours Degree in Geology and a Masters Degree in Information Systems Engineering.He has worked at the UK Admiralty Research Establishment conducting research into Naval C4I, calculation of war stocks and the development of the UK High Level War-gaming Facility.He left the UK Civil Service in 1994 to work as a Consultant with Westland Systems Assessment Ltd, where he was responsible for a number of Operational Analysis studies predominantly in the field of Anti Submarine Warfare. Since 1996 Mark has been supporting Dr Robin Miller in a number of projects, but primarily in the fields of interoperable modelling and simulation research.  Mark became a self-employed defence consultant in 1999.List of references[Jacquart & Miller, 97] R. Jacquart, R. Miller: “The development of the VV&A process: a Franco-British view”. 14th DIS Workshop, March 1997.[DoD 5000.61] Department of Defence Instruction 5000.61A: “DoD M&S Verification, Validation and Accreditation”. October 5, 2001.[Zimmerman et al, 98] Ph. Zimmerman, G. Kamsickas, J. Schandua, S. Youngblood: “FEDEP Roles and Products”.SISO Workshop, Spring 1998.[Graffagnini et al, 99] J. Graffagnini, S. Youngblood, R. Lewis: “An overview of the VV&A process for the HLA FEDEP”. SISO Workshop, Spring 1999.[DG, 2002] D. Girardot:[PB, 2002] P. Bouc:[Pace, 99] D. Pace: “Use of Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) in simulation evaluation”. SISO Workshop, Fall 1999.[Might, 99] R. Might, R. Wallis, Col. F. Crain: “Developing requirements for analytical models and simulation”. 9th CGF Conference, 1999.[Pace, 2000] D. Pace: “Simulation Conceptual Model issues”. Proc. of 2000 Summer Computer  Simulation Conference.[Zeigler, 2000] B. Zeigler, H. Prachofer, Tag Gon Kim: “Theory of Modeling and Simulation”. Academic Press, 2000.[Kleijnen, 2000] J.P.C. Kleijnen: “Strategic directions in VV&A research”. Proc. of 2000 Winter Simulation Conference.[Pfleeger, 94] S.L. Pfleeger: “Experimental design and analysis in software engineering”. Sigsoft, vol 19, 4, 1994.[Miller & Allen, 96] R. Miller, P. Allen: “VV&A of synthetic environments: proposed definitions”. 14th DIS Workshop, 1996.[Brade, 2000] D. Brade: “Enhancing modeling and simulation accreditation by structuring verification and validation results”. Proc. of 2000 Winter Simulation Conference. 