Using Multimedia in an Air Force Modeling and Simulation Web-Based Course without Losing InstructionRonald W. TarrPatricia MulliganInstitute for Simulation and Training.3280 Progress DriveOrlando, Florida 32826-0544407-882-1391, 407-882-1398rtarr@ist.ucf.edu, pmulliga@ist.ucf.eduDianne ParrishAir Force Agency for Modeling and Simulation (AFAMS)12350 Research Parkway, Orlando, FL 32826-3276E-Mail:  Dianne.Parrish@afams.af.milTelephone:  DSN:  970-5771, Com:  (407) 208-5771FAX:  XXX-5990ABSTRACT: The use of M&S continues to increase as a major development in the military and the military’s supporting industries.  As these applications increase and the need to expand the use of M&S applications to all user domains, the demands on users, leaders and managers for integration of both technical and operational issues become increasingly complex. Thus imparting knowledge for efficient ways to manage the applications becomes a major educational challenge. The Air Force Agency for Modeling and Simulation (AFAMS) and University of Central Florida’s Institute for Simulation and Training (UCF-IST) have collaborated under a Joint Advanced Distributed Learning Co-Lab prototype program to explore innovative approaches to educating the USAF workforce on M&S using available training opportunities and identifying ways to fill these training shortfalls using cost-effective methods such as distributed learning environments (i.e., the Internet & World Wide Web).  The goal of this effort is to demonstrate the use of e-learning technologies to improve job performance of USAF personnel newly assigned to M&S jobs.  While designing this prototype for AFAMS, using the ADL guidelines (Joint Advanced Distributed Learning Co-Laboratory, 2001), the designer decided to use more multimedia to present information to the learner since the use of text alone would be less stimulating and might negatively affect retention.  Because Modeling and Simulation has a wealth of information to offer new personnel, the course needs to be highly interactive and engaging.  However, there was a concern that perhaps too much multimedia might hinder the instructional messages that needs to be conveyed.  This paper covers background information on the prototype project, information on multimedia applications, and some of the tools used to make courses interactive.  Other topics to be discussed include the benefits and limitations of multimedia and how they affect student learning and achievement and issues of reusability.   Provided in this paper is background information on multimedia and some of the tools used to make courses interactive.  Other topics to be discussed include the benefits and limitations of multimedia and how they affect student learning and achievement. IntroductionThe use of M&S continues to increase as a major development in the military and the military’s supporting industries.  As these applications increase and the need to expand the use of M&S applications to all user domains, the demands on users, leaders and managers for integration of both technical and operational issues become increasingly complex. Thus imparting knowledge for efficient ways to manage the applications becomes a major educational challenge. The Air Force Agency for Modeling and Simulation (AFAMS) and University of Central Florida’s Institute for Simulation and Training (UCF-IST) have collaborated under a Joint Advanced Distributed Learning Co-Lab prototype program to explore innovative approaches to educating the USAF workforce on M&S using available training opportunities and identifying ways to fill these training shortfalls using cost-effective methods such as distributed learning environments (i.e., the Internet & World Wide Web).  The goal of this effort is to demonstrate the use of e-learning technologies to improve job performance of USAF personnel newly assigned to M&S jobs.  While designing this prototype for AFAMS, using the ADL guidelines (Joint Advanced Distributed Learning Co-Laboratory, 2001), the designer decided to use more multimedia to present information to the learner since the use of text alone would be less stimulating and might negatively affect retention.  Because Modeling and Simulation has a wealth of information to offer new personnel, the course needs to be highly interactive and engaging.  However, there was a concern that perhaps too much multimedia might hinder the instructional messages that needs to be conveyed.  This paper covers background information on the prototype project, information on multimedia applications, and some of the tools used to make courses interactive.  Other topics to be discussed include the benefits and limitations of multimedia and how they affect student learning and achievement and issues of reusability.   Provided in this paper is background information on multimedia and some of the tools used to make courses interactive.  Other topics to be discussed include the benefits and limitations of multimedia and how they affect student learning and achievement. BackgroundThe United States Air Force, along with all the other branches of the Armed Forces, has determined that Modeling and Simulation technology is both desired and critical to the future capabilities of all aspects of military operations and readiness. Design and use of M&S for Air Force Title 10 responsibilities and determining the required level and quality of M&S support are complex tasks.  M&S helps Air Force professionals to make better decisions and improve warfighting skills, thereby enhancing readiness. The Air Force must leverage M&S expertise to realize the full benefit of M&S to the warfighter.  (AF M&S Master Plan, 2001). The military has determined a critical need for advanced M&S and is avidly pursuing its usage.  Several things have occurred over the last 5 years to make this possible, ranging from the development of policy and plans, reorganization of agencies and missions, and the recognition that the workforce needs to be trained on the use of this new technology, as it is actually a new way of doing business. As part of this process, the Air Force Agency for Modeling and Simulation (AFAMS) has been established and given the mission to assist in many cross-service programs that deal with M&S; thus training the M&S workforce fell to them. Actually, the requirement is being fulfilled by two programs, one that is formally looking at who the M&S workforce consists of and how best to establish a process to educate it. Although M&S has been around for 10 years, only recently have the advances in technology made its application so pervasive and useful to so many USAF mission areas. Currently, the USAF recognizes 6 major areas of M&S application, ranging from the oldest use of M&S-Training to the newest-Experimentation. Also included are test and evaluation, analysis, acquisition and wargaming. Originally viewed as primarily an analytic tool, M&S is now found in virtually ever aspect of the USAF mission, from military operations to advanced research. The challenge to the Air Force is with M&S’s rapid growth, many members of the workforce have little or no experience with its capability nor do they understand proper methods of applying it. The New ADL ProgramOne of the very practical challenges facing AFAMS and the USAF in educating its M&S workforce is the operational challenge facing all the services since the end of the Cold War-shrinking budgets and higher optempo. Specifically that translated into a situation in which a normal training program, i.e., resident functional course, was not feasible. Thus in conjunction with AFAMS academic partner, IST/UCF, a plan was developed to consider a non-traditional approach that focus on the new members of the USAF M&S workforce and that could be delivered making maximum use of the World Wide Web (WWW). This concept was submitted to the newly established Joint ADL Co-Lab in Orlando, whose mission is to explore and develop new methods of implementing the DoD ADL Initiative through funding of service prototypes. This prototype was intended to look at several aspects of ADL fundamentals, to include reuse, multi-service applications, Sharable Content Reference Model (SCORM) and advanced applications in learning such as multimedia. The prototype was funded and became one of the first ADL Prototypes to be initiated. At the present time the first phase of the prototype has been completed, and it has been tested at the Air War College, as part of the M&S elective there, and was formally demonstrated at the recent Interservice/Industry Training Simulation and Education Conference (I/ITSEC) 2001, where is was formally presented to the Deputy Undersecretary of Personnel & Readiness as well as the Assistant Director for M&S, HQ USAF. The prototype has several major features that make it both unique and a cutting edge application. These include: the extensive front-end analysis of learning requirements for the M&S workforce, the modular design, the comprehensive registration and interview of students resulting in an individual training plan, full integration with the very successful USAF Modeling and Simulation Resource Repository (MSRR) for access to myriads of relevant information, testing and certification integrated with USAF personnel for record update.  All of this executed through WWW and multimedia presentations that are being used only after they have been proven to work though iterative formative evaluation with both SMEs and target audience students. The prototype is also providing extensive knowledge and feedback on what aspects of multimedia work for different audiences and content domains. The Role of Multimedia   Richard Clark stated, “The best current evidence is that media are mere vehicles that deliver instruction but do not influence student achievement any more than the truck that delivers our groceries causes changes in our nutrition” (1983).  Does it matter how, where, and when we deliver instruction?  Educational research has focused on the influence of media on learning and the impact of technology in this debate.  What about using Multimedia; will the learner lose the instruction or gain achievement?  Multimedia has been present in many forms of instruction for the past 30+ years but is becoming more of a growing staple in distance education today, as the topics and students become more sophisticated.  Simply defined, multimedia is the use of more than one medium of communication to deliver a message or idea.  The growth of computer-based instruction and distance learning via the web has launched a new and exciting avenue for teaching difficult and sometimes obscure concepts in a non-traditional way.  The interest in multimedia can be seen across all areas of instruction:  education, industry and government.  The premise is that multimedia can provide a more effective approach to learning.  Multimedia uses videos, pictures, sound, animations, graphics, and text to present information.  The assumption made about multimedia is that it helps people learn.  Several researchers are trying to scientifically demonstrate that this assumption is fact rather than opinion (Najjar, 1996).  Understanding how individuals learn and understanding the needs of the audience is crucial to using multimedia in instruction.  Advantages of Multimedia (if well-implemented) enable students to learn at a pace that is comfortable for them.  Making material more interactive may promote more interest in the module or lesson among the users.  The use of multimedia in a lesson provides individual attention and flexibility to the learner.  “Each medium can be designed to be adjustable in intensity and appearance.  So, for example, sounds can be made louder or softer, text can be made larger or turned a different color…Images can be magnified or shrunk, edited or copied…” (CAST, UDL 2001). The recent advances in both bandwidth and processing power of desktop computers have made the broader use of multimedia possible technologically; the issue is how to make the best use pedagogically.  The use of audio in learning abstract concepts in an experiment supported the authors’ hypotheses that combining audio with visual (text, static, or dynamic illustrations) presentations would provide a difference in learning performance.  The authors concluded that the significant difference between the pretest and posttest scores was attributed to the use of multimedia.  “…when the visual was further elaborated with dynamic illustration, the audio not only drew students’ attention toward the dynamic illustration, but also explained step by step the visual image that helped to build connections between the abstract concept and the concrete illustration” (Lai, 2000).  Dual coding theory supports this concept because of the fact that learners possess a visual and a verbal information-processing component.  This principle supports “…that it is better to present an explanation using two modes of representation rather than one.” (Mayer & Moreno, 2001).  There has been a long ongoing disparity among researchers as to the amount of learning channels a learner uses to acquire information.  However, most of the research on learning styles has focused on learner control.  Multimedia offers the opportunity for the learner to control the sequencing and pacing of information.  The interactivity may help in reducing anxiety and improving the learners’ attitude, hence, aiding in better comprehension and generalization of knowledge (Beccue, Vila & Whitley, 2001).“Bells and Whistles” and “Eye Candy” have been the negative responses from individuals taking a course using too much multimedia, especially for certain target audiences or subjects.  Researchers are also finding the limitations multimedia has including the experimental design, learning styles, novelty effects and method vs. media. The little research conducted on multimedia instruction has left many researchers questioning the experimental design of such studies.  Lookatch reported that most multimedia research has failed to address the basics of control groups and other conditions that may affect learning and not necessarily the multimedia itself.  He attributes gains in learning to the amount of time used to prepare materials, instructional strategies and content to motivate the learner, not the use of multimedia.  The author states “media clearly enables the design of better instruction…multimedia and other technologies are simply tools that assist with instruction.  They have no more influence on achievement and wholeness than a scalpel has on healing” (Lookatch, 1997). The importance of knowing the audience and understanding how people learn was noted earlier.  As research continues, it seems to be that certain learners benefit from instruction using multimedia.  Smith & Woody conducted a research study that compared multimedia-teaching techniques with traditional classroom teaching.  The authors examined the possible influence of learning styles among the participants and how these styles were affected when multimedia was used.  They concluded that multimedia instruction had some benefits to students who learn more visually than verbally.  They stated, “…those students who prefer visual input to verbal input will benefit more…verbally oriented students’ performance does not improve, and may in fact suffer…” (Smith & Woody, 2000). In the case of the USAF sponsored program, the students come virtually from across the entire Service with variety of backgrounds. As part of the prototype, there will be various processes at the initial registration of students to determine more than the usual amount of information to better allow student access to the content in ways that better meets their needs. At one end will be information about their service experience, their educational background and their current area of assignment. At the other end will be a different set of questions that consider which approaches to their education might be more efficient. Although there are no proven methods to assess learner’s “style” and then prescribe the form of instruction method or media that will work best for that style. There are some more fundamental approaches, both in terms of practical issues (available time to study, level of technology they have access to, etc.) as well as preferences (students expresses desire for less text more graphics, more interactivity and discovery of information than straight presentation, etc) As research in intelligent tutoring progresses, the technology behind the Learning Management Systems will be expected to diagnose a learning activity and suggest alternative paths that a learner might find more efficient. Many researchers have reviewed other alternative advantages.  The novelty of using multimedia may have an initial increase in achievement, but as the students become more familiar with the new medium, the less likely they will stay motivated and engaged (Najjar, 1996).  Clark suggested that it is method over media.  The instructional methods, such as shorter steps, reduced verbal loads, and self-pacing lessons have more of the influence on learning than the medium chosen to deliver them (Clark, 1983).SummaryThe military and in fact the entire country, is facing many challenges in meeting the changing times and need to continually be in a learning mode, but to do it in an integrated fashion that does not take people away from their jobs. Recent advances in computers and networks coupled with major programs like ADL offer some powerful solutions to these challenges. However, the focus of what to train and the best methods to apply that training continue to be challenges of a different sort. Multimedia has many attributes that could provide very useful assistance to our training programs, especially as SCORM and other standards make training and educational programs not only more useful but also more reusable and accessible to students wherever they are. As the community becomes more diverse and the content becomes more complex, the matching of the right content to the right student in the right manner becomes increasingly important.  The proper applications of multimedia and web technology through focused, realistic programs like the AFAMS ADL Prototype are essential to add to the body of knowledge on how best to mix these elements to accomplish the best training for our community.ReferencesAir Force Modeling and Simulation Master Plan (Draft 1 July 01).  Air Force Agency for Modeling and Simulation.Beccue, B., Vila, J. & Whitley, L.  (2001).  The effects of adding audio instructions to a multimedia computer based training environment.  Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 10, 47-67CAST:  Qualities of educational media.  Retrieved November 2001, from  HYPERLINK "http://www.cast.org/udl/Qualitiesof educational Media355.cfm" http://www.cast.org/udl/Qualitiesof educational Media355.cfmClark, R.  (1983).  Reconsidering research on learning from media.  Review of Educational Research, 53, 445-459.Joint Advanced Distributed Learning Co-Laboratory (Orlando, FL).  ADL Guidelines. Retrieved December 1, 2001, from  HYPERLINK "http://www.jointadlcolab.org/v2/index.htm" http://www.jointadlcolab.org/v2/index.htmLai, S. (2000).  Influence of audio-visual presentations on learning abstract concepts.  International Journal of Instructional Media, 27 (2), 6p.Lookatch, R.P. (1997).  Multimedia improved learning—apples, oranges, and the type I error.  Contemporary Education, 68, 110-113.Najjar, L. (1996).  Multimedia information and learning.  Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 5, 129-150.Smith, S. & Woody, P. 2000.  Interactive effect of multimedia instruction and learning styles.  Teaching of Psychology, 27, (3), 220-224.