Integration of an Internet Attack Simulator in an HLA EnvironmentJohn R. MostowU.S. Army Communications-Electronics Command (CECOM)Command and Control Directorate (C2D)Fort Monmouth, NJ 07703 HYPERLINK mailto:mostowj@mail1.monmouth.army.mil mostowj@mail1.monmouth.army.milJohn WakeleyU.S. Army Communications-Electronics Command (CECOM)Intelligence & Information Warfare Directorate (I2WD)Fort Monmouth, NJ 07703wakeley@mail1.monmouth.army.milJohn D. Roberts and John BottAtlantic Consulting Services (ACS), Inc.167 Avenue at the Commons, Suite 4Shrewsbury, NJ 07702 HYPERLINK mailto:johnr@mitre.org jroberts@acsinc-nj.com/jbott@acsinc-nj.comKeywords: C4I, FOM, HLA, Information Warfare (IW), RTI, Tactical Internet (TI)ABSTRACT: A Tactical Internet (TI) comprising the components of the communications infrastructure needed to support future multimedia information requirements will be a key component of the systems architecture as the Army moves toward a digitized battlefield. The evolutionary nature of the technology, along with security issues and data confidentiality requirements make the Internet a focal point of vulnerabilities for both military and commercial organizations. Each component of the TI (computers, radios, routers, switches, gateways, and Command and Control [C2] terminals) is susceptible to intrusion or interference with the intent to disrupt battlefield operations or obtain information without authorization. This paper describes the effort to integrate in a distributed simulation environment an Internet Attack Simulator (IAS) tool capable of simulating attacks likely to be directed against networks based on commercial Internet technology.The Army is using the IAS to evaluate various protect tools under development as part of the Communications Electronics Command (CECOM) Tactical C2 Protect Advanced Technology Demonstration (ATD). When integrated in a distributed simulation environment(using the High-Level Architecture (HLA)(the IAS will support man-in-the-loop virtual simulation experimentation for use in training and the development of tactics, techniques, and procedures in a hostile environment. This paper describes the implementation of various information warfare (IW) attack signatures as part of an overall HLA Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I) Federation Object Model (FOM).  The FOM, being developed under a separate but related effort, supports a simulation architecture focussed on representing realistic tactical communications including interfaces to real C2 systems. An HLA interface for the IAS is being designed and developed within the context of an existing C4I simulation environment, the CECOM Tactical Internet Model (TIM). Interfacing the IAS with this type of distributed simulation environment provides an initial capability to simulate attack and defend scenarios for Army C4I Systems.IntroductionA key component of the Army’s next-generation digitized battlefield systems architecture is the Tactical Internet (TI).  The TI consists of the various communications infrastructure components needed to support future multimedia information requirements.  Because of the evolving nature of the technology, the Internet has become a focal point for security and confidentiality requirements of the data being transmitted for both military and commercial organizations.  The components that make up the TI are very similar and in some cases the same types of devices and protocols that characterize the standard Internet.  These components include computers, radios, routers, switches, gateways, and computer-based Command and Control (C2) systems.  As such, they are susceptible to the types of attack characteristic of the Internet, including intrusion or interference with the intent to disrupt battlefield operations or obtain unauthorized information.This paper describes an effort to integrate an Internet Attack Simulator (IAS) within a distributed simulation environment using the High Level Architecture (HLA) as the key enabling technology.  The idea is to provide an environment where the Army can use the IAS to evaluate various protect tools under development, taking advantage of existing live, virtual, and constructive applications.  This type of environment should prove useful for training and the development of Army tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTP) in a hostile environment. The nature of the HLA lends itself well to this type of problem.  It is a general-purpose architecture for simulation reuse and interoperability and is based on the premise that no single simulation can satisfy all uses and users. An individual simulation or set of simulations developed for one purpose can be applied to another application under the HLA concept of the federation: a composable set of interacting simulations. Each individual application that participates within a federation is known as a federate.  The intent of the HLA is to provide a structure to support reuse of capabilities available in different simulations, ultimately reducing the cost and time required creating synthetic environments, and to encourage the possibility of distributed collaborative development of complex simulation applications.  The HLA was originally developed by the Department of Defense (DoD) and has been adopted as the facility for Distributed Simulation Systems 1.0 by the Object Management Group (OMG) in November 1998. The HLA is currently in the process of becoming an open standard by way of the IEEE.The remainder of this paper presents further details regarding this work. Section 2 provides some background information including a description of the IAS and Information Warfare in general.  Section 3 describes the integrated environment being developed.  This includes identification of certain attack scenarios used for demonstrating the capability as well as a description of the simulation environment.  Because of the sensitive nature of this work, the specific military systems involved are not identified by name.  In addition, the existing simulation environment serving as the basis for the integration work is not identified by name, but rather in terms of its capabilities.  Section 4 discusses the HLA Federation Object Model (FOM) developed during the integration effort.  Section 5 presents a summary and conclusion, and section 6 provides a list of references used in generating the paper. BackgroundThe U.S. Army Communications-Electronics Command (CECOM) at Fort Monmouth, NJ, in partnership with Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), is leveraging commercial interest in information systems security to develop an IAS.  Acquisition of the IAS is being achieved through the Dual Use Science and Technology (DUST) program.  A dual use technology is something that has both military utility and sufficient commercial potential to support a viable industrial base.  The idea involves the partnership of DoD and industry to jointly fund the development a certain technology area needed to maintain technological superiority on the battlefield and for industry to remain competitive in the market place.  Operating in this manner allows DoD to leverage streamlined contracting procedures and to share the cost among the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), the Services, and Industry.  The DUST also provides certain benefits to industry including vehicles to form beneficial partnerships, access to advanced technologies, and increased potential for transitioning technology into defense systems leading to increased markets.  Through the DUST program, the government and contractor are sharing the cost of developing the IAS, with each contributing 50 percent of the total costs involved.Internet Attack SimulatorThe purpose of the IAS is to provide a capability for simulating information attacks that are likely to be directed against networks based on commercial Internet technology as well as those encountered by military-specific systems.  The objective is to make use of the simulator for military experiments, exercises, and tests where network security or C2 protect capabilities require exposure to a realistic threat environment.  The IAS will potentially be used in economically viable commercial applications as a tool for network protection services to test their effectiveness. The IAS application consists of a number of specific capabilities relevant to the problem domain.  Fig. 2.1 illustrates the IAS in terms of its functional components.  A user-friendly graphical user interface (GUI) is provided for development of attack scripts, scenario generation, and network configuration.  Underlying the GUI is a scripting language that allows for straightforward development of attack scripts, the ability to embed scripts within scripts, and provisions for scheduling and monitoring the attacks.  System-level interfaces required to carry out the attacks include Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP), User Datagram Protocol (UDP), Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP), and RS-232.  Provisions for an HLA interface are also provided in the form of program-level hooks that provide access to the type and form of the attack being executed.  Other features of the IAS include the ability to apply plug-ins to invoke external processes (e.g., attacks on other platforms or operating systems) and a logging capability for after-action analysis and repeatability of tests.  Figure 2.1 IAS Component Level DiagramThe purpose of this paper is to describe an effort that involves integrating this IAS capability with a distributed simulation environment using the HLA as the underlying framework.Information WarfareInformation Warfare (IW) is the term used by the DoD and the Joint staff to describe a range of actions taken during conflict to achieve information superiority over an adversary [1].  It is specifically defined in CJCSI 3210.01 as: “Action taken to achieve information superiority by affecting adversary information, information-based processes, information systems, and computer-based networks while defending one’s own information, information-based processes, information systems and computer-based networks [2].” The term IW can refer to attacks ranging from those made by a single adversary with limited means and skills (e.g., the recent Melissa virus incident [3]) to concerted, well-financed campaigns involving many skilled people.  The weapons used in IW are in essence instructions whose successful execution achieves the goal of the attacker(s).  Given the current state and popularity of Internet technology, the threat of IW attack on military information systems is a very real possibility [4].  Every system with a path of communication to the Internet(including those with substantial effect on human life and property(can be subject to attack and the resultant loss of service, information, and compromise of system control.Integration EnvironmentDemonstration ScenariosThree types of attack scenarios were identified for use in demonstrating the IAS capability.  The scenarios are based on three common types of Internet attacks: (1) Denial of Service (DoS), (2) Unauthorized Access, and (3) Spoofing.  The scenarios have been categorized according to the approach taken and the effect of the attack [5].  It must be noted, however, that these categorizations are not mutually exclusive since there can be significant overlap between attacks. DoS is generally focused on disruption or destruction of the components that contribute to the operation of an information system or systems.  Two of the most common forms of DoS are flooding and forced suicide.  Flooding involves the issuance of copious transmissions causing a performance degradation or disruption to system operation.  Forced suicide occurs when a component executes one or more commands that result in a temporary or permanent loss of its functionality (e.g., reboot, format the hard drive, or turn off network interface).  For the purposes of demonstrating the IAS capability, the DoS scenario identified involves a flooding attack with the effect of slowing down or completely taking the target out of service.  In this case, the target could represent a single system or an entire network depending on the role of the system being attacked. The second type of IW scenario is classified as unauthorized access of system data.  This scenario involves bypassing or neutralizing protection mechanisms of a system to obtain information that the attacker has no authorization to access.  The content of this information is often used to leverage further compromise of the system.  Another use is to exploit the value of the information itself for political, financial, or tactical advantage.  The unauthorized access scenario will focus on the objective of gaining information that should only be available to legitimate users with appropriate access permission.  Certain security-relevant files, such as the user/password file or system host table, will be obtained from a given system.  Once obtained, the scenario may continue by exploiting this information to gain execution privilege on the target system and using it to extract account passwords, create new accounts or make use of certain sending processes (e.g., e-mail).The third IW scenario involves the concept of spoofing, which is defined as the practice of providing identification or authentication information that is not correct for the purpose of posing as a host, process, user, or valid message.  Assumption of identity can provide ranging abilities to the hacker from straight DoS to pseudo-valid interaction with the target(s) to provide false information, obtain information, or plant programs that may seek further information and provide a means of its transmittal/retrieval from the compromised system(s).  Spoofing is addressed as a separate scenario type here because it is considered the most sophisticated form of IW and requires the greatest expertise and knowledge of the target systems.  The effect of this kind of attack can result in certain forms of DoS, including takeover of a system component, questioning system reliability, and the issuance of messages with false authority.  The spoofing scenario for the IAS simulation environment involves injecting falsified application-level messages (such as command level messages with erroneous data or Situation Awareness [SA] messages with incorrect locations) into the target C2 systems.  The intended result of this action is to force the user to question the validity of the system data, rendering it virtually useless.Simulation EnvironmentIntegration of the IAS within a distributed simulation environment is based on an existing capability under development using the HLA as the information exchange mechanism.  Underlying this simulation environment is a high fidelity real-time model of the Army’s TI for lower level echelons.  It provides realistic digital, voice, and data communications to the simulation and training environment by computing message delays and losses in communications based on terrain, network traffic, and radio characteristics.  The simulation environment was originally developed to provide an interface to the virtual world for one of the Army’s existing C2 systems and used during Task Force (TF) XXI for training.  The environment is now being used to support a separate but related Army simulation program as a training interface to a next generation Army C2 system. Originally implemented using the Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) protocol and other low level Unix communication mechanisms, the components of the simulation environment were designed to communicate using primarily DIS protocol data units (PDUs) and Internet Protocol (IP) multicast sockets.  As part of a separate, but related Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project, the environment is being transitioned to the HLA based on the interface specification defined by a prototype Command, Control, Communications, Computers and Intelligence (C4I) FOM.  Figure 3.1 shows the basic configuration of the underlying simulation environment.In this illustration, the target system is meant to represent any one of a variety of real world C2 systems existing or planned within the Army’s TI.  C2 systems provide users with the ability to send and receive messages, and display status information in one form or another.  The environment is capable of hosting one or more target systems.  The C4I Interface component is a customized piece of software providing access to the HLA and any other interface functionality required by the target system.  It is generally hosted on a separate platform and communicates with the target system through some sort of physical interface (e.g., Ethernet, PPP, Serial interface, etc).  The Global Positioning System (GPS) Server is a high fidelity centralized navigation capability providing time-synchronized own location information to the target system.  The SA Server component is responsible for generating and maintaining SA information for simulated entities not represented by a real target system within the environment.  The objective is to provide SA messages in a format applicable to the target system.  Figure 3.1 Underlying Simulation EnvironmentThe Communication Effects Server (CES) provides realistic communications effects through computation of message signal degradation and other losses based on radio performance and environmental effects including propagation loss.  In addition, it accounts for channel access and message delivery delays due to network loading and routing.  The ModSAF component is a DIS-based entity level constructive simulation system capable of modeling certain behaviors of land, sea, and air units.  In this configuration, it is used as the scenario driver for the simulation environment.  The HLA Gateway provides an HLA interface to the ModSAF simulation by acting as a translator between DIS and the HLA federation.  The HLA Gateway was developed under a separate DoD effort by the Institute for Simulation and Training (IST) from the University of Central Florida (UCF) and implements the Real-time Platform Reference (RPR) FOM.Implementation ApproachThis section describes the approach for integrating the IAS into the underlying simulation environment.  The DUST contractor selection process was completed during the third quarter (3Q) FY99.  The actual contract was awarded during the 4Q FY99.  An initial version of the IAS prototype is not scheduled for delivery until the 3Q FY00.   CECOM is currently in the process of working with the IAS contractor to identify requirements for an HLA interface to the IAS.  The overall objective is to determine the appropriate mechanisms for launching these attacks into the simulation environment.  This may involve embedding an RTI interface within the IAS software or establishing some sort of inter-process communication between the IAS and an HLA interface process.  At this point, the approach has not been determined. Interfacing the IAS with the identified simulation environment will not be a straightforward process.  The IAS is being designed to operate against real world computer based systems functioning in their operational environment.  The goal is to be able to launch the attacks under realistic conditions and determine the effects on the target systems.  This information will be used to identify vulnerabilities and ways to protect the systems.  Within the simulation environment, launching the actual attack may result in unwanted or unpredictable behavior.  In the real world, a flooding attack might be achieved by tying up a particular port of the target system resulting in that machine becoming locked for a period of time or significantly reducing its performance.  A real flooding attack in a simulation environment might tie up the wrong machine or bring down the entire simulation thus invalidating any results.  The objective is therefore to achieve the intended effects of the attack without necessarily performing the actions associated with an actual attack.The approach for interfacing the IAS with the simulation environment involves creating an HLA interface wrapper around the IAS to intercept the actual attack.  The IAS federate would then communicate this information to the federate responsible for the target system and the effects of the attack would then be initiated by the receiving federate.  For example, the intended result of a flooding attack is to cause a DoS to the target system.  Launching a flooding attack via the HLA interface would involve somehow disabling the capability of the target system to send and receive messages.  Requirements for the HLA wrapper are being developed based on the three types of attack scenarios identified in section 3.1.In the absence of the actual IAS, an IAS surrogate is being developed to serve as a vehicle for defining the interface specification, developing the FOM, and demonstrating the concept.  The surrogate exists as a separate federate capable of initiating certain attacks.  The spoofing attack has been implemented by causing invalid SA messages to be sent to the target system specifying incorrect locations for a particular entity.  The surrogate federate creates an internal object with the same identify as an existing object.  The surrogate then communicates bad location information to the SA server component through an HLA attribute update mechanism, resulting in a SA message being forwarded to the target system federate with an incorrect location.  This is not the way a real world spoofing attack would happen, but the result of bad location information being received and displayed by the target is the same.In addition to the spoofing scenario, an Unauthorized Access attack has been implemented as well.  This would normally involve gaining access to the target system through some means such as telnet, rlogin, or file transfer protocol (ftp).  In a real environment, this type of attack might occur by forcing a buffer overflow when initiating a telnet session allowing certain code to be executed providing access to system information.  This attack has been implemented in the simulation environment using interactions.  The surrogate sends an interaction to the target system federate notifying it of the attack.  Based on a correct set of parameters provided, certain information from the target system (i.e., /etc/passwd or /etc/hosts file) is sent by the target system federate back to the surrogate federate through another interaction.  In this case an actual buffer overflow is not executed on the target system.  The target system federate provides the means to access the desired information and makes it available through the RTI.Work is in progress to implement a DoS scenario within the surrogate federate.  The scenario involves flooding the target system using a SYN attack.  In the real world, this type of attack can be executed by initiating a TCP connection on a specific port of the target system specifying an unreachable IP address as the requestor.  The target system becomes tied up for a period of time trying to negotiate the connection with an unreachable host.  By sending a voluminous number of connection requests in a row, the network interface to the target system becomes completely unresponsive for a noticeable period of time (i.e., several minutes).  In the simulation environment, an actual SYN attack is not launched against the target system.  The IAS surrogate notifies the target system federate of the attack using an interaction including parameters to specify the severity of the attack.  The target system federate then acts to shutdown the incoming and outgoing message interface for a specified period of time.  When the attack is completed and the target system is to become active again, the target system federate issues an interaction notifying the other federates and resumes processing of messages to and from the target system.Initially, the IAS capability will be demonstrated through small-scale experiments within the CECOM Digital Integrated Laboratory (DIL) to establish advanced C2 protect and attack capabilities.  The DIL provides a virtual laboratory environment where a variety of modeling and simulation (M&S) tools and C4I systems are accessible via local and remote networking capabilities.  Integration of the IAS within this environment will provide the means to evaluate other types of C2 systems via the C4I interface of the underlying simulation environment.  Plans are to make this capability available to a much wider audience during the later portion of FY00 through the use of Wide Area Networks (WAN) and long-haul networking capabilities to provide connectivity to similar simulation environments located at the various Army battle laboratories around the country.  Figure 3.2 illustrates the concept of an integrated IAS capability within a distributed simulation environment.Figure 3.2 Distributed Simulation CapabilityFOM DevelopmentThe FOM is the key to creating a successful federation as it addresses inter-federate issues and is relevant to the use of the RTI.  The FOM describes the types of data and interactions each simulation component agrees to share through the RTI during a federation execution and is based on the OMT. In particular, the FOM defines the set of object classes chosen to represent the real world within a federation.  The classes include specification of the attributes and data types used to describe them.  In addition, the FOM provides the set of interaction classes used to represent the interplay among the real-world objects.  During execution of the federation, the instantiations of these object classes are used as the primary means of communication among federates.  Information is exchanged in the form of object attribute updates or interactions.  Each federate makes available or publishes a set of classes, attributes, and interactions that it makes available to the other members of the federation.  At the same time, each federate must request access or subscribe to the classes, attributes, and interactions that it requires access to from other participating federates.  The complete set of classes, attributes, and interactions required for the exchange of information must be accounted for and defined by the FOM.Development of the FOM for this effort is leveraging related work being performed under the CECOM SBIR contract identified in section 3.2. The purpose of this effort is to investigate the transition of Army C4I M&S products and tools to an objective M&S environment using HLA technology [6]. Currently in Phase II, this effort has produced an initial prototype C4I FOM based primarily on the communications processes, devices, and characteristics associated with the TI.  Because of the highly related nature of these two projects and the underlying HLA premise of encouraging reuse, the FOM-specific characteristics and requirements of the IAS have been incorporated into the prototype C4I FOM.Integration of the IAS into an HLA environment has resulted in the initial specification of an IW taxonomy.  The taxonomy is a means of classifying these attacks according to their characteristics, similarities, and difference in an object-oriented fashion.  It has been defined primarily based on the requirements identified for implementing the attack scenarios defined in section 3.1 within the simulation environment.  The information captured as part of the taxonomy is incorporated into the FOM as classes, attributes, interactions, and associated data types.  Figure 4.1 shows the IW taxonomy developed as part of this effort.Figure 4.1 IWEffects TaxonomyThe taxonomy is presented using a Unified Modeling Language (UML) notation [7].  It consists of four classes; each represented by a rectangular box.  The class name is displayed in the top portion of the box.  The middle portion contains the attributes that define the characteristics of the class.  The lower part of the box specifies the functions or methods that can be executed by an object defined by the class. The taxonomy has been defined in terms of the effects of the attacks.  The IWEffects class represents the base class describing a basic set of characteristics common to all types of attacks.  The three classes located underneath the base class and connected through the diamond shaped notation are considered subclasses of IWEffects and correspond to the attack scenarios identified in section 3.1.  These subclasses inherit all the attributes and methods of the IWEffects class, plus define a set of their own unique attributes which serve to characterize each class.  The attributes and methods shown in figure 4.1 have been defined based solely on the implementation of the IAS surrogate to operate within the simulation environment described earlier.  This taxonomy may not necessarily apply to the general implementation of the IAS, but rather specifically to its HLA interface.  At this point in time, the taxonomy is not consider complete and will continue to evolve as further work progresses to develop the IAS surrogate and eventually integrate the actual IAS.Summary and ConclusionsThe IAS capability is considered by the Army to be a valuable tool for supporting laboratory evaluations, conducting experiments, and for “red teaming” during field tests. When integrated in a Modeling, Simulation and Stimulation (MSS) environment (as in Fig. 3.2) the IAS will support warfighter-in-the-loop evaluation of protect tools at the Central Technical Support Facility (CTSF), located at Fort Hood, TX, as well as the other Battle Labs.  The IAS will also support the development of TTP in a hostile C2 environment through exercises and experiments performed in conjunction with these organizations.  The integration of the IAS into this distributed environment is being performed in accordance with the Joint Technical Architecture (Army)-compliant HLA.  By following the HLA standard, the IAS will be interoperable with other simulation systems as well as HLA-interface-capable C2 Systems. In addition, establishing interfaces with applicable force-on-force simulations will provide great value and benefit to the Army’s future information systems in terms of quantitative analyses of the warfighting impact of C2 protect tools.References[1] FM 100-6, Information Operations, 27 August 1996.[2] CJCSI 3210.01, Joint Information Warfare Policy, 2 January 1996. [3] C. O'Hara: “’Melissa’ a sign of problems to come, panelists told,” Federal Computer Week, 19 April 1999.[4] W. R. Cheswick, and S. M. Bellovin: Firewalls and Internet Security: Repelling the Wily Hacker, Addison-Wesley, Reading MA, 1994. [5] J. D. Howard:  “An analysis of security incidents on the Internet 1989–1995,” Carnegie Mellon Software Engineering Institute CERT Coordination Center,  HYPERLINK http://www.cert.org http://www.cert.org, 7 April 1997.[6] W. Sudnikovich, J. Roberts, J. Lacetera:  “Implementation of a prototype C4I FOM,” Spring 1999 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, paper number 99S-SIW-061.[7] M. Fowler: UML Distilled, Applying the Standard Object Modeling Language, Addison-Wesley Longman, Inc., 1997.SpoofingUnauthorized AccessDenialofServiceIWEffectsDILFt. KnoxFt. HoodFt. BenningFt. LeavenworthFt. Rucker……CommServersLoggerC2 SystemsIASRTILANHLA InterfaceAttack EffectsScenarioGeneratorSystem InterfacesGUIGPSServer EMBED MS_ClipArt_Gallery.2  ...HLAInterfaceRuntime Infrastructure (RTI)AttackDatabase EMBED MS_ClipArt_Gallery.2   EMBED MS_ClipArt_Gallery.2   EMBED MS_ClipArt_Gallery.2   EMBED MS_ClipArt_Gallery.2  TargetC2 SystemSAServerWide-Area NetworkCommunicationEffects Server HLAGatewayModSAFtargetHostAddrtargetHostTypetargetOSLaunchAttack()targetServicedurationtargetPorttargetFilelocalAddrmessageObjs