SYNTHETIC NATURAL ENVIRONMENT MODELLING CONCEPTUAL REFERENCE MODELGuo GangHuang KediCollege of Mechaeronics Engineering and AutomationNational University of Defence TechnologyChangsha, China, 410073086-731-4534656ggwyh@yahoo.comKeywords:SNE, Conceptual Reference Model, SEDRIS, modelling, simulation, HLAABSTRACT: The Synthetic Natural Environment (SNE) Conceptual Reference Model (CRM) is a reference model that establishes, describes, organizes and standardizes the concepts when modelling SNE. Through the analysis and discussion of the SNE CRM, we establish a reference model which embraces the concepts, hierarchies, frameworks and processes separately from the rational, technical, pre-runtime and runtime profiles of the SNE modelling and form a complete and unambiguous high level view that ultimately facilitates to abstract, understand, communicate, organize and guide the system analysis, design and implementation.1. INTRODUCTIONProviding a complete, accurate and authoritative model description, data representation and application support of the SNE including the terrain, ocean, atmosphere and space is not only the basis of all kinds of simulations including training, analysis, test and experiment, but also the key of high interoperability, reuse, credibility and high fidelity in heterogeneous networked simulations. Considering the important, essential and urgent need of the SNE modelling in simulations, the US Department of Defence Modelling and Simulation Office (DMSO) already made the capability of acquiring timely and authoritative natural environment representations as one of the six objectives of the Modelling and Simulation Master Plan earlier in 1995 and also initiated the Integrated Natural Environment program to accomplish this rough task. [1], [2] The SNE modelling is complicated and difficult for it not only need to provide a unified mechanism to represent the completely total natural environment domain including the terrain, ocean, atmosphere, space and a standard method to exchange data of miscellaneous formats from different sources but also need to supply integrated and polymorphic data representations to meet the requirements of visual, radar, infrared and Computer Generated Forces (CGF) simulations. To tackle these hard eggs successively, it’s important to define a complete SNE modelling CRM that provides high level views from different aspects of the basic rational infrastructure, technical framework, operational concepts, application patterns as well as the principles, methods, technologies, processes, models and simulations that are involved in the SNE modelling. [3]This paper focuses on the basics of the SNE CRM and presents a detailed CRM which is composed of four parts according to different views, emphasises and purposes and jointly provides a clear and explicit view of the total domain of the SNE modelling. The details of each view are also discussed as well as some key and critical issues that relates with the SNE modelling in today’s most Advanced Distributed Simulations (ADS).The followings are arranged as such: in section 2, the basics of the SNE CRM are introduced. The most important SNE rational CRM is discussed in section 3 and some formalizations of the rational CRM are introduced as well as most important realization considerations are analysed. The next section put an emphasis on the technical aspect of the CRM which forms the basis of the total SNE domain modelling and simulation. The pre-runtime and runtime SNE CRMs are introduced in section 5 and 6 which focus on pre-runtime data processes and runtime simulations respectively. At last, some conclusions are summarized in section 7.2. THE SNE CRM	Concept is the abstract, denotation, delegation of the existence, entity, process and concretion instead of the detailed things or implementations themselves. Concepts are usually used as a mean to understand and communicate with other peoples, as a denotation to represent some details or processes, as a method to classify and organize some hierarchies and structures and also as a blueprint to guide analysis, design and implementations or to gestate visions.The SNE modelling CRM is a reference model that establishes, describes, organizes and standardizes the concepts from the rational, technical, operational and runtime aspects of the SNE modelling and thus captures a high level view for the purpose to abstract, understand, communicate, represent, organize and guide the system analysis, design and implementation.2.1 Why an SNE CRMThe main reason and purpose of establishing an SNE CRM are:To understand and communicate. Through a reference model with standard description and representation of concepts, frameworks and systems, both Subject Matter Experts (SME) and simulation system modellers and builders can understand and communicate easily, unambiguously and conveniently.To capture the rational, technical, pre-runtime and runtime concepts of the SNE modelling and provide a basic high level view of the organizations, technologies, hierarchies, processes and patterns. To promote and insure the high interoperability, reuse, credibility and fidelity of the SNE modelling.To build up a framework and a blueprint to organize and guide the projects under the SNE modelling through systematic engineering design and development. 2.2 What the SNE CRMThe CRM addresses the conceptual views of the SNE modelling from different view points. A complete and unambiguous SNE CRM must be as abstract and brief as possible while keeping the merits of providing as much information and knowledge as possible.For the completeness of the SNE CRM, the principles, methods, technologies, processes, infrastructures and hierarchies of the SNE modelling systems must be considered and reflected in the CRM. For the succinctness, the CRM must use the fewest models to describe and organize these concepts. Besides, the standardization in the CRM need also be considered.According to these principles, our SNE CRM are divided into four parts, namely the rational CRM, the technical CRM, the operational CRM and the runtime CRM, each of which captures a one-side view of the total SNE modelling corresponding to different emphasis and purpose. These four parts together forms a complete and clear view of the whole SNE modelling.2.3 How the SNE CRMThe rational CRM describes the rational principles and conceptual basis of the SNE modelling as well as the common understanding of the relationship of the different SNE modelling domains including the natural environment, the military simulation systems and all kinds of models. So the emphasis of the rational CRM is to address the fundamental rational concepts, principles, components and relations of the SNE modelling.The technical CRM puts an emphasis on the common supporting technologies that implement the rational CRM and the conceptual systems of the SNE modelling in all kinds of simulations and thus we can consider it as a technical view of the SNE modelling.The operational CRM mainly addresses the procedures and processes of the environment data from all kinds of sources to the transmittals that are ready to be distributed or run in simulations. This reference model focuses on the pre-runtime data processes.The last CRM gives an application pattern of utilizing the concepts and technologies in the SNE modelling in advanced distributed simulations adopting High Level Architecture (HLA) to build environment federates or federations. The rational CRM is the fundaments of the other three CRMs and the technical CRM provides common technologies supporting the implementation. The operational CRM and the runtime CRM utilize the principles in the rational CRM and the supports provided by the technical CRM. The four parts thus together provide a brief and complete abstract of the SNE modelling and serve as a high view of system.3. THE SNE RATIONAL CRM3.1 Basic Rational CRMThe basic SNE rational CRM focuses on the rational conceptual basis of the SNE modelling and the common understanding of the relationship of the natural environment representation, the military system models and all kinds of effects and impacts models which is illustrated in Fig.1. As shown in the figure, this graphical conceptual reference model is derived from the one that proposed by Paul A. Birkel in [3] but with more explicit distinction between SNE representations and military system models as well as internal relationships. The fundamental basis of the SNE rational CRM is the data flow and drive between the models in SNE representation and the military systems which is shown in Fig.1 by green and red arrows standing for the forward effects drive and the inverse impacts correspondingly. In Fig.1, not only the environment and the interaction effects are separated in the SNE representation but also do the component models and the behaviour models in the military systems to clearly show their internal relations. For the environment, the SNE modelling needs to provide environment states across a period of time to support the effect and impact model computing in simulations. The internal environment models may involve physics or dynamics processes that change the state of the environment including the properties of entities and parameters. The SNE rational CRM also exposes the division and separation of different systems and models which subsequently brings clear system boundaries and relations and results in a good exordium and guideline for design and implementation. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Fig. 1 SNE rational CRM3.2 Formalization of the Rational CRMFrom the viewpoint of the general system modelling, if  EMBED Equation.3   is a kind of physical, mathematical or logical description or representation of system  EMBED Equation.3   whether it is a real one or not, then we say that  EMBED Equation.3   is an abstraction of  EMBED Equation.3   and we call it one model of  EMBED Equation.3   which is denoted by  EMBED Equation.3  . On the other hand, the model  EMBED Equation.3   must have correct and unambiguous interpretations responding to system  EMBED Equation.3   for similarity, consistency, functionality and utility otherwise the model is of no use or little use to us. Similarly, we denote this by  EMBED Equation.3  . Generally, one system may have different models for various purposes and even many models with different granularities or level of details or representations. For one model it can be interpreted according to different systems but with one system the interpretation must be accurate and unambiguous. Generally, we define “simulation” as “running a model over a period of time with given data”. So, another important key factor in modelling and simulation is the time axis and this is usually considered during the modelling phase and realized in the runtime phase. At the same time, providing enough data suitable for running the model is also a precondition to drive the simulation. In the modelling and simulation community it is prevalent and wise to separate the model and the data for more flexibility, clarity and effectiveness. To formalize our SNE rational CRM, we not only need build up the models that describe or represent the physical natural environment but also capture all the data needed to drive these models. The natural environment that we focus on is physics and exists as continuous spatial domains which can be denoted by  EMBED Equation.3   where  EMBED Equation.3   is a kind of spatial coordinate representation and  EMBED Equation.3   is the spatial domain universe of discourse EMBED Equation.3  . For the time axis, it is usually be defined as a period of continuous and even time flows denoted by  EMBED Equation.3  . As we have discussed, the first task in the SNE representation in Fig.1 is to describe the environmental states. In facts, the data used to represent those states are essentially properties related with a special spatial point, area or domain and a time point or period and many properties are derived from others or overlapped. For example, the environment data used for visualization, IR and radar simulations can all be considered as spatial and temporal representations of physical properties of the natural environment but in different electromagnetic spectrums and with different forms. The requirement of CGF simulations is just another kind of environment property representation most of which is derived from visual databases and must be kept consistent with other databases. For the SNE rational CRM, we only focus on higher levels and define those properties of interest as: EMBED Equation.3  . Attention that usually some properties may have no definitions and values with respect to certain spatial and temporal regions. Till now we can denote the environmental states as a model with the form of: EMBED Equation.3  Where  EMBED Equation.3  can be continuous or discrete and  EMBED Equation.3  is function mapping that describes the environment states. For the simulation, with data such as those related with initial environment states or sampled spatial or temporal points are provided we can drive the model and give interpretations to the simulation and its results.For the internal environment models, most of them are used to describe relations between environment physical properties, environment dynamics along time and statistics with respect to phenomenon or procedures. With above definitions, we can formalize this model as: EMBED Equation.3  Together,  EMBED Equation.3   and  EMBED Equation.3   depict the whole natural environment without considering military system impacts. 3.3 Technical ConsiderationsAs we have seen in  EMBED Equation.3   and  EMBED Equation.3  , the first thing to be dealt with is the spatial domain  EMBED Equation.3   and temporal axis  EMBED Equation.3   which needs more precise considerations and accurate definitions. One problem is how to deal with the resolution and granularity of  EMBED Equation.3   and  EMBED Equation.3   as well as different or multi-representation models. The second is the property vector  EMBED Equation.3   which involves a huge number of properties as regard to the total terrain, ocean, atmosphere and space domains. Although it’s difficult and complicated to give this property space accurate definitions and reasonable organizations or standards, it is of great importance to capture and depict the problem space as well as the foundation for common glossaries and semantics for interoperability. 	With the capability that the technology currently can provide and the functionality most applications demand a practical approach usually adopted is to partition the whole natural environment into different sub-domains such as terrain, ocean, atmosphere and space. But currently there is no standard for such division and also it is usually more difficult to treat littoral and subsurface cases and so on. Even currently the SEDRIS Environment Data Coding Standard (EDCS) provides a sound basis for the standardization for environment data classification, attributes coding and status representation, there is still much left to be considered such as suitable taxonomies, standard data organizations and flexible data representations and so on. Another problem is the multi-representation for models or data coming from different environment domains or utilizing various modelling techniques or purposing at special end user requirements which subsequently bring us the problem of correlations and consistence of these databases. Currently the SEDRIS Data Representation Model (DRM) has been designed to tackle this problem for pre-runtime data representation and interchange, but a common environment data model that suitable for all environment domains and applications is also of great need. The last problem is the data flow between the military system models and the natural environment models. Usually, models can be driven along time axis by time step advance means or by event advance approaches. While at the same time one can also chose from object-oriented, agent-based or conventional procedural approaches when analysing, modelling and designing. Certainly, the final choice made about how to drive the simulation relies on multiple factors but it is critical and important to analyse the general principles that are suitable for such occasions.4. THE SNE TECHNICAL CRMThe technical CRM as shown in Fig.2 addresses the common supporting technologies that implement the rational CRM. In Fig.2, the principle is that the upper technologies and services are all based on the lower ones.  SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Fig. 2 SNE technical CRMThe basis of the common technology architecture is the SNE common data model and data representation and interchange services.[4]  A common data model is needed to facilitate the communication, understanding and share between all participants involved in SNE modelling and simulations and provides a basic core concept for software design and development. The data representation and interchange services function as a standard SNE data representation and interchange mechanism across environment domains through a complete common semantic and syntax.The environment library is designed and implemented as a distributed networked SNE database across the Internet providing SNE source data or transmittals in standard format as well as the ability to access, query, search and transfer the desired data through a single access site.The environment scenario generation utilizes the available data from environment library and the services provided by the SNE data representation and interchange function to generate or composite the SNE scenario in the ocean, atmosphere and space domains that meets the requirements of simulations. The terrain scenario and database generation functions similar to the former except that it is concerned with the terrain domain which is more complicated and difficult.The environment effect and impact models describe the interactions between environment and military systems and thus the models are usually defined and stored as standards to enhance the interoperability and reuse. The topmost applications include typical environment federates or federations, tools and utilities which are all constructed on the preceding technologies and services. Currently, under the directions of the Integrated Natural Environment program initiated and sponsored by DMSO and powered by many other commercial and industrial organizations, a Requirement/Common Data Model (RCDM) and the Synthetic Environment Data Representation and Interchange Specifications (SEDRIS) are being developed to address the low level supporting technologies. The environment library is implemented as a distributed Master Environment Library (MEL) and serves as a functional component of the Modelling and Simulation Resource Repository (MSRR). Also, the DMSO funds another two projects, namely Environment Scenario Generation (ESG) and Terrain Scenario Generation and Archive (TSGA) that are designed to generate or composite the desired scenarios utilizing the available technologies and resources, to provide environmental scenarios for simulations timely, economically and automatically. 5. THE SNE OPERATIONAL CRMThe SNE operational CRM is documented using IDEF0 as illustrated in Fig.3 which consists of 4 functional nodes at level1. The operational CRM utilizing the IDEF0 model with the main purpose to capture the process, steps, participants, constrains, mechanisms, inputs and out puts of the operational data flows and procedures in SNE modelling. [5]Fig. 3 SNE operational CRMAs shown in Fig.3, the first step is to analyze the requirements including determining if any available source data exists in library or on hand and the choices to produce Just-in-Time (JiT) data. The next is to acquire the desired source data which may be in different formats but must be authoritative. In step 3, the database builders need to schedule the procedures and tasks and produce the deliverable authoritative SNE transmittals including the static terrain, the dynamic terrain, the ocean, the atmosphere and the space. Last, the runtime database compilers and the simulation developers jointly compile the transmittals into runtime format that are optimized for performance or specific purpose such as visualization or CGF. From the technical point of view, the essence of the operational SNE CRM mainly focuses on the pre-runtime data acquirement and processes and thus it provides a reference model and standard for pre-simulation data solutions. Correspondingly, the technologies such as environment library, terrain database generation systems, environment scenario generation systems and synthetic natural environment data interchanges are altogether found a sound basis for the pre-runtime data processes. 6. THE SNE RUNTIME CRMThe SNE runtime CRM offers a reference model of the framework and blueprint of the environment federates or federations utilizing the concepts and technologies in SNE modelling and adopting High Level Architecture (HLA) jointly. The purpose of this reference model also attempts to establish a reference model of standard and reusable system architecture when designing and implementing environment federations. [6]This CRM founds on the principles revealed by the rational CRM and utilizes the technologies provided by the technical CRM. The data that the system ingests comes from the operational pre-runtime processes. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Fig.4 SNE runtime CRMIn Fig.4, all federates jointly support the simulation in a synthetic environment. The OASE server responds for providing ocean, atmosphere, and space data while the simulation federate for simulating the process of the engagement. The dynamic terrain is composed of three federates for it is usually important, complicated and difficult.[7]  The DTSim responds for managing the dynamic terrain according to the internal physical models and the impacts that the military system operations cause. The Subsurface Sim responds for terrain subsurface modelling and simulation while the HydroSim is a terrain hydrology simulation which considers the impact of weather impacts and results heavy effects on mobility and etc. The 3D Viewer and the 2D Display render the scene for visualization purpose or for interaction. The last federate controls the simulation, collects data and provides After Action Review (AAR) functionalities.7. CONCLUSIONSWith the rapid development of technologies and the urgent requirements of various applications, the SNE modelling and simulation domain is more and more becoming a common infrastructure that support the DoD wide modelling and simulation communities which will ultimately promote the interoperability, reuse and fidelity of modelling and simulation activities through providing common technologies, products, tools and etc. Thus, a complete, standard, brief and unambiguous reference model is greatly needed to establish, describe, organize and understand the concepts, frameworks and hierarchies when modelling the SNE.Through the analysis and discussion of the SNE CRM, we established a reference model from the rational, technical, pre-runtime and runtime aspect which brings us a complete and clear high level view of the SNE modelling that facilitate to abstract, understand, communicate, organize and guide the system analysis, design and implementation. But as we can see, the way ahead of us is still far away to go. The conceptual reference models especially the formalizations and some critical technical problems need further discussion and refinement, even re-implementations. 8. REFERENCES[1] Juan A. Perez and john G. Hughes, The DOD Modeling and Simulation Integrated Natural Environment Program, Proceedings of the Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 2000, 00S-SIW-073.[2] Charles E. Campbell and Michael A. Craft, Advancements in Synthetic Natural Environment Representations, Proceedings of the 8th SISO CGF&BR Conference, May 1999, 8th-CGF-071.[3] Paul A. Birkel, The SNE Conceptual Reference Model, Proceedings of the Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 1998, 98F-SIW-018.[4] Paul A. Birkel, Dale D. Miller, Timothy Miller, John Rourke and Eric Root, The Terrain Common Data Model (TCDM): A Joint Effort of JSIMS, STOW and JWARS, Proceedings of the 8th SISO CGF&BR Conference, May 1999, 8th-CGF-004.[5] Steve Gifford, Culture Data within a Large Scale Terrain Database Generation System, Proceedings of the Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 2000, 00S-SIW-143.[6] Robert A. Reynolds, David K. Larson, Victor Skowronski and Steven O. Ouzts, A Reference Object Model and Supporting Federate for the Ocean, Atmosphere and Space Environments, Proceedings of the Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 2000, 00S-SIW-099.[7] Dale D. Miller, David Bakeman, Steve Adelson, Daniel Gilbert and Annette Janett, Dynamic Terrain in the Environment Federation, Proceedings of the Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 2000, 00S-SIW-115.AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIESGuo Gang is a PhD student from College of Mechaeronics Engineering and Automation, National University of Defense Technology, China. He is specialized in computer visualization, synthetic natural environment modeling and standardization of modeling and simulation.Huang Kedi is a Professor specialized in system simulation, virtual reality, control theory and engineering and also has an honor of the vice director of the Chinese Association for System Simulation. Military System ImpactsDamagesObscurantsEnergySpecial impactsInternal Environmental ModelsPhysicsDynamicsStatisticsComponentModelsEnvironmental EffectsIntervisibilityMobilityElectromagnetLogisticsTargetingOthersEnvironmental StateTerrainOceanAtmosphereSpaceNatural EnvironmentInteraction EffectsData FlowTimeOr Event DriveMilitary System ModelsSynthetic Natural Environment RepresentationWeapons & CountermeasuresBehavior ModelsTransitDeploySupplyAttackOutflankDefenseSearchDetectTrackFireWithdraw……Active SensorsUnits and PlatformsPassive SensorsEnvironment Effect & Impact ModelsEnvironmentLibraryEnvironmentScenario GenerationSNE Common Data Model andSNE Data Representation and Interchange ServicesTerrain Scenario & Database GenerationApplications, environment federates or federations, tools, utilities, and etcOcean, atmosphere, space environment2D DisplayDynamic terrain and subsurface simulationHydroSimSubSurfaceSimDTSimRTI interfacehlaControl / hlaResultssimulationOASE serverSimulation control, data collection & AARRTI version 1.33D Viewer