Simulation Based Acquisition:  A US/UK PerspectiveMs. Michelle BEVAN, Mr. Sean PRICEModeling and Simulation Information Analysis Center, Cranfield University, Royal Military College of Sciencembevan@msiac.dmso.mil, s.n.price@rmcs.cranfield.ac.ukAbstract. This paper will consider what benefits can be identified from the implementation of the Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) initiatives currently employed in the US and UK.  We consider the acquisition process in the widest sense – that is the entire systems engineering process from the identification of need and user requirements through to disposal – and attempt to identify tangible benefits that have emerged from the utilization of SBA approaches. We also compare and contrast the UK and US views on SBA, concluding that there are great areas of overlap, but there are also different interpretations and aspirations in both countries. We do this through a series of small case studies.  We highlight the ways in which the UK and the US have utilized lessons learned from the practice of SBA.  In addition, we show that SBA, whether it is called SEBA, SBA or another term, is an appropriate model for any country to make the acquisition lifecycle more efficient and shorter.IntroductionThe most difficult challenge in implementing any new idea or process is convincing the non-user that it is not only a viable idea, but one whose worth is greater than the time and effort required to implement it.  Humans are creatures of habit, regardless of how technology has progressed or how entrepreneurial one might be.  Habit, tradition, and getting into a 'comfort zone' are all large factors in how a process is implemented.  "We've always done it this way", "If it ain't broke, don't fix it," and other similar statements come to mind.  Regardless of how forward-thinking we like to think of ourselves, our organization or our country, we still like to be comfortable in the way we do business.  That is why the concept of Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) has taken so long to become an accepted practice.  First, the concept was not created by one country, nor has it ever had just one name.  In this paper we address the United States’ label, SBA, and the United Kingdom's title of Synthetic Environment Based Acquisition (SEBA).  The idea has been around for quite some time.  The genesis of SBA/SEBA could be found in a number of different labels or programs. Concepts such as:  Concurrent Engineering, Total Quality Management, Shared Data Environment, Cost as an Independent Variable, and Knowledge Management are a few of the titles.  (Hollenbach, SIW 00F-SIW-081).   These labels all point to the same idea; find what is good about a process and re-use that component for quicker, cheaper, better products.  definitionsBefore discussing the concepts further, the official definitions of SBA and SEBA follow:SBA: An acquisition process in which [the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD)] and Industry are enabled by robust, collaborative use of simulation technology that is integrated across acquisition phases and programs. (DoD Glossary 1995).SEBA:  The consistent and coherent application of the modelling, simulation and [Synthetic Environment (SE)] technology within, and across, both acquisition phases and programmes to facilitate the attainment of the Smart acquisition goals of faster, cheaper, better (SECO 2001).These definitions are only the short, summary definitions.  They must be expanded to understand how the concept has emerged as an overarching one that encompasses all the terms mentioned above.  SBA/SEBA must be differentiated from the traditional acquisition process.  Traditional processes are linear, sequential and take years to implement fully.  Through time, that process has become antiquated as technology developments become more and more rapid, the face and location of warfare continually changes, and funding decreases. As we see by the fact that some systems have been fielded for 40 or more years now, the process itself is one that needs adjustment.  Introducing simulation technology into the process meant using the computer to shorten the process.  SBA furthers that technology enhancement by introducing the idea of tying together information from each phase of the acquisition lifecycle through the use of simulation.Essential elements of sbaThe following are five essential features that distinguish SBA from more traditional acquisition practices.Simultaneous TestingSBA will allow equipment testing and capability testing to take place throughout the concepts, assessment and design stages of the systems engineering process.  This is in contrast to traditional practices, where testing tends to take place as a final stage of the development process.  Within SBA, testing is an integral part of the design process rather than a final quality assurance check mechanism.	3.1.2 End-User InvolvementSynthetic environments allow the end user to be involved in the acquisition process in a full and meaningful way from the beginning of the acquisition lifecycle.   This is in contrast to traditional programs where users may be consulted but would rarely be a part of the design team and would probably not get to influence the development of capability.  In SBA the user can be involved from the outset by using models of the proposed equipment in a virtual world which therefore allows equipment development to occur at the same times as doctrine development.  In the past, the separation of the two has led to a capability gap.  With SBA, the equipment becomes an effective component of defence capability much sooner than previously would have been possible.3.1.3 Cost in Trade-off Analyses.SBA allows project teams to compare cost and time expenditures required for the programme. To introduce capability effectively, a complicated set of inputs must be balanced – those of cost, performance and time.  This balance is often perceived in terms of risk.  Synthetic environments allow the investigation and the possible reduction of risk associated with projects by increasing confidence early in the assessment and development processes.3.1.4 Iterative Modelling.SBA allows a process of iterative model development and integration, leading to greater understanding and insights earlier in the CADMID process.  The evaluators can use simulations to explore the design space, to validate designs and to converge upon a capability that meets the need.  This is done in an iterative fashion, rather that at one particular stage, which means the capability is developed in a much quicker, efficient way. 3.1.5 ExperimentationAn acquisition process supported by models, simulations and synthetic environments allows design teams to concurrently explore greater numbers of potential solutions than is currently possible using traditional engineering means within a reasonable timeframe.  It also allows the investigation of a several different, widely varying scenarios, giving confidence that the developed capability will be useful and relevant in all envisaged scenarios.  Equally, SBA allows the exploration of the design space through time, allowing the full lifecycle equipment costs to be considered at the beginning.  Finally, it allows the proposed capability to be integrated into existing (and/or proposed) defence capability as a part of the design process.  This further strengthens confidence that the capability requirement will be met.views of seba/sbaThe basic understanding of the two concepts is the same.  Underlying all the pieces of the acquisition lifecycle processes of both countries is the need for humans, and thereby the processes they use, to change.  Figure 1 below demonstrates the process that humans undertake to accept a new idea.  The left axis represents the User Commitment to the new idea.  At this point in time, we are in the trial use area.  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1 - How Organizations Commit To ChangeSource:  Daryl R. Conner and Robert W. Patterson, “Building Commitment to Organizational Change,” Training and Development Journal  (April 1983), p 18-30.It is probably fair to say that SBA is a largely unproven process.  However, there are likely to be significant benefits associated with it if it is implemented as currently envisaged.  Amongst these are the following:A reduced overall programme risk, through informed and timely decision making.A reduced cycle time within programmes.  In essence, the team will be able to iterate through concepts to assessment and design more quickly than traditional methods. As a consequence of the above, a reduction in overall programme time.  This should ensure that equipments are brought into service sooner and are hence current for longer.A reduced requirement for exercises and trials during development time, hence reducing costs for time, space and prototypes.The ability to effectively visualise  requirements and cost drivers, and their implications.An ability to adapt quickly and flexibly to changing requirements, scenarios and environments.  Support for the inclusion and  evaluation of human factors.  In essence, SEs support the inclusion of the human at the outset of and right through the CADMID process.Representation of the whole system, user and environment within the wider defence system of systems.SEs support the SPI approach in that they involve linking multidisciplinary and multi-organisational teams together, which reflects the SPI/IPT approach.  So an SE based approach positively encourages IPTs to work in an integrated manner.That said, there are significant concerns about the process and its implementation.  Amongst them are the following:The user of any model, simulation or SE must have confidence that it is a credible representation of reality.  That is, the model must be verified and validated.  The validity of SEs is a ongoing area of research interest.Closely linked to this is the issue of false credibility.  It appears to be an unfortunate fact that individuals will often attach greater credibility to a SE than the underlying component models themselves warrant.  This is probably due to the general high standard of graphics associated with such systems.  At the end of the day all models are merely assumptions and data and users should not be seduced by realistic front ends.The concept of SBA envisages an iterative, integrated approach to the use of models, simulations and synthetic environments throughout the lifetime of a capability or equipment.  This necessitates advanced configuration management mechanisms, as would be the case in any equipment acquisition programme.SEs increasingly rely on communications technology.  SEs can be distributed over local or wide area networks.  Currently, bandwidth is one of the key constraints on what is possible with SEs.Taking a systems of systems view, it is possible that we will need to integrate whole SEs too investigate wider defence capability, doctrine and concepts.  Hence SEs must be designed with interoperability in mind.  Closely linked to the ideas behind the iterative development of SEs is the idea of reuse.  This includes the development of existing models from within the programme and the utilisation of models from outside of it.  One of the thorniest issues facing the sensible use of SEs in acquisition is that of IPR.  A company that has spent lots of money developing a system or capability may be loath to put that model into a SE which is observable by his competitors.  For this reason, experience suggests that contractors will often try to use “black box” models within SEs.  Hence the internal workings of the model are not explicit to all.  This then raises issues of validity and confidence.A key reason for using SEs is that it is believed that they will save money in the long run.  The construction of an SE may be a very expensive and time consuming process.  The benefit is that going through that process may give you a better capability earlier.  The downside is that in the short term it may not seem to be the most affordable solution.SEs may often be formed from models and simulations that operate at different levels of fidelity.  Possibly most importantly, it must be remembered that what we do with SEs is to conduct experiments.  Hence these experiments need to be designed using the principles of experimental design in line with the purpose and context of the problem.  The data need to be captured and recorded as would any other lab experiment.There are probably four key observations about the utilisation of modelling, simulation and synthetic environment technology to support the acquisition process.  Firstly, SEs are themselves systems.  That is, they will display emergent properties (desirable, undesirable and unforeseen).  The leap of faith is that they are similar systems to the ones that we wish to understand.  It is the job of verification and validation to establish this to some degree of confidence.  We hence hope that the emergent properties that the SE exhibits will be broadly similar to the emergent properties that the modelled system would exhibit.  It follows that we should adopt a systems engineering perspective to the development and through life use of SEs themselves.Secondly, SEs are simulations.  When constructing them, therefore, we should adhere to all of the tried and tested principles of  model development and experimental design that operational research has spent much of the last 50 years establishing.  For example, a complex SE is not necessarily a better SE.  We should start simply and add complexity as our understanding and requirements increase.  Thirdly, but linked very much to the last point, SEs must be treated (as all models should be) as tools for thinking with.  Models do not (should not be asked to) make decisions.  Models can throw insight onto some problem system or situation, but should never be used blindly.  They are merely another tool which we can use to generate awareness and promote learning.Finally, modelling and  simulation are not new additions to the acquisition process; they have been being used with great success for many years across many programs.  Computer Aided Design (CAD) and Computer Aided Manufacture (CAM) are examples of this.  Synthetic environments technology, however, offers the potential for the integration of these models into something with much broader applicability.  Secondly, whereas in the past modelling and simulation might have been loaded towards the front end of the development process, the vision for SBA is that simulation is integrated through the whole-life of the equipment.  Thus, it is arguable, SBA is an evolution rather than a revolution.United StatesThe acquisition process in the United States has undergone numerous changes that will enable the SBA process to be fully utilized.  This has particularly been the case with revisions to the Department of Defense (DoD) 5000 series of documents.  The documentation is not only in revision, but has been superseded by instructions rather than mandates on how to best execute a program. (www.dau.mil).  The best descriptor of how simulation processes affect the way in which acquisition is carried out is a spiral process. Simulation data is inserted into acquisition phases throughout the process.  This is enabled by the use of a centralized data repository that is available to all users within the acquisition lifecycle, as appropriate.  Figure 1 shows that idea, and the different areas in which M&S are used.  The central repository idea is one that is expanded in SBA to make use of the results of the models at any stage in the acquisition process.  This is discussed more fully in the Case studies section.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2Source:  Mr. Michael Lavine, presentation to International Test and Evaluation Association (ITEA) Conference, 6 December 2000.United KingdomThe process in the UK is best represented by what is known as the SEBA Wheel.  As explained on the Ministry of Defence website (http://www.mod.uk/issues/simulation/seba.htm), the SEBA Wheel is explained in the following quote:“Spiral development delivers an increasingly more detailed concept design, which requires more detailed analysis to support acquisition decisions. Within the 'SeBA wheel', see Figure 1, the inner wheel is 'spun' quickly; possibly many times for each step progression around the outer wheel, which represents the phases of the acquisition process. Each revolution of the inner wheel evolves and increases the fidelity of the knowledge appertaining to a solution; this knowledge is captured in the expanding central Knowledge Repository.”Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3 The SEBA Wheel Source:  http://www.mod.uk/issues/simulation/seba.htmAgain, the theme of a central knowledge repository as the key element of SEBA is repeated.  Without having a way for all stages of the acquisition lifecycle (and those in them) to access data from other stages (simulation or otherwise), SEBA is not possible.Case StudiesWithin this section of the paper, we will identify two case studies of each country in which SBA has been developed.  They will serve to demonstrate the lessons learned in implementing SBA.  Then, we will highlight an on-going programme that is leading in implementing SBA practices.United States5.1.1 CrusaderLearn as we go:  the Crusader programme has been cancelled.  However, the lessons learned from this Army program are being used to better the next procurement activity.  The Crusader was proposed as the next-generation, self-propelled howitzer.  The system had two vehicles, the howitzer and the Resupply Vehicle (RSV), both tracked. First, the Crusader programme had an integrated data environment (IDE).  This system contained all pertinent data about the program from the design phase, contractor bids, system design, simulations systems, points of contact and every piece of information that might be needed.  As is with most programmes that are embarked upon today, there was a team of contractors and government involved. Several different organizations were involved, in many different geographical locations.  The IDE, however, served to bring them all together in a secure environment.  The programme office was responsible for access to the IDE. Each person was evaluated for their need to know about different parts of the programme.  If a contractor needed to have access, they signed non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) so that no infringement of intellectual property would occur.  Each person was allowed access through a password to only the parts of the system (and subsequent information) that that person was authorized to have, and needed to complete his work. However, sharing of information was key to the success of the program – which lasted much longer due to the SBA approach used.  In particular, the system design software was written in such a way that when it was developed sufficiently, it could be handed to those who were creating the crew-station training simulator.  Future users of the system began testing and training on the system before it was fully created, so that design ideas could be passed back through the IDE to the design team.  For instance, it was only when someone sat in the seat for the simulator did it come to light that the seat did not have a height adjuster. That was quickly added back into the system. Reuse is another big factor of SBA.  Those developing the software to run the actual Crusader system, first developed it for the simulator.  Data could be passed back and forth amongst those who were using the software for different applications.    Simulation also allowed for concurrent testing.  Stimulators tested the firing system without having to have the entire Crusader in the field.  Virtual simulators tested the human factors aspects of the interior of the vehicles, as well as the combined functions needed for the entire crew and commander.The Crusader programme broke through old barriers by enabling designers to completely change something in simulation before a prototype was ever created. The IDE function allowed the users within different organizations, and different contractors, to have confidence that their intellectual property would be protected while still providing the best information for the entire group to use.  Alas, although an excellent example of the use of SBA, the decisions for the use of the system, cost and applicability to doctrine, future tactics and other issues is left to the decision makers.  Simulation, after all, is only a tool to assist those decision makers. 5.1.2 ComancheComanche, otherwise known as the Reconnaissance and Attack Helicopter 66 (RAH 66), is still flying.  The completely new design has been tested in simulation more than any other.  This programme is a part of the  Objective Force (OF) and is projected to work in concert with the Future Combat System (FCS).  Comanche also uses an IDE, although the team is smaller than that of Crusader, it still incorporates more than one major contractor (Boeing and Sikorsky), and numerous other organizations.  One distinguishing characteristic about the Comanche programme is that they have utilized their Simulation Support Plan (SSP) more fully than programmes in the past.  The SSP is a tool that is required of the Program Manager (PM), but has in the past been simply a piece of paper listing the possible simulations that might be used in the program.  Often the update of the SSP was neglected, and it was left to sit on the shelf as the program continued.  However, Comanche personnel decided to use the SSP in a more robust manner, changing and updating it as the program went from milestone to milestone.  In this way, the living document of the SSP was a tool, added into the SBA toolbox from which they could pull.Further, the way in which simulations themselves have been used has been remarkable.  One example was how the contractor successfully met a Measure of Performance (MOP) for a milestone event.   A suite of computational flow dynamics models was used to predict the way in which an infrared heat signature was emitted from a specific part of the aircraft.  Actual test data of the prototype craft was used as a baseline.  The simulation was then run for that test data situation.  The results matched.  The simulation was used to predict the way in which the data would change if the design was changed.  The design change was approved and implemented before ever 'bending metal' to change the prototype.  An entire phase of prototyping and testing was eliminated because of the confidence of the engineers (and validators) of the simulation.5.1.3 Future Combat System (U.S. Army Objective Force) Finally, the foremost programme in the United States today implementing the practices of SBA is the Future Combat System (FCS).  This programme is a U.S. Army initiative that is part of the Objective Force (OF).  All those involved in new system procurement have been aware of the drawbacks of traditional system acquisition for some time.  From each perspective: congressional funding, programme management, use in joint and international cooperative ventures,  testing, training, technology – each group involved (contractors, government, military, etc) understands that we cannot do business as in the past.  The risks are too great, failure means keeping 40-60 year old systems fielded at great risk and cost.  The first step the FCS programme office utilized using SBA was that the design of the vehicle/vehicles was not specified. Nor was the number, the configuration nor the capabilities.  How did the programme office get contractors to bid on such an ill-defined system?  By having the contractors bid on what the system might be, using simulation to prove their designs. Each contractor was invited to use government facilities to prove the validity of their concepts in their simulations and models.  The evaluation not only led to the contractor's use of the simulations, but the government's ability to evaluate the designs – and the simulations – to gain greater insight into what could be used to design the system.  Evaluation and testing is always an essential element of any programme.  Evaluation of multiple capabilities and future capabilities earlier in the process is an added advantage.  Rather than dealing with the technology that was at hand – or more precisely – being behind the technology curve because of antiquated government procurement processes– the government was evaluating possible technologies and how they could be incorporated into the system.Current testing of the system capabilities is being conducted through the use of simulation.  These tests incorporate the ideas of the Joint Visualization Battlelab (JVB with Joint SAF) and the processes used by the Unit of Action Maneuver Battlelab (UAMBL)-developed OneSAF.  Not only are we joining simulation processes with the actual system, but we are incorporating ideas about future capabilities into the system. Further, we are learning how to integrate disparate simulations with essential data about doctrine, tactics and technology that is being employed today.  SBA is proving to be the tool to use to first discover those areas that need attention and second to be able to test them for future combat situations.United Kingdom5.2.1 Ground Based Air Defence (GBAD)  The GBAD programme is considered a SEBA programme because it integrates several different system capabilities along with their supporting assets.  It is an Air Defence Command, Control, Communication, Computation and Information (ADC4I) system that enables target identification before the target becomes a threat to the system.  Phase one of the programme will integrate legacy capabilities with a new capability that is SEBA-oriented because it has overarching ADC4I capability. This means that new developments are being integrated into older systems, so that the acquisition lifecycle is more rapid and efficient.  The GBAD system projects threat information out to the 2020 timeframe, and integrates that information into testing and training. The system is created to first evaluate the system and training currently employed, then eliminate old methodologies that are inefficient in supporting training.  The entire methodology is designed to eliminate unnecessary costs associated with this evaluation and training as well. The GBAD also points out a requirement for evaluating the emerging threat environment to be able to recommend upgrades to existing weapons systems.  This provides new systems in development the ability to support migration from those legacy systems.  Thus, GBAD is a prime example of SEBA practices being put to use. (http://www.mod.uk/dpa/projects/gbad.htm)GBAD Phase 2 will continue collaboration with NATO allies, through an extension of the original Memorandum of Understanding (MOU).  Other countries (i.e. The Netherlands, Turkey, Norway, Germany, Italy and France) have also expressed an interest in MOUs to benefit from this program.    5.2.2  Future Joint Carrier Aircraft (FJCA). The FJCA programme shows SeBA processes and highlights one of the primary reasons for the idea in the first place, that of reduced funding and the requirement for systems that meet the needs of more than one military service or organization.The actual procurement programme started in 1996 as a formal replacement of the Royal Navy’s Sea Harrier, slated for 2012.  However, in 1998 it was determined that the new system could (and should) be a joint program between the Royal Navy (RN) and the Royal Air Force (RAF).  The Joint Force 2000 requirement states that the system will replace the RAF’s GR9, and T10, albeit 3 years later than the Sea Harrier.   The FJCA will replace current Joint Force Harriers with a multi-role attack/fighter aircraft.The FJCA programme is not only a joint, internal UK programme, but an international one as well.  The possibility for coordination and cooperation is enhanced by multi-nation development.  This was especially seen as the case when the UK looked for a programme that would meet its needs.  They found it in the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF), a US programme.  An MOU was entered into in January of 2001 to partner with the US programme.  As a part of the process, the UK has been a full participant in the source selection.  The Short Take-Off Vertical Landing (STOVL) variant of JSF has been selected to meet the requirements. The fact that there are different variants and that each country involved has input to the process shows the way in which SeBA works.  The environment part of SeBA is also the collaboration of organisations, as well as information across the acquisition programme.  By using integrated data environments in the larger sense of the term, the UK is able to influence design parameters to meet their needs.  Additionally, the way in which information is shared and synthetic environments created to develop this programme, other programmes are also made aware of  the progress (as well as the challenges). In this particular case, the FJCA has close ties to other programmes; the Maritime Airborne Surveillance Capability (MASC) and the Future Offensive Air System (FOAS). (http://www.mod.uk/dpa/projects/jca.htm)5.2.3 SECO Initiatives The Synthetic Environment Coordination Office (SECO), the creator of the aforementioned SeBA wheel, is responsible for conducting research and coordination to enable SeBA.  In that regard, the SECO initiatives have to do with the way in which SeBA is executed, the underpinnings for it and postulated ways in which to move forward.  This is different from the US approach, which has responsibility to much larger service organizations.  Although the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) is regarded as a 'sister' organization to SECO, the methodologies employed for evaluation are somewhat different.  We will discuss these differences in the next section.According to the SECO website (http://www.mod.uk/issues/simulation/seba.htm):". . . SeBA is predominantly concerned with the construction and management of an evolving set of Synthetic Environments (SEs), Models and Simulations (SEMS), of increasing complexity. The aim is to mitigate programme risk by simulating, modelling and emulating the necessary variables to ensure the equipment target remains within the specified boundaries (ordinarily of time, cost and performance). In an ideal implementation, everything would be known about the project and the equipment solution before any commercial commitment is made; this is unrealistic, as the expenditure to make this assessment would normally outweigh the potential benefits."A product of one of those studies is a paper by Lt Cdr Monty Long RN, formerly serving in SECO and  Mr Steve Gale from the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, UK Ministry of Defence.  Their paper, entitled "Simulation Based Acquisition: The Ground Truth," was the result of study throughout the world on what SBA really is, who was (at that moment in time) attempting to implement its practices and recommendations to bring out.  Their conclusion is still valid, and in keeping with the opinions of the authors of this paper.  Each study conducted by SECO assists the UK in coordinating all the acquisition programmes across the entire country. This office is able to coordinate in a way that other countries or organizations cannot, but with different restrictions on how that information can be exchanged.  Data resides in a central repository with access required by government approval.    However, part of the SECO initiatives are also to cooperate with other countries in their SeBA/SBA initiatives as well.us/uk differences First, the reason for the difference in the approach for SBA and SeBA is size.  The UK has the flexibility to be able to encompass all acquisition related programs from one office. The SECO has input to the major organizations within the UK that deal with acquisition, regardless of the system, service or organization.  Because of this central organization, the UK can focus its studies in particular areas, make recommendations and influence the process.  The US, on the other hand, does not have the same level of autonomy in one given organization.  That is not because an organization does not exist to guide policy development (it does, in DMSO), but rather because the huge number of involved organizations, personnel and military services.  Each U.S. military service has its own way of dealing with the acquisition process and how simulation is implemented within it, regardless of overall oversight.  This is evidenced by the fact that the very regulations that guide simulation work has now been taken from a regulation to a guideline.Second, the differences are also in approach to information.  The UK has different ties to other countries than the US, and must work within the constraints of being a part of larger organizations. This can be seen as flexibility or as a constraint, depending upon the situation. In some cases, the UK programme guides cooperative efforts, such as the GBAD, involving numerous countries– having facilities in both the UK and Germany.  In other instances, questions of national security have required different rules in the UK with regard to contractors than the US has.  However, the effort required to manage one acquisition program in the US can cost exponentially more in time,  money and personnel than one within the UK defence organization.  Information flow can be restricted from the US to other countries when it may flow more easily between the European states, for example.  However, the similarity here lies in the fact that one cannot ever say which programme will be more flexible given different parameters!Third, the difference in the size of programmes also forces the UK to focus on one particular area at a time. That is why SECO has done such extensive work with verification, validation and accreditation (VV&A). The UK philosophy is to focus intently on one area to get maximum benefit across the programme.  Funding does drive the focus of a program, and SEBA/SBA is no different.  The lessons learned of two different ways of executing SBA with regard to organization and structure can be shared.Finally, the goals of the two countries are the same – make the acquisition system faster, more efficient and provide better equipment for the military through use of models and simulation.conclusionsWe have discussed the process and elements of SBA/SEBA,  and seen that there are numerous programs that are attempting to integrate those processes.  There are success stories in the use of modelling and simulation.  The final analysis, however, is that there is no one case study that proves SBA/SEBA itself.  The reason?  There has not been enough time to see those changes and processes across the entire lifecycle to prove that point.  We quote Lt Cdr Long and Mr. Gale from their paper:"It is believed that SBA is an initiative that will significantly influence future acquisition but larger acquisition initiatives that are 'driven from the top' will always take precedence.  SBA has already been a catalyst for acquisition reform and, given technology take-up trends, in 3 to 5 years the dust will be blown off the conference papers and the SBA visionaries will be praised.  The success of SBA should not be measured by the frequency of the use of the term in programme plans.  SBA will have succeeded when the principles behind it are embraced in acquisition reforms.  SBA will then not be seen as something different, it will be an organic part of acquisition itself and the term 'SBA' will have long since faded. "Finally, although the terminology will change over time, the processes of SeBA/SBA are valid. We have shown that numerous programmes are considering the entire timeline of  the acquisition lifecycle rather than one phase at a time.  There is collaboration not only within services within one country, but also across several different countries as well.  Simulations have been used in most every phase of acquisition programmes throughout the lifecycle before. The difference with those processes and SBA/SeBA is that the information is being utilized again and again, throughout the programme.  The lessons learned, and sometimes the actual simulation data, is also being passed to other programmes.  Changes are being made technologically to enable this process.  Integrated Data Environments (IDEs) that enable sharing of information in a limited fashion to protect proprietary information is one way.  Collaborative simulation exercises is another.   Joint programme reviews, and even directives or law to utilize simulation have been created. The biggest change that is needed, however, is still the human being involved.  Only in time will we trust that the systems are working the way they should, that sharing this information is not only possible, but the only productive way to make sure a programme makes it to fielding and final transition to the next system.SBA/SeBA is still in the beginning stages of execution, however, it is still a process well worth the time, money and effort to make a reality.  references-Hollenbach, SIW 00F-SIW-081- Synthetic Environment Coordination Office (SECO) publication, 2001.- How Organizations Commit To Change, Daryl R. Conner and Robert W. Patterson, “Building Commitment to Organizational Change,” Training and Development Journal  (April 1983), p 18-30.- Defense Acquisition University website (www.dau.mil)- Synthetic Environment Coordination Office (SECO) Website: http://www.mod.uk/issues/simulation/seba.htm- Ground Based Air Defence System http://www.mod.uk/dpa/projects/gbad.htm- Future Joint Carrier Aircraft: (http://www.mod.uk/dpa/projects/jca.htm)- SECO Issues http://www.mod.uk/issues/simulation/seba.htm):- Mr. Michael Lavine, presentation to International Test and Evaluation Association (ITEA) Conference, 6 December 2000.- (DoD Glossary 1995). PAGE 1 of  NUMPAGES 8 PAGE 8 o