Skinning the Body: Human FOM DevelopmentMAJ Gregory CreechMichael D. Proctor, Ph.D.Department of Industrial Engineering and Management SystemsP.O. Box 162450University of Central FloridaOrlando, FL 32816-2450407-823-5296, FAX 407-823-3413gregory.creech@us.army.mil,  mproctor@mail.ucf.eduKeywords:HLA, FOM, medical simulation, virtual humanABSTRACT: Medical simulations cover a very broad spectrum and vary significantly in terms of modeling fidelity.  Most however, share a common thread – interaction with a portion of the human body (real or modeled).  This paper addresses the High Level Architecture (HLA) as the architecture of choice for creation of a complete human body model.  The HLA, with its detailed handling of objects and interactions, offers the perfect environment for describing the human body and its complex actions and reactions to both internal and external stimuli.  Beginning with a brief discussion of several human body models, we first examine demonstrated and potential interoperability shortfalls between these models and existing medical simulations.  Included in this discussion is how the HLA would resolve such shortfalls.  The paper concludes with a proposed subset baseline Human Federation Object Model (FOM) that focuses on the first line of human defense to external stimuli: the skin.  When expanded, this FOM could serve as the foundation for resolution of the identified interoperability shortcomings and set the stage for future medical simulations development. 1. INTRODUCTIONMedical simulation is exploding, as medical professionals realize the wealth of training opportunities that the field provides.  As medical simulations become more technologically advanced, so to do their underlying framework, sometimes to the point of rigid complexity, limiting their scalability and subsequently hindering their overall use to the medical community.  HLA promises to change that, making even the most complex of systems play nicely with others, through strict compliance with architecture standards.  Medical simulations, as complex or focused as they may be, generally share a common thread; their interaction with the human body.  This poses a significant architectural challenge, since the human body is itself a complex system of systems.  In the real world, medical practitioners are presented with the problem that each human body differs somewhat due to age, genetics, etc.  However, we are all still human. Years of exhaustive research have gone into studying the human body’s actions and reactions to varying stimuli.  In military terms, medical practitioners are fighting a known enemy.  Now, consider the variety of virtual human models employed by various medical simulators and simulations.  Further consider the interoperability nightmares associated with incorporating these systems into a larger-scale simulation, when each uses its own version of the human body model.  One may liken this to a surgeon undergoing an in-depth pre-surgical study of human anatomy and associated pathology, only to be faced with, upon pulling back the sheet on the operating table, a scaly fish ready to be put under the knife!  Such situations just don’t work.  The medical community needs a standard HLA-compliant human body model with which to work.  That way, just as the surgeon knows what to expect when walking into the operating room, disparate simulations will also have a degree of comfort coming into a larger-scale medical simulation, knowing that they and the other models in the simulation share a common understanding of the body.  2. ON COMMON GROUND: ATTEMPTS TO STANDARDIZE Researchers at the University of Washington, Seattle have formed the Digital Anatomist Program [1], with a goal to standardize a knowledge database for digital representation of the human body.  Their knowledge base is hierarchal in nature and would serve as an excellent baseline for HLA FOM development.   It does not, however, take into account objects external to the human body, but important to the vast array of medical simulations.  The list of external objects must eventually include the full complement of surgical instruments, as well as other vehicles for the introduction of substances onto or into the human body. In 1999, Creech and Proctor [2] examined the Combat Trauma Patient Simulator (CTPS) [3].  The CTPS research team at the University of Central Florida’s Institute for Simulation and Training (IST) was prototyping and evaluating a training and analysis simulation system that realistically simulated the emergency medical treatment process. The premise of this research project was that realistic physical simulations, from the time of initial trauma throughout treatment and transportation, could simulate “virtual casualties”.  The central component of this system is a physical simulation of a casualty (an instrumented mannequin), the Human Patient Simulator (HPS).  The HPS is a model-driven system.  Sophisticated physiological and pharmacological models determine virtually all simulator responses.  Patient physiology is defined by patient profiles and can be modified either “on-line” or through scripts.  In HLA terms, the CTPS system is an HLA federation.  We determined that if a theoretical simulator capable of total body injury and intervention were to join an HLA Federation such as the CTPS federation, then the required FOM would be substantial.  The FOM would have to describe the overall patient in a normal state, both anatomically and physiologically, as well as in altered (or injured) states.  The FOM would have to fully describe injury mechanisms, including their specific effects on the human body.  Such a FOM was begun by a company called Mystech Associates, Inc. [4].Mystech, under government sponsorship, developed a prototype “Human Response to Stimuli” FOM.  The MYSTECH FOM is simply a union of two previously developed MYSTECH SOMs, the Physiological and Response to Stimuli SOMs.  Each of these object models is discussed in more detail in the following paragraphs.Mystech developed a Physiological SOM for stimulation of a mannequin, which incorporated the human respiratory and cardiovascular systems, along with the corresponding nervous system components.  Mystech’s decision to limit the scope of the Physiological SOM to the cardiovascular and respiratory systems is based on these system’s key role in the intake and distribution of oxygen, a function key to survival of the physiological system.  There is no denying the validity of this decision, however, not all simulations will rely so heavily on the underlying physiology.  The Mystech Physiological SOM guided the development of the Mystech Stimuli SOM.  Since the Physiological SOM focused on the respiratory and cardiovascular systems, the Stimuli SOM only included those stimuli that affect these systems.  With this approach, the size of Stimuli SOM increases proportionally with the size of the Physiological SOM.  In developing the Stimuli SOM, Mystech concluded that the Stimuli Federate does not determine the first order response of the body.  This means that the structure of the Stimuli SOM did not include physiological objects.Our 1999 research concluded that the CTPS had some limitations, as did Mystech’s object model.  One identified limitation was the inability to visually manifest the physical damage that occurs with a physical injury. According to Satava and Jones [4], “ “Realism” is the prime determinant of believability in any virtual environment, with the medical arena having a high priority on realism.”  With this in mind, an ideal virtual patient, from a medical caregiver standpoint, should look and function much like a real patient on the outside and inside.  We must also include the anatomical and physiological structure necessary for “total body” representation.  One task of the aforementioned CTPS research was to evaluate a U.S. government-owned program called Operational Requirements and Casualty Assessment (ORCA) [6] for possible integration into the CTPS system [7].  More specifically, the requirements for this task were:evaluate the ORCA simulation to determine its suitability for integration into the CTPS system as a patient generatordesign the method for integrating ORCACritical to this paper, the ORCA integration studies examined the effects of various types of injuries on the human body and determined their degradations on the body’s ability to perform specified tasks are mapped over time. This study provides much insight into the complexity of modeling the human body, considering all of the associated interaction possibilities.  The ORCA GUI (see Figure 1) provided a screen display of the human anatomical model, allowing the user to select penetration entrance and exit wounds via the mouse.Figure 1 - ORCA GUI for Penetration InsultAlthough rudimentary, the interface provided insight into how detailed penetration injuries to the human body could be.  We realized through studying the ORCA model that tissue damage will trigger complex systemic interactions, the modeling of which are on a grand scale.  We concluded that the Mystech Stimuli SOM would have to be considerably enhanced in order to handle total-body reaction to stimuli.  Also noticeably lacking were the stimuli necessary to do the damage to the body.3. THE NEED FOR VISUALLY-ENHANCED MEDICAL SIMULATIONSThere are a number of simulations currently available that are attempting to enhance realism through visualization.  The reason is obvious: medical first-responders must determine level of consciousness and attend to major life-threatening conditions.  Many of these conditions present themselves visually (e.g. major hemorrhage).  MediSim [8], developed by Sandia National Laboratories, focuses on situational training of first-line battlefield medical personnel whose responsibility it is to triage and  stabilize multiple casualties, prior to their evacuation to field hospitals. The Virtual Medical Trainer – Trauma Patient Simulator (VMET-TPS) [9]. is an interactive, multimedia, virtual- reality-based simulator  that presents the user with a three-dimensional (3D)  trauma scenario, complete with realistic visual and aural effects.  None of these high-fidelity visual simulations, as we concluded in 1999, have attempted to join an HLA Federation such as the CTPS Federation.  This conclusion still appears valid.  A starting point for addressing these issues may be the Mystech Stimuli SOM, but it needs major enhancement.  For example, the tissue damage provided by ORCA-generated injuries are not represented as stimulus in the Mystech Stimuli SOM.  We concluded that something on the order of a “Damage to Tissue” stimulus is required.  The complex systemic interactions to such stimuli would also have to be dealt with and this will require a great deal of medical expertise.4. THE HUMAN BODY FOM: ONLY SKIN DEEP The CTPS study gave us insight into just how close the simulation and medial communities are to creating the ideal virtual patient:the Visible Human Project has made it possible to view a realistic digital 3D representation of the human body, inside and outalgorithms for stitching together digital images into panoramic scenes are now faster and more efficientvisualization of virtual worlds through head mounted displays is better than ever tactile devices have made it possible to realistically touch and manipulate objects in a virtual worldThese insights enlightened and motivated us to pursue an HLA FOM solution to the complex human body.  Such an endeavor, however, will be enormous.  What we portray here (Tables 1.1, 1.2, and 1.3) is a representative subset; an idea of how existing models such as the Human Anatomist database and others can conform to HLA standards.The tables display objects, attributes, and interactions associated with two primary players: the skin and the scalpel.   As you can see, the representative FOM tables leave enough ambiguity to allow for other scalpel-like cutting instruments.  Using the data from the tables, it is easy to put together how skin meets scalpel to achieve a simple simulated incision.  The scalpel exerts a specific pressure at a specific point on the body (cut_start_surface).  The pressure causes the skin to part until instrument pressure equals skin resistance (cut_start_sublayer).  The surgeon moves the scalpel along a certain path (cut_direction) at a specified speed (instr_speed).  The incision stops when speed and pressure approach zero, resulting in cut_end-sublayer and finally (as instr_location approaches surface skin) cut_end_surface.  This is the simplest of examples.  A more robust FOM will also take into account actions such as vessel damage, the starting and stopping of blood flow, and the systemic changes that these events produce.  The example does, however, demonstrate the capability of putting seemingly complex medical functions into a rigid architecture such as HLA.  Benefits of pulling simulations together via this FOM are highlighted in the following example.  Let’s say that SurgSimA has the most fantastic graphic representation of the thoracic region imaginable.  The haptic realism associated with SurgSimA, however, leaves much to be desired.  SurgSimB, on the other hand, dedicated significant resources into making its haptic feedback mechanism and array of surgical instruments the best in the business.  Wouldn’t it be nice to use the SurgSimB instruments on the SurgSimA body model.  A HLA FOM could ensure that the incisions executed with painstaking precision on SurgSimB, maintain the same level of precision when they are displayed on the high fidelity output of SurgSimA.    Base Class1st Subclass2nd Subclass3rd SubclassCasualtySkinEpidermisDermisHypodermisStratum_ germinatumStratum_ spinosumStratum_ granulosumStratum _lucidumStratum_ corneumPapillaryReticularTissue_connectiveTissue_adiposeTable 1.1 Abbreviated Object Class Structure [10] ClassAttributeDatatypeSkinSkin_thicknessSkinThicknessEnum (mm)Skin_resistanceScale (1-10)InstrumentInstr_TypeCuttingProbingInstr_ChararcteristicLength (mm)Width (mm)Weight (kg)Instr_locationCoordinate (x,y,z)Instr_pressureGrams per square mmInstr_speedmm/secCut_directionAngle (degrees)Table 1.2 Abbreviated Attribute TableAffectedObjectsInteractionInteraction DefinitionSkin, InstrumentCut_start_surfacex, y, z coordinate of incision start point at skin surface.  Marked by instr_pressure and skin_resistance moving away from 0 and instr_location moving away from surface to subsurface location.Cut_start_sublayerx, y, z coordinate of incision start point at depth. Marked by decreased instr_pressure and instr_speed, as well as movement of instrument along angle described by cut_direction.Cut_end_surfacex, y, z coordinate of inscision end point at skin surface.  Marked by instr_pressure and instr_speed values approaching  0 and instr_location approaching skin surface location.Cut_end_sublayerx, y, z coordinate of incision end point at depth (marked by instr_pressure, skin_resistance values approaching 0.)Table 1.3 Abbreviated Interaction Table5. CONCLUSION ORCA and the Visible Human Project demonstrate the ability to provide a real time digital representation of the human body.  The CTPS demonstrates the utility of human body simulators in training emergency medical personnel.  The utility of a virtual human, as opposed to the physical representation, is obvious, particularly when considering a mass casualty training scenario.  Patient injury states could be stored for multiple patients, only to be passed on, at the speed determined by the trainer, to the waiting training audience.  These “virtual patients” could be represented on a variety of simulations.  For instance,  a visually-enhanced simulator such as MediSim or VMET-TPS might be the best training vehicle for on-site response and triage.  An HPS-like mannequin might be best for care while transporting the casualty from the battlefield (or civilian trauma site) to a longer-term care facility.  Once at the long-term care facility, a high-fidelity surgical simulator may take over the job of patient representation.  The HLA has proven itself as a valid mechanism for bringing disparate military simulations together on common ground.  The element missing for establishment of such harmony within the medical community is the Human Body FOM.  Medical practitioners and simulation developers must, however, decide on a FOM.  This paper has discussed a possible starting point (the Digital Anatomist Program knowledge database, or similar hierarchal model), and even taken it a step forward by proposing a set of HLA-ready external interaction and object class additions.  After deciding on the FOM, the medical community must invest the necessary time and money to make the FOM a reality.  The world will reap the benefits.  6. REFERENCES[1] Rosse, C., Mejino, J.L., Modayur, B.R., Jakobovits, R., Hinshaw, K.P. and Brinkley, J.F., Motivation and Organizational Principles for Anatomical Knowledge Rrepresentation: the Digital Anatomist Symbolic Knowledge Base,  J. Am. Med. Informatics Assoc.5.17-40, 1998, available online at:http://sig.biostr.washington.edu/~onard/AMIApapers/KBpaper.pdf [2] Creech, G. and Proctor, M., Research into the Enhancement of Medical Training Scenarios Through Simulation Integration, 99S-SIW-020, Proceedings of the Spring 99 SIW, Orlando, FL, 1999.[3] Rajput, S., Kun Tu, H., Goldiez, B.F., & Petty, M.D. (1997), Combat Trauma Patient Simulator: Phase 1 Final Report, IST-CR-97-28, December 19, 1997.[4] Lyell, M., (1998), Representation of Non-visual Stimuli as a Precursor to Mannequin Stimulation Over the Internet, SBIR contract # M67004-97-C-0047, Mystech Associates, Inc., Apr 30, 1998. [5] Satava, R. and Jones, S. (1997), Virtual Environments for Medical Training and Education, Presence, Vol.6, No 2, April 1997. [6] Klopcic, J. Terrence, Neades, David N., and Tauson, Richard A., Operational Requirements- based Casualty Assessment (ORCA) Code: Models and Algorithms, 8 May 1998.[7] Petty, M., Combat Trauma Patient Simulator, Phase 2 Workplan for the IST Portion of the Project, Version 1, July 8 1998.[8] Stansfield, S., Shawver, D., Sobel, A. (1998), MediSim: A Prototype VR System for Training Medical First Responders, Proceedings of the IEEE Virtual Reality Annual International Symposium, March 14-18 1998, Atlanta GA, IEEE Computer Society Press. [9] Research Triangle Institute (RTI) (1998), Virtual Reality in Medical Training: Patient Assessment and Trauma Care Simulation, online document: http://www.rti.org [10] Swanson, J,  Anatomy and Histology of Normal Skin, Loyola University, Chicago, 1996, online document: http://www.lumen.luc.edu/lumen/MedEd/medicine/dermatology/melton/skinlsn/sknlsn.htm7. AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIESMAJ GREGORY CREECH is in an acquisition officer in the US Army.  He received his B.S. in Computer Science from Methodist College, Fayetteville, NC in 1988 and his M.S. in Industrial Engineering (Simulators and Training Systems) from the University of Central Florida in 1999.  He began his army career as a special operations medic in 1983.DR. MICHAEL D. PROCTOR is an Assistant Professor at the University of Central Florida conducting research and teaching in the field of Interactive Simulation and Training Systems.  Dr. Proctor holds advanced degrees in Computer Science, Operations Research and earned his Ph.D. in Industrial Engineering at North Carolina State University.