From Swedish Environmental Information to SEDRIS – a Necessary Transition for Future Interoperability? (03E-SIW-013)Simon AhlbergSwedish Defence Research Agency, FOIPO Box 1165SE-581 11 LinköpingSweden+46 13 37 80 15Simon.Ahlberg@foi.seSusanne AstellSwedish Defence Materiel Administration, FMVSE-115 88 StockholmSweden+46 8 784 44 44Susanne.Astell@fmv.seKeywords:SEDRIS, EDCS, Geographic information, Environmental information, SwedenABSTRACT: Current changes in Swedish military doctrine indicate new priorities for the Swedish Armed Forces and industry. International peacekeeping operations and exercises put new demands on the handling and exchange of environmental information, where Sweden has to be able to describe and exchange environmental information with other participants in order to be able to interoperate successfully.This paper presents the results of a joint project performed by the Swedish Defence Materiel Administration (FMV) and the Swedish Defence Research Agency (FOI). The paper addresses the current status of how Swedish geographic information is handled and maintained. A survey among consumers and producers of environmental data has been performed to determine future trends and needs. The paper also discusses how the concept of Network Based Defence will impact geographic information in the future. The Network Based Defence concept will introduce new challenges for data providers and users, since environmental data collected from multiple sensors and sensor types must be handled and exchanged continuously among systems, also to any foreign participants. This accentuates the need for a common and standardized environment description that will ensure unambiguous interpretation of the information that is conveyed. SEDRIS (Synthetic Environment data Representation and Interchange Specification) is a promising system for this. The use of SEDRIS also affects how Swedish domestic environmental data are to be handled. Swedish geographic information has until now been described using national Swedish formats and schemas. One aim of the project was to see how Swedish geographic and environmental information can be represented in EDCS. Another aim of the project was to determine what actions need to be taken if Sweden is to adopt EDCS for its environment description and how a transition to SEDRIS may affect producers and consumers of environmental data.IntroductionSweden has a long tradition in handling geographic information. The Swedish Land Survey organization was founded in 1628 and has since then provided maps and other information about the country. To support the growing need for geographic information within the Swedish Armed Forces, a new organization called GeoSE (the Armed Forces Support Unit for Geographic Information) was formed. The objective of the organization is to handle distribution and production of tailored geographic data products for applications used within the Armed Forces. The kind of geographic information that has traditionally been provided by the organization has been almost exclusively geographic information for GIS-like applications and decision support systems. However, in the last decades, the organization has also provided geographic source data for use in Swedish simulation applications. The kind of data used as source data for simulation has not been different from that used in GIS and decision support system, though, which as technology has developed, has proven to be insufficient in terms of resolution and precision.Sweden is going through a significant structural change in military doctrine  REF _Ref32637156 \r \h [1]. Its focus has shifted towards a concept called Network Based Defence. The idea of Network Based Defence entails a new way of working for the Armed Forces. With greater flexibility than before it will be possible to link together different military functions, such as decision-making, information systems and weapon systems, in a single networked organisation. This Network Based Defence will provide the basis for an improved understanding of various situations, thus enabling faster decision-making and greater flexibility in combining units and resources to suit whatever task is at hand. Consequently, the Armed Forces will be able to utilise its resources much more effectively than before. The network concept places special demands on the Armed Forces to change the methods of command and control, warfare, and development, but it also calls for a review of the command structure and the proficiencies that future soldiers and the Armed Forces staff will need. The network concept also sets new demands for distribution, exchange and storage of geographic and environmental information due to the constant flow of data acquired using distributed sensors. Data distribution will no longer be limited to Swedish users and systems. International cooperation and information exchange in becoming increasingly important. To ensure that the information is correctly conveyed, the use of a system that unambiguously describes the information content is critical to obtaining a correct and unified situation assessment among all users.Swedish geographic information, handling and organizationSpecifications for geographic information are used as a basis for requirements specifications from FMV to the industry as well as a delivery specification when ordering geographic information from GeoSE. The product specification contains the following two parts:A structural specification for geodata products, based on standards.A contents specification formed according to the structural specification and covering the contents to create a geodata product. Hence, the contents specifications are used in conjunction with the structural specifications to form delivery specifications for deliveries from GeoSE It is important that the method chosen when establishing a specification has a broad international acceptance and usage. This ensures that there is a common use of terminology and structures among different participants (systems and data providers as well as the users). This yields the prerequisites to establish an effective environment for producer-/provider systems and user systems for handling geographic data. It is also important that the specifications that are produced are unified so that there e.g. are no multiple definitions for an object.Above all, the specifications shall be compatible with existing and emerging international standards. Product specifications for environmental data should essentially be produced in the same manner as specifications for geographic data.The impact of Network Based DefenceThe paradigm shift to Network Based Defence will have a significant impact on how data is collected and distributed. The sensors in the network will continuously provide the system with updated information. For every component it is critical to understand what information is distributed and to be able to extract and insert its specific information from the massive data volume. Also, this new way of distributing data and the amount of data to be handled set new demands on data providers such as GeoSE. For this new way of distributing information, strict rules have to be followed in order to provide consistent information content throughout the system. To ensure this consistency, there have to be some forms of authoritative directives specifying how this is to be handled. The projectThe work described in this paper is the initial effort to determine the needs for environmental data within the military simulator community in Sweden  REF _Ref32646569 \r \h [2]. The work also attempts to determine how the Swedish proprietary system for describing environmental information can be translated into a more widely used international system in order to obtain a broader source data base and to be able to share data with international participants in distributed simulations or other applications that use environmental information.Future NeedsIn this project we conducted a survey which was sent to a number of leading producers and consumers of environmental data within the Swedish simulation sector, to the industry as well as to military and government. One purpose of the survey was to gather information about parameters such as status, geographic coverage, sensor capabilities and fidelity of geographic information used in Swedish simulators. Another purpose was to determine the need for environmental data for the simulator systems, and of what kind. Also, the survey should find out current trends in geographic environment usage for simulator development.Many responses indicated a need for better geographic information with higher precision and resolution, and a majority expressed a clear need for the ability to obtain international data. This is due to the fact that more and more simulators and users of distributed simulators want to be able to participate in distributed simulations, even internationally.Interoperability As stated before, to improve the chances of interoperability, a fundamental requirement is that the information being conveyed is understood and interpreted equally. Since more operations require international interaction, there is a need to be able to exchange data between many kinds of systems and participants.Why SEDRIS?The Swedish system for classifying environmental features is called GSD (Geografiska Sverigedata, Geographic data of Sweden)  REF _Ref32651945 \r \h [3]. In order to be able to represent Swedish geographic information in such a way that our Armed Forces can exchange environmental information with international partners unambiguously and at the same time being exchange that information in a non-proprietary standardized way, there is a need to shift towards the use of an international system. SEDRIS (Synthetic Environment Data Representation and Interchange Specification)  REF _Ref32651960 \r \h [4] is a very promising system for this, as its aim is to provide a system to represent any kind of environmental feature (EDCS / DRM / SRM), and also to provide a data interchange mechanism which will allow robust sharing of environmental information (STF / API), which will lead to greater exchange and re-use of data. That is a match in requirements.Differences Between Swedish Geographic Information and EDCSThere are some fundamental differences concerning how geographic information is represented and classified in GSD and EDCS. The Swedish system for describing geographic data classifies features using feature codes. This way, it is the actual code that is used to tell features apart. In EDCS (and FACC  REF _Ref32637224 \r \h [5] for that matter), features are classified using both classification and attribution. For instance, a road that is more than 7 metres wide will have the GSD code 5021, and a road that is less than 5 metres wide will have the code 5028. As can be seen, it’s the coding that separates them, but the codes themselves give little clues as to what the feature attributes are. In EDCS, these roads would both be classified as ECC_ROAD, but they would have an EAC_TOTAL_USABLE_WIDTH of 7 and 5, respectively. Furthermore, the EAC_TOTAL_USABLE_WIDTH may only be one of the attribute codes that may be used for this. Perhaps we could have used EAC_TRAVELLED_WAY_WIDTH instead. This difference makes somewhat complicated to find a one-to-one mapping between the two representational schemas.Mapping Between GSD, FACC and EDCSSince FACC is considerably more familiar to Swedish users of geographic information, earlier efforts were to map from GSD onto FACC. This mapping would serve as a basis for extending the mapping onto EDCS (since EDCS has conceptual and structural similarities to FACC). With the latest versions of SEDRIS, a tool is provided that automatically translates between FACC and EDCS. This tool can be used to verify that the mapping from GSD directly to EDCS is consistent with the mapping from GSD to EDCS via FACC. This comparison can show if there are any conceptual errors which may lead to long term data interpretation issues. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 6. SEQ Figure \* ARABIC \s 1 1: Alternative ways of mapping from GSD to EDCS.Authoritative MappingLegacy environmental data will probably be used for a considerable time. Therefore we need to make sure that legacy source data is correctly and consistently translated into the new system. There is also a need to provide a correct and consistent classification of environmental concepts during the transition from the old system to the new to introduce the new system and to educate the users. Since there are alternative ways of translating environmental concepts from GSD to EDCS, there is a need for an authoritative master mapping document that clearly states how to translate between the systems. Otherwise, arbitrary translation can lead to inconsistencies in the interpretation of environmental concepts, resulting in possible degradation in interoperability. This master mapping document would serve as a reference when handling legacy data for e.g. simulation construction and maintenance. To create such a mapping document, several fields of expertise should preferably be involved to ensure correct translations and to avoid misunderstanding. This would indeed be a time consuming process, but thoroughness in this process will lead to increased consistency and, also important, increased credibility and therefore, hopefully, a broader user base. Increased credibility is also necessary in order to gain sufficient mandate from both military and civilian organizations to be used as a standardised mapping.All legacy environmental data in Sweden will not be translated to EDCS overnight or maybe at all. However, we can try to persuade the Swedish Armed Forces to specify that all environmental data be described using EDCS when procuring new systems. This way, we can slowly start building a repository of new environmental data.SEDRIS Impact for producersSEDRIS is a maturing technology. With many of its components approaching FCD status in the standardization process, we expect to see an increased usage of SEDRIS once it has been established as a standard. The data representation and the spatial reference models in SEDRIS are not bound to any specific country or system. They are more tied to structure data and to locate and orient it. The component that affects Swedish data representation is, as said before, EDCS.  A key feature of SEDRIS is that when it is used correctly, it is intended to be virtually invisible to the user. It is just another way to transmit the information. Compare this with the use of coaxial cables or twisted pair cable for an Ethernet network. Provided that the user’s tools provide SEDRIS read and write functionality, the actual process of producing and consuming data will not be affected. Should there not be SEDRIS read and write functionality for a proprietary format or system, this of course has to be provided. Since more and more commercial tools provide SEDRIS functionality, even the more commonly used modeling and simulation tools have also implemented SEDRIS import and export functions, so that the use of SEDRIS is not depending on the choice of development tools.SEDRIS Impact for consumersSEDRIS as an interchange technology should not impact users in a major way. Provided that there are mechanisms that allow SEDRIS import and export built into the users’ tools, it should not be any different than using other data sources. If SEDRIS is used, not only data from the user’s specific field of interest can be used, but also data from other disciplines, which leads to access to a broader range of source data.A Transition ChecklistShould a transition in environmental information representation be initiated, there are a few key actions that need to be taken. In the requirements specification for environmental information, it shall be stated that it be delivered and represented using SEDRIS and its technologies.In the requirements specification for models for a project, it shall be stated that these be delivered using SEDRIS and its technologies.There shall exist an authoritative mapping from domestic representation of geographic information to EDCS in order to handle legacy data.There shall be a timetable for the transition to SEDRIS among Swedish producers and consumers of environmental information.The organizations responsible for providing environmental information shall be subjected to education about SEDRIS.Conversions and mapping documents between SEDRIS and internal simulator formats and representations must be developed unless such already exist. Users must be educated about how a transition to SEDRIS as a concept and a technology will affect production and consumption of environmental data. Lack of information often leads to confusion.Probably the most important actions to take are education and information. Both producers and consumers need to see the benefits of using a system that is widely used among international participants and partners in order to exchange and share geographic information. The general level of knowledge among the different organizations must be increased to understand the cost-effectiveness of re-use as well as the added value of the ability to access more data.ConclusionsWith the structural changes in Swedish military affairs in mind, we are bound to adopt a system that ensures reliable data interchange in order to operate internationally, Sweden still has some way to go, but there are emerging systems that can provide valuable aid should a new system be used. However, legacy data must still be handled, which stresses the need for a consistent mapping into the new system. The mapping will serve as an authoritative document that, if broadly used, will reduce inconsistencies among systems, both internal and international. There is also an information and education gap that has to be filled in order to obtain greater knowledge about the benefits of using a standardised international system in terms of re-use, cost-effectiveness and interoperability.ReferencesMilitärstrategisk doktrin, 2002 års utgåva, M7740-774002S. Ahlberg, S. Astell, "Bilaga Milstolpsrapport för syntetisk omgivning AO 569479," FMV Funktion 18400:48516/02, 2002.GSD, http://www.metria.com/gsd/SEDRIS, http://www.sedris.org/FACC Digital Geographic Information Working Group. Digital Geographic Information Exchange Standard (DIGEST), Part 4: Feature and Attribute Coding Catalogue (FACC). Edition 2.1. Washington, DC: September 2000.BiographiesSIMON AHLBERG is a researcher at FOI and his fields of interest are environment modelling, rapid visualisation and computer graphics. He holds an M.Sc degree in Computer Science and Engineering. SUSANNE ASTELL is a senior engineer at FMV and is responsible for specifications of geographic information to the Swedish defence materiel systems. She holds an M.Sc degree in Surveying and Mapping.FACCGSDEnvironmentEDCSEnvironmentEnvironment