A Swedish Approach to Simulation Based Acquisition (03E-SIW-071)Dr. Tommy NordqvistFront End ABSE-582 21 LinköpingSweden+46 13 24 93 51tommy.nordqvist@frontend.seMr. Peter GabrielssonSwedish Defence Material AdministrationSMART-labSE-115 88 StockholmSweden+46 8 7825972peter.gabrielsson@fmv.seMr. Per AsplundFront End ABSE-582 21 LinköpingSweden+46 13 24 93 52per.asplund@frontend.seMrs. Marie-Louise GustafssonSwedish Defence Material AdministrationWeapons DirectorateSE-115 88 StockholmSweden+46 8 7826870marie-louise.gustafsson@fmv.seKeywords:Simulation Based Acquisition, Systems Engineering, Life cycleABSTRACT: This paper presents the status of the work on a Swedish Approach to Simulation Based Acquisition. The paper is directed to different stakeholders within the acquisition community, for example, programme managers and other decision makers. The work is founded on the US interpretation of SBA, the international standard ISO/IEC 15288 “Systems Engineering Life Cycle Processes”, and a life cycle based on information from ISO/IEC 15288 and different relevant SOU:s (Investigations by different Swedish Departments) discussing the new requirements on product acquisition within the Swedish Armed Forces. The paper starts with an introductory description of the different sources used. Thereafter, our preliminary framework is presented. The Swedish Approach to Simulation Based Acquisition is based on a life cycle consisting of following life cycle phases: Concept Development; Concept Evaluation; Systems Definition and Demonstration; Development and Production; Utilization; Modification and Upgrade;and Disposal. Part of the systems life cycle processes found in “FMV processes for product development” has then been linked to the different phases. Potential M&S (Models and Simulation) activities and tools to support the performance of the processes in the respective life cycle phase is then identified and briefly described. Examples of activities and tools are: Development of business (mission) models; Development of product conceptual models; Simulation tools for illustrating the dynamics in business; Simulation tools for “what-if” analyses. Some preliminary conclusions from the work performed so far are also presented. The paper finally addresses ideas on future work.IntroductionDeclining defence budgets and the rapidly changing world has increased the pressure on the Swedish acquisition community to develop more cost effective and efficient ways to acquire different kinds of products. It is also a fact that the products the Swedish Armed Forces need for performing their new tasks has increased in complexity. These demands has resulted in substantial efforts to develop an acquisition model that extensively utilize the potential of Models and Simulation in the difficult and demanding work of supporting the Swedish Armed Forces with technical products that enhance its capacity. Although Models and Simulations have been used within Systems Engineering for a long time, it has been in a fragmented way where M&S is only used for very specific purposes (e.g risk reduction). M&S has not been used in a structured way in a products whole life cycle or to enhance the whole Systems Engineering process.The work presented in this paper is therefore focusing on development of an approach where established systems engineering practices and M&S are integrated in a life cycle perspective to support acquisition of products. The basis for the approach is the product life cycle. In the different phases of the life cycle the technical processes in “FMV processes for product development” are used. To illustrate how the performance of these processes could be enhanced, M&S activities and tools are exemplified.The work presented in this paper is performed under a R&D programme directed by Swedish Defence Material Administration (FMV).BackgroundWith the purpose to give the reader a common reference for discussions in the paper, the following sections briefly describes “Simulation Based Acquisition”, the “Product Life Cycle” and “FMV processes for product development”. The reason for choosing these documents, as a basis, is on the one hand to give an introduction to SBA, and on the other hand our goal to develop a “Swedish Simulation Based Acquisition” model based on internationally established knowledge and the chosen approach for Systems Engineering within FMV.Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA)The definition of SBA [1] is as follows:”SBA is an iterative, integrated product and process approach to acquisition, using M&S, that enables the warfighting, resource allocation, and acquisition communities to fulfil the warfighter´s materiel needs, while maintaining cost-as-an-independent-variable (CAIV) over the system´s entire lifecycle and within the DoD´s system of systems.”According to [2] the purpose of SBA is to “facilitate an unprecedented quality of enterprise-wide, collaborative decision-making across the acquisition life cycle through the following actions. Maximizing the use of relevant acquisition information, simplifying the process of capturing, managing and assessing that information. Reducing the time and cost of decision-making. Allowing full assessment of decision consequences prior to commitment, minimizing risk. Opening communications across all levels of the acquisition enterprise”.In [1] the goals of  SBA are to:“Substantially reduce the time, resources and risk associated with the entire acquisition process. Increase the quality, military worth, and supportability of fielded systems, while reducing total ownership costs throughout the total lifecycle. Enable integrated product and process development (IPPD) across the entire acquisition life cycle”In our interpretation of [1], SBA should be supported by three principle components.The first component is an evolved Culture in which enterprise- and agency-wide collaboration is the rule and in which individual technical contributions and innovations are encouraged and efficiently managed. The second component is a refined system acquisition Process that capitalizes on changes in the acquisition culture. The third component is an advanced SBA systems engineering Environment to support all system life cycle activities simultaneously, encouraging software re-use and maximising interoperability. These components of SBA are explained in more detail below.The SBA Culture [2] must have the following characteristics: Early involvement of stakeholders; Collaboration; and Reuse.Early involvement of stakeholders increase the probability that technical deficiencies can be avoided and that it will be possible to operate and support the system cost effectively. SBA presupposes continuous collaboration among all stakeholders (e.g., decision makers, acquirers, suppliers, users, those responsible for operation and support) throughout the life cycle. In order to make this possible, laws and regulations probably need to be changed, or be adapted to this more open way to collaborate. This is especially true regarding laws and regulations that regulate the collaboration between the acquiring organization and the suppliers.But this is not enough. A continuous exchange of information and experiences among stakeholders is also needed throughout the life cycle. This requires that stakeholders share their information. The management culture must also support collaboration among stakeholders. Reuse in a SBA perspective includes reuse of models, simulations, data, and experiences to avoid redundant work (reinventing the wheel). Reuse of models, simulations, and data require that Verification, Validation and Accreditation (VV&A) are an integrated part of model development and simulations.According to [3] the SBA Process must have the following characteristics: Mission centric acquisition; Life cycle oriented acquisition; Interplay between models and simulations on the one hand and product and process on the other.Mission centric acquisition implies change of focus from understanding the specific task(s) to be supported by the product, to understanding the overall mission to be supported. An important part of SBA is that the product to be acquired as well as the acquisition should be regarded in a life cycle perspective.  In other words, models and simulation should be used to increase knowledge about the mission that will be supported by the product (although not yet defined in this stage) and the needs of that mission, about the product and design requirements, about the production process requirements and about the operations and support requirements. This is illustrated in Figure 1 below (from [3]).An important prerequisite for the SBA process is that models and simulations interplay with product and process development and contribute to the continuously increasing knowledge. The knowledge gained from the development and use of models and simulations should influence the design of the product and the processes. The experience gained from production, operations and support of the product should influence models and simulations.According to SBA [1, 2] each product’s entire life cycle and the processes needed in the different life cycle phases should be simulated. By simulating all aspects of the product in the entire life cycle a virtual product is created. The virtual product can be studied in all phases of the life cycle thereby enabling cost effective fulfilment of the product requirements. Using models and simulations should discover mistakes early, not when the product has been delivered and is in operational use. Figure 1: Life cycle oriented acquisition and the domain conceptFigure 1 illustrates that there are two types of domains; Real domains and Virtual domains. The real domain deals with the concrete product and the processes needed for production, operations and support. The virtual domain deals with models of the concrete product and models of the processes needed for production, operations and support. The domain types are separated into mission, product, production, and operations and support domains. In the mission domain issues regarding the mission, requirements on the mission, and the mission need of supporting technical products are handled. In the product domain issues regarding, for example, product requirements, product functionality, and product design are handled. In the production domain issues regarding, for example, the production and test of the product are handled. In the operations and support domain issues regarding, for example, the operation and use of the product, as well as support and maintenance are handled. In summary, the main message in Figure 1 is the necessity to develop and use models and simulations in order to create a good understanding of the mission (business), the products needed to make the mission more effective, the production process(es) needed to produce the product and the process(es) needed to operate and support the product, before any decision to start production.Figure 1 also shows two ”libraries” where models are stored and retrieved. These are described in more detail below. A prerequisite for SBA [1, 2] is that all relevant information is stored in so called DPD (Digital/Distributed Product Descriptions), see Figure 1 above. This enables stakeholders to reuse models and simulations and thus making the acquisition process more efficient. DPD should mainly support storage of three types of information: Product data (e.g., requirements, data for project management, costs, data for development, production and test); Product models (for example, simulation of the product’s behaviour and performance); Process models (models describing activities necessary for definition, development, production, distribution and disposal of the product). The models can also include other product related information (e.g., functional descriptions). Furthermore, the DPD should support storage of models of the surrounding world (environment models). These models are used to evaluate the product model as well as if the implemented product will function in an efficient manner after delivery.According to [2], the SBA Environment should have the following characteristics: Infrastructure to support collaboration; Data and models; Application tools.To achieve collaboration, irrespective of where the collaborators are geographically located and irrespective of what organization they belong to, SBA must offer supporting technology that is accessible by all collaborators. All collaborators taking part in the process must have access to information relevant to the product and the processes during the product’s life cycle. The infrastructure must contain uniform (standardized) descriptions of product data that can be exchanged between different stakeholders, competencies (disciplines) and over the phases of the product’s life cycle. In order to make the production, operation, support and maintenance of the product cost effective, the infrastructure must offer common standards, descriptions of common processes, and common tools. The infrastructure must also offer product models and models of the surrounding world. In order to make it possible to implement the infrastructure it has to be founded on a common technical basis. The infrastructure is continuously developed, based on the needs identified in the other two components: Culture and Process.According to [2] application tools should exist for synthesis (definition of the next product increment), prediction (design and development of the incremental product build), evaluation (evaluation or test of the incremental product), and trade-off/optimization (Translation of lessons learned from evaluation into a revised definition of the target product). Predictions and evaluations can be performed regarding the virtual or the real product. Application tools are also needed to support management and collaboration.2.2	The product life cycleThe product life cycle presented in Figure 2, is our interpretation of the information in [4, 5, 6].	According to this model a products life cycle is divided into following phases: Concept phase; Concept evaluation phase; Systems definition and demonstration phase; Development and production phase; Utilization phase; Modification and upgrade phase; Disposal phase. In our view the Utilization phase is parallel with the modification and upgrade phase. The reason for this is that the product could be modified and upgraded while still in use.Below, the respective phases are briefly described. In the Concept phase, ideas concerning development of new products are generated. In this phase different ways to enhance the warfighting performance is investigated and needs for new products are identified. In this phase, new technological opportunities as well as the need for different sub-systems to cooperate are also investigated.In the Concept evaluation phase, the feasibility of the concepts is evaluated. The worthy of the concepts generated in the concept phase is validated against the operational value of implementing the concept. The concepts are also evaluated with respect to life-cycle cost and possibility of evolutionary development. In this phase different acquisition alternatives are also investigated. For example, acquiring directly from industry, cooperative efforts in conjunction with other countries, acquiring COTS and/or GOTS.  In the Systems definition and demonstration phase, the ideas deemed worthy in the concept evaluation phase are further developed. The concepts are defined in more detail and possible functionality is demonstrated using mock-ups, prototypes, and functional models.  Important issues in this phase are systems architecture, interfacing with other systems, technological opportunities/risks. Also, acquisition alternative is decided and negotiations with partners and suppliers are initiated in this phase.In the Development and production phase, the product is acquired in accordance with the decided acquisition alternative. In the Utilization phase, the product is used in its operational environment.In the Modification and upgrade phase, the product is continuously developed based on experiences from operational use and new demands.In the Disposal phase, the product is withdrawn from the operational environment and the system is disassembled.FMV processes for product developmentIn Figure 3 below, “FMV processes for product development” are depicted. “FMV processes for product development” are a tailoring of  [4].  The processes are divided in 4 groups: Enterprise processes; Project processes; Agreement processes; and Technical processes. In each process group there are different processes, for example, the Define Stakeholder Requirements; Analyze Requirements; Design System; Implement; Integrate; Verify; Transfer; Validate; Operate; Support; Maintain; and Dispose System, in the Technical Process group. Although the processes are depicted in a sequence, from top to bottom, the processes should not, necessarily, be performed in a sequence. Processes should be performed when needed in the product life cycle. FMV processes are at least for the process group “Technical processes” almost identical to the technical processes in [4], on the overall level. The tailoring can instead be found at the activity level in the processes, where FMV processes are more developed compared to [4].  The focus in this introductory description of “FMV processes for product development” is on the technical processes, as they are deemed as an important foundation when developing the Swedish Approach to SBA.In the process ”Define Stakeholder Requirements” all stakeholder requirements are defined. To define stakeholder requirements it is necessary to: Identify the stakeholders; Elicit stakeholder requirements; Analyze and prioritize requirements; Validate requirements; Maintain requirements. In the “Analyze Requirements” process the often vague and imprecise stakeholder requirements are analyzed and defined further. The result from this process is what often is called system requirements. In the process of analyzing requirements and defining system requirements, it is necessary to: Define functional boundary for the system of interest; Define system functionality; Define system performance; Define system constraints. It is also necessary to evaluate the quality of the system requirements (consistency, uniqueness, completeness, non-ambiguousness), as well as that all stakeholder requirements has been taken care of.In the “Design System” process a system design is developed based on the systems requirements. In order to develop the system design it is necessary to: Define the system’s logical design; Allocate system requirements to system elements; Define design criteria; Determine which system requirements should be allocated to operators; Investigate if COTS/GOTS products are available; Evaluate alternative design solutions; Define external and internal interfaces; Specify the physical system design.In the “Implement” process, the system design is transformed into a product. To produce the system following activities are necessary: Develop an implementation strategy; Identify implementation constraints; Realize or modify system components according to the system design; Verify that system components fulfil system requirements. In the “Integrate” process, the system components are integrated to a system. In order to integrate system components it is necessary to: Develop an integration strategy; Identify design constrains resulting from the integration strategy; identify and obtain necessary supporting systems for the integration work; Integrate the system components.In the “Verify” process, the integrated system is verified. To verify the system following activities is necessary: Develop a verification strategy and plan; Verify that the system fulfils specified requirements. In the “Transfer” process, the system is installed in its environment. To install the system, following activities are necessary: Develop a transition strategy and plan; Prepare the operation site; Configure the system; Activate the system; Demonstrate that the system is installed in a proper way; Demonstrate that the system deliver required services.In the “Validate” process, the system is validated to provide objective evidence that the services provided is in accordance with stakeholder requirements.  To validate the system, following activities has to be performed: Develop validation strategy and plan; Perform validation to demonstrate conformance with stakeholder requirements; Identify, if necessary, parts of the system that result in non-conformance.In the “Operate” process, is to use the system to get the expected services. To use the system, following activities has to be performed: Develop operation strategy; Assign trained and qualified operators; Activate the system in its operational context; Monitor the system.In the “Maintain” process, the system in maintained in order to sustain the capability to provide required services. To maintain the system, following activities are necessary: Develop a maintenance strategy; Define system constraint resulting from the maintenance strategy; Implement problem and incident reporting procedures; Implement procedures for corrective actions; Perform preventive maintenance.In the “Disposal” process, the system is ended. To dispose a system, following activities are necessary: Develop a disposal strategy; Deactivate the system; Disassemble the system; Remove the system from operational context; Perform, if necessary, destruction of the system, or specific system components.3 The Swedish ApproachBelow, a preliminary framework for Swedish Simulation Based Acquisition is presented. In this framework we have focused on the Process component in SBA, although the other two components, Culture and Environment, are important. In the future work on the framework these components will be handled. The reason for this is that FMV, the Swedish Armed Forces as well as the Swedish industry, has recognized the need for more effective and internationally established systems engineering processes. The basic building blocks in the Swedish approach to SBA are: the “Product life cycle”, “FMV processes for product development”, and M&S.  As mentioned earlier, the reason for choosing those building blocks are our goal to develop a Swedish SBA that is founded on the national and international knowledge base within the systems engineering area. The product life cycle is the basis for the Swedish SBA; it is products that are in focus, and every product has a life cycle. The “Product life cycle” building block is developed from [4, 5, 6] and can therefore be regarded as an established life cycle view, both in Sweden as well as internationally.The Systems Engineering community agree that it is necessary to utilize engineering processes in the life cycle phases. The “FMV processes for product development” building block is based on the International standard found in [4], which is a guarantee for that this building block is recognized within the systems engineering community.Most people involved in the product life cycle recognize the value of M&S to enhance the engineering processes as well as the product; therefore the third building block is M&S activities and tools. Figure 4 gives a top-level view of the basic building blocks in the framework and their interplayFigure 4 tries to illustrate that “FMV processes for product development” should be utilized during the whole life cycle of a product. To enhance the performance of the respective processes in the different life cycle phases, Models and Simulation shall be used. In the following text the preliminary framework is presented in more detail, including examples on relevant M&S activities and tools. The examples should not be seen as exhaustive, the main purpose is to exemplify M&S activities and tools that in our view support the engineering processes and the life cycle of the product. For every life cycle phase suggestions on supporting engineering processes are presented, together with proper M&S activities and tools.As the work presented in this paper have not analyzed all processes for product development and integrated them into the Swedish Approach to Simulation Based Acquisition, not all processes are discussed. The focus is on FMV technical processes.3.1 The concept phaseIn the Concept phase, see Figure 4, ideas concerning development of new products are generated so this phase will benefit from the FMV processes “Define stakeholder requirements”, “Analyze requirements” and “Design system”. Work with conceptual ideas can be more effective if they are supported by M&S activities. Development of simple business (mission) models and conceptual models of system ideas will certainly support these activities. Simulation of models to illustrate overall function and to support decision-making concerning, for example, potential further work on the concept can also be of value. In order to test the ideas, simple what-if analyses to investigate potential consequences of conceptual ideas on existing business and/or systems can be performed.Potential M&S tools to support these activities are several. Model libraries, including environmental models, existing scenarios, business descriptions, descriptions of existing units as well as descriptions of existing products are essential. Simulation tools for illustrating conceptual ideas in a context are already today used as an easy method to create a uniform picture. Visualization tools cannot be underestimated vs. abstract thinking. Simulation tools for ”what-if” analyses will also play an important role.3.2 The concept evaluation phaseDuring the concept evaluation phase, see Figure 4, the feasibility of the concepts is evaluated and the concepts are validated against the operational value of implementing them. Life cycle cost and possibility of evolutionary development are also important. Also this phase will benefit from FMV processes “Define stakeholder requirements”, “Analyze requirements” and “Design system” as well as “Validate”.The M&S activities here will include further development of conceptual models. Simulations in order to evaluate value of concepts in a business perspective and the possibility to integrate with other adjacent systems are more or less necessary in the concept evaluation. Furthermore, it is also necessary to investigate the possibility of realizing different concepts and their cost.Potential M&S tools to support these activities are also here several. Model libraries, including environmental models, existing scenarios, business descriptions, descriptions of existing units as well as descriptions of existing products are still essential. Simulation tools for illustrating conceptual ideas in context will also here be of value. Simulation tools to support evaluation of different concepts and their value for the business could be useful as well as tools to investigate the possibility to integrate different concepts with other products and to investigate realisation potential and life cycle cost.3.3 The Systems definition and demonstration phaseIn the Systems definition and demonstration phase, see Figure 4; the concepts are defined in more detail and possible functionality is demonstrated. Acquisition alternative is decided and negotiations with partners and suppliers are initiated. This phase could benefit from several of the FMV processes as “Define stakeholder requirements”, “Analyse requirements” “Design system”, “Implement”, “Integrate”, “Verify”, “Maintain”, and “Validate”.M&S activities can support this phase, further development of models (prototypes, functional models, scenarios) is often necessary. Visualisation of alternative models functionality in context is of course always an efficient method. The need for Life cycle cost analyses supported by M&S now becomes more evident. There is also a need for simulation of alternative product designs and evaluation of functionality, cost and technology.To support these activities M&S tools similar to the ones listed above are also valid. Leaving the conceptual phases, tools supporting analyses of products become more and more interesting. Tools to support development of product models, demonstration of functionality and estimation of life cycle costs are example of tools for product analyses.3.4 The Development and production phaseIn the Development and production phase, see Figure 4, the product is acquired and the phase will benefit from following FMV processes “Define stakeholder requirements”, “Analyze requirements”, “Design system”, “Implement”, “Verify”, “Integrate”, “Maintain” and “Validate”. Development of models to support further design of the product now becomes important. Evaluation of different design alternatives using simulation is one example of design analysis. Development of models of the production process is essential to identify flaws and need for resources.  During development continuous Verification and Validation of the product during production using simulation will help keeping track of the product’s performance. To support these activities modelling tools for development of production processes are necessary, as well as simulation tools for streamlining production processes. The access to simulation tools for verification and validation of products during development and production are of course also important.3.5 The Utilization phaseIn the Utilization phase, see Figure 4, the product is used in its operational environment. Therefore the phase will benefit from the FMV processes “Transfer” and “Maintain”. Utilization of M&S for tactical development, mission planning and mission rehearsal will play an extremely important role for the warfighter. Education and training will also be supported by M&S. Tools in support of these activities are of course Training simulators, Simulators supporting education, Planning simulators and Simulators supporting mission rehearsal.3.6 The Modification and upgrade phaseIn the Modification and upgrade phase, see Figure 4, the product is continuously developed based on experiences from operational use and new demands. The phase will therefore benefit from FMV processes “Define stakeholder requirements”, “Analyze requirements”, “Design system”, “Implement”, “Verify”, “Integrate”, “Transfer” and “Validate”.To support the processes in this phase, development of models will often be necessary (e.g. prototypes, functional models, scenarios). Simulations of suggested modifications will focus on, for example, evaluating the effect on product performance.  Simulations to support economic analyses of suggested modifications and/or upgrades are also important to perform. To support these activities, M&S tools similar to the ones used in the system definition phase can be of value. Model libraries are still important. Examples of other tools are modelling tools supporting systems modelling, demonstrating business and/or technical functions, simulation tools illustrating proposed function in context and supporting life cycle cost analyses.3.7 The Disposal phaseIn the disposal phase, see Figure 4, the FMV process “Disposal” can be beneficial. Development of models for performance analysis of disposal, and simulation to investigate potential environmental effects and/or effects on humans from disposal activities are M&S activities that can support this process. Simulation to determine best disposal method(s) is another example.Tools that support these activities are modelling tools supporting development of model(s) of the disposal process, simulation tools supporting simulation of the disposal process and supporting analyses concerning environmental consequences from disposal. Summary and ConclusionThe purpose of this first attempt to develop a Swedish approach to SBA was to analyze the SBA ideas described in [1, 2] , the Systems Engineering processes described in [4, 7], and the “Life Cycle for products” found in [4, 5, 6]. From these analyses a preliminary framework for Swedish SBA was developed based on the building blocks “Life cycle for products”, “FMV processes for product development”, and M&S.Preliminary conclusions from the work are presented below. The main conclusions can be summarized as follows. The proposed framework for a Swedish Approach to Simulation Based Acquisition presented above should be regarded as preliminary. There is a need for more elaborated M&S competence within the System Engineering community, as the potentiality of M&S is not fully realized and put into practice. When we identified potential M&S methods and tools to be used in different SE processes it became obvious that the SE community and the M&S community need to work closer together.It is necessary to continue the definition of Swedish SBA needs of M&S (methods, tools, infrastructure, competence) as the work presented here, can be seen as a preliminary survey. A preliminary analysis of the work performed so far, indicates the need for following methods, tools, and infrastructure/environment. MethodsSwedish SBA should benefit from methods focused on: Development of different models (scenario(s) and business  (mission) models; systems of system design; terrain models; product models); Verification, Validation and Accreditation (VV&A), of scenario(s); business models; terrain models, system design; product modelsSimulation with different purposes and in different life-cycle phasesDevelopment and streamlining of production processesToolsSwedish SBA should benefit from tools focused on: Development and maintenance of scenarios; business models; system design; terrain models; product models VV&ASimulation tools for, for example, “what-if” analyses and system optimizationDevelopment, analysis and optimization of production processesEnvironmentSwedish SBA should benefit from efforts within the environment area focused on: M&S/Systems Engineering (SE) competence network; M&S experts supporting Systems Engineering projects; A technical infrastructure that makes it possible for stakeholders to reuse existing models and other relevant information; A common and established standard for information exchange (data exchange) between simulation systems as well as between simulation systems and C2 systems and other systems.Future workThe preliminary framework regarding Swedish SBA has to be further developed in at least following ways.ProcessBeing a first identification of possible subject field within Swedish SBA in need of M&S activities and tools the next step has to be to further identify, test and evaluate methods and tools.Further analysis of “FMV processes for product development” and continued integration of these processes into Swedish SBA is needed. As said, earlier the process groups “Agreement processes”, Project processes, and Enterprise processes have not been analyzed. It is also necessary to analyse the technical processes on a deeper level, as all the activities has not been analyzed in detail.It is also necessary to test, and evaluate the identified M&S methods and tools, as well as the evolving framework in a practical way.EnvironmentAn environment supporting Swedish SBA must be defined and implemented. There must be work on investigating methods and tools for inheritance of data, knowledge and experiences between and within different Life Cycle phases, and also between and within programs.Model repositories need to be established. As some SBA influenced projects already have been performed at SMART-lab, the process of building repositories for, for example, HLA compliant models has started. Methods and tools for storing and retrieving those models need to be established.There is a need for establishing competence networks. The development of  “FMV processes for product development” and the work within M&S involve to an extent the same people. This means that we have a starting point for creating an M&S/SE competence network including personnel from FMV, the Swedish Armed Forces, and industry as well as consultants.CultureThere is also a need for work within the culture component. As a first step in implementing Swedish SBA, personnel from FMV, Industry and the Swedish Armed Forces need to have the same understanding of Swedish SBA. Therefore, courses are planned during 2003.Another issue worth studying is the EC laws concerning the interaction between acquirers and suppliers and their influence on the Swedish Approach to SBA.5. References[1] 	A Road Map for Simulation Based AcquisitionReport of The Joint Simulation Based Acquisition Task Force, December 4, 1998.[2]	SBA Functional Description - Version 1.1. Report of The Simulation Based Acquisition Industry Steering Group (SBA ISG), 24 February 1999.[3]	Nordqvist, T., Asplund P., & Gabrielsson, P., “Förstudierapport: Analys av SBA och ISO/IEC 15288 och förslag till integrering”. Appendix to FMV Report: ProjTU 23321:30479/02, in Swedish, 2002.[4]	ISO/IEC 15288 FDIS, Systems Engineering Life Cycle Processes, 2002. [5]	SOU 2001:21, “Försvarsmaterial på nya villkor”, Commission on Defence Acquisition , in Swedish, 2001.[6]	SOU 2002:39, ” STYRning och Organisation av Materielförsörjningen för försvaret, Commission of Defence Acquisition, in Swedish, 2002. [7]	”FMV processer som stöd för produktframtagning”, FMV processweb, in Swedish, FMV, 2002.Author BiographiesDr. TOMMY NORDQVIST is the managing director of Front End AB, a Swedish Consultancy Company focused on Business Modelling, Requirements Engineering, Systems Design, and M&S. Dr. Nordqvist has been a researcher at Swedish Defence Research Agency where he conducted research on, for example, Requirements Engineering, Systems Engineering and Decision Support Systems. He has also been a consultant at AeroTech Telub, a Swedish consultant company, where he, for example, participated in the requirements engineering work aimed at a C2 system for air defence. After AeroTech Telub, Dr. Nordqvist held a position as method expert, focused on Software Engineering, at Defence Material Administration (FMV). Dr. Nordqvist participates in the work of developing the Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP). Dr. Nordqvist also participates in the work at FMV to further develop their Systems Engineering processes.PETER GABRIELSSON is the Director of SMART-lab, the Swedish Defence Modelling and Simulation focal point at the Defence Material Administration (FMV) in Stockholm. Mr Gabrielsson began his career working with air-to-air missile evaluations in support of acquisition in 1987. Working as a senior engineer within air-to air he later on headed the “Beyond Visual Range air combat studies and simulations” during the early nineties. After a couple of year as the Director of Systems Analysis at the Joint Material Command he was appointed the current position in 2001. Mr. Gabrielsson is also one of the primary advocates of SBA and M&S in Sweden.PER ASPLUND is a consultant at Front End AB, a Swedish Consultancy Company focused on Business Modelling, Requirements Engineering, Systems Design, and M&S. Mr Asplund has been a research engineer at the University of Umeå and later at Swedish Defence Research Agency. He has also been a consultant at AeroTech Telub, a Swedish consultant company, where he, for example, participated in requirements engineering work and usability studies. After AeroTech Telub, Mr Asplund worked at Defence Material Administration (FMV) mainly in a project developing the Swedish Army’s command and control system as a method expert and as responsible for the requirements specification. At Front End Mr. Asplund has worked with business modelling and participated in a number of simulation projects often as responsible for the first three steps of FEDEP. MARIE-LOUISE GUSTAFSSON is a senior engineer and the project manager for SBA R&D Programme at the Swedish Defence Material Administration (FMV). Mrs. Gustafsson began her career working with air-to-air missile evaluations in support of acquisition in 1997. Mrs. Gustafsson has been involved in a wide variety of modelling, simulation, and analysis projects for different missile systems.  EMBED Word.Picture.8  