The “New” World of Simulation – Digital Games and Gaming (03E-SIW-073)Anders FrankSwedish National Defence CollegeValhallavägen 117115 93 Stockholm, SWEDEN+46-8-788 7500anders.frank@defencegaming.org Robert VirdingSwedish Defence Materiel Administration115 88 Stockholm, SWEDEN+46-8-782 4000robert.virding@defencegaming.orgKeywords:Commercial games, game industry ABSTRACT: The development of commercial digital games in the last decade has created vast impact on the society ranging from technological advancements, economic growth to new social behaviours. The potentials of using games and gaming for other purposes than entertainment are very promising. While the military initiatives mainly are focusing on training and education there are more advantages around the corner. Games can be used as mediator for new concepts and ideas, used as tool for analysis or even be used integrated as part of the command and control process. There’s a lot to be gained from the digital games entertainment world. But for the military to really take advantages of this world there are several differences and obstacles to overcome. Setting up new interdisciplinary projects between game industry and the defence requires in-depth knowledge of both cultures. “Game Studio” at Swedish Defence Materiel Administration (FMV) and “Game Net” at Swedish National Defence College (FHS) are such initiatives aiming at creating arenas for the commercial industry and the defence.IntroductionWargaming as a phenomenon has long history within the military. But last century technology advancements have enabled more complex solutions ranging from immersive platform simulators to massive scale, worldwide, computer-assisted exercises. Parallel to this development the computer and video games has gone from being viewed as just small toys to advanced, internet-based, complex simulations where users in all ages meet to interact. Even if there have been contacts between the military simulation world and the commercial game market [1] we are beginning to see evidence of more collaborative and interdisciplinary activities between the domains. And perhaps the future holds even more potentials. The potentials and benefits of using commercial games within the military are many. The overall and initial reason is cost but as we have discovered there are perhaps even larger advantages of why we want to use games and gaming. Commercial games are developed to entertain and more people use this form as their entertainment diet [2]. Our main interest is to find out if there are ways we can be entertained and in the same time gain something else. This “else” can for instance be analysis, learning, gain insight or awareness of situations. This is not only interesting but also very challenging because it touches very sensitive matters in our western culture. We live in a society clearly separating having fun from doing serious work: Stop playing games – get serious! But perhaps military culture, that are used to wargaming and exercises, are more open to adopt alternative ways to enhance “serious” matters. As we believe in the potentials we shall try to describe who ought be susceptible to this new type of gaming and everything that concerns of military and commercial game industry collaborations.Evolution of the Game IndustrySeveral facts are revealed when studying the computer and video games industry:The economic growth is staggering, Total revenue for 2002 of software sales in the US reached $ 6.9 billion [2]. Foresight also predicts a strong increase.The technology advancements in game industry are on the bleeding edge. Today games are equipped with state-of-the art graphics, sound and networking. Game applications are no longer a one mans job but involves a large team of skillful engineers and artists. Budget, time, complexity and number of developers are well comparable to major traditional software projects.The audience is growing, not only by numbers but also in ages. More than sixty percent of the gamers are older than 18 with a rising number every year [2]. An interpretation of this trend is that people continue to play games when they grow older.The way people play games have also changed. Mulitplayer and online capabilities is now a standard functionality to practically every game released on the market. People want to play with others, join in clans and guilds, compete in massive multiplayer games over Internet, create a reputation among fellow gamers. Echoes outside game industryThe evolution of this industry has created an interest and activities outside the entertainment industry. Technology in games is on the bleeding edge, which has affected other technology intense companies to find solutions how to incorporate game technology in their products. 3D-graphics from games can be seen in visual simulation applications [3], Artificial Intelligence software kits, developed for games, are used to simulate agents in research and games are used as an interesting instrument to conduct other research [4][5].Scientific disciplines like psychology, social science and computer science studies do direct research on games and gaming. Questions are addressed like the social impact on society, perception psychology of young gamers and cultural barriers for games as a new medium [6].Since more people are involved in creating games and a lot of people want to get into the industry the academia are making a lot of effort establishing new curriculums. Practically every university in the western world has some kind of game development courses or programs. Established initiatives like the computer game developers program in University of Skövde [7] have no problem at all to fill the seats.Learning companies and organizations have a raised interest on how use games as the mediator in the learning process [8]. Even though a lot is happening very fast in this sector there are still much to do – for instance creating appealing educational entertainment for adults. How commercial games can be used in the militaryThere are strong similarities between military simulators and commercial games both on the explicit and implicit plane. Advanced commercial platform simulators like Jane Combat Simulations’ Falcon F/A-18 [9] strives at delivering as realistic simulation as possible, which is roughly the same ambition with the military counterpart (but with different technology and budget). On the implicit plane commercial games address issues of conflicts, goal oriented tasks, decision-making, resource management, control and dynamic thinking which are key functional aspects of “serious” military M&S simulations.Examining how commercial games can be used within the military is mainly a study on how commercial computer and videogames intersect with the military modeling and simulation domain.  A complete coverage on this union is no easy task. Instead we will categorize three military activities that we have found most receptive to utilize commercial games. But before heading on to these it’s wise to point out key differences.Key differencesMilitary M&S applications are used for different purposes and have various goals to fulfill. They can be used for analysis, training or to support planning and decision making.  The basic purpose of commercial games Is that they shall entertain. This fact is the utterly most important goal for every computer and video game. Different goals from the two domains is the overall reason the applications from the military may resemble the ones seen in the commercial games but still differ in their foundations. Furthermore an understanding of these differences is very vital to understand the advantages of using commercial games in the military. The entertainment factor in games can be translated into playability. High playability is what differentiates a good game from a bad. Thus playability forms the guiding rule when weighing in how much realism and fidelity is needed. It doesn’t matter how much realism a game is added with, if the playability is not enhanced it is just a waste of resources. Fidelity works in similar way; the fidelity of object representations (like terrain, weather or physical attributes) is only made up to a level where the desired playability is enabled. If an object moves contradicting Newton’s law it’s ok if it only follows the constraints issued by the playability. Users follow these rules quite easily, accepting the game realism and fidelity. But often this is not the case of the military counterpart. It is near a deadly sin to taper on realism and fidelity in military simulators just to enable higher playability. Higher realism and fidelity means that the simulation of models has a bigger chance to more valid to the real world. This is somewhat like a mantra of the military M&S world. Sometimes this demand of realism is made to such an extent it becomes absurd, often missing other important issues of M&S applications.From a technology view there are some fundamental differences as well. What usually influences civil and military technology development at a high level are standardizations and interoperability issues. Interoperability within the M&S community with the HLA standard [10] has no given place in the game industry. This industry is hit driven where very few game titles constitute a larger proportion of the revenues. Interoperable standards from an economical point of view work only if they can provide more sales. From a technological view standards often work against the fundamental law of game technology – speed. Everything slowing down the execution of a game are cut off or optimized which means incorporating standards at the cost of execution time is not going to happen. CategoriesTraining & EducationTraining and education is the largest sector within the military to make use of modeling and simulation. Every year roughly 250 000 enlistees [11] in the US are about to be trained in various military areas and services. The combined training budget on US armed services is $ 18 billion, excluding trainees’ salaries. So with budget like this and the large number of student the military are looking deep into how to enhance and rationalize the learning process. Even if the training and education takes place practically everywhere within the military only a few areas have made use of commercial games as an alternative. A platform simulator (tank, aircraft etc) or tactical simulators are typical systems where commercial games can offer a low-budget alternative to big military traditional solutions. PC-based commercial simulator and strategy games are very complex today with the fast pace of hardware technology developments. Even though fidelity and realism might be an issue more military training centers show an increased interest in utilizing commercial games. Often the argument is that these games can support certain aspects of the training, like lessons in tactical maneuvering of a tank battalion or drilling a platoon in urban warfare. When using commercial games for this purpose it is very important the games have editors and script capabilities so developers can customize them to fit the training simulations. Not many believe in using these commercial games straight off the shelves into the training centers.Another advantage of games is they execute on ordinary PC’s. This makes the training application very portable, it even allows the trainee to do the lessons at home. Combine the stimulating experience of the games with the learning attributes and this is a very good idea. If people play games in their spare time, why not try to make us of it for something useful? The only detail is to find right game applications. Many have the opinion that educational software are very serious business and cannot be “destroyed” by entertainment or unclear phenomenon like playability. This is perhaps the reason we do not se much of edutainment (educational entertainment) software for adults. There is however no research evidence that the learning process is destroyed by high playable edutainment – rather the opposite [12]. Example: A student at a warfare college is about to take a course in higher (echelon) naval warfare. In the curriculum there is an obligatory activity of completing three levels of the schools own naval warfare game. It’s a realistic game where the student are phased with three typical conflicts all solvable with the right strategic and tactical knowledge that is taught in the course. The student may complete the levels wherever and whenever he wants. After completion of each level an unlock key is generated to be used in the examination.  Marketing ideasThe vast market for games direct companies and organizations to sell ideas and market products with games. A good game (high playability) is an excellent mediator of content as the user spends hours with the game. One recent example of this use is Americas Army [13] where the US Army spent a relatively large amount of money on marketing itself towards to the computer and video game audience (for more info see chapter  REF _Ref33191152 \r \h 5 below). But marketing ideas does not only limits to traditional marketing campaigns. Gaming is about dynamic processes where a user a must understand game flow to be able to achieve the goals. This can be utilized when explaining new dynamic processes to an audience. Also, the interactive involvement of the participants is what differentiates gaming from observing a simulation. Our hypothesis is that the participants will gain deeper insights in the situation and flow when participating in a motivating process instead of just observing it “statically”. Example: A new doctrine within the armed forces is being made as a game to simplify and exemplify the complex nature of details and dynamic behavior. The true meanings of the doctrine are made easy accessible with the audience participating in the execution (as players). The game is both stimulating and entertaining to keep up the motivation and enthusiasm of the players.  Planning, analysis and decision makingIn the same manner as to use games to market ideas they are apt to be used in the mission planning, analysis and the decision making process. Modeling and Simulation is just in the early phase to truly support these activities. As the technology develops, more aspects of the real world can be encapsulated in the models. If we had such a system, that in a valid way could encapsulate the real world in models, we could make use of simulations trustfully as judgmental instrument, analysis tool or planning system in the command and control process. As up to now there are too much uncertainty and validation problems to fully utilize M&S in command and control processes. But it’s getting better. One joint research project between Swedish National Defence College (FHS) and U.S DoD Joint Chief of Staffs J8 called STRATMAS (Strategic Management Systems) [14] has the ambition to support the operational staff process with prognosis and optimization of the resources. STRATMAS are among others things equipped with an advanced, grid-based, societal model on which military and humanitarian relief objects operate on. Answers on how successful a military intervention is are given in social contexts with the grid.The gaming is introduced in this use of M&S when the simulation is transformed or extended to a game. Gaming in contrast to simulation is where users participate in the execution. This means that instead of just observing the progress of the simulation, users participate in the simulation with their roles and the guidelines to solve the objectives – as they would in the real process.Example: A future joint operational staff supported with STRATMAS-game is in the phase of analyzing a newly created plan for UN mandated military intervention in Afghanistan. They feed in all the data needed to represent the plan, starts the game and take part in the development. Instead of just watching the simulation they play the simulation, as it would be for real. The staff team does not only see how well their plan works but also gain an insight on the dynamic of the scenario. If the plan does not hold they all see the causal effects of why and how to, in real time, correct the plan. As a positive side effect the participant does not only gain deep insights in the scenario but will also learn how they and other behaves in situations which will be very vital as the “real” staff process progress.Establishing collaborationsThough potentials and incentives are many there are some concerns worth describing before heading on using games within the military.Mainly the concerns originate from a cultural and market divide. Game market is about selling game titles to consumers using a traditional value chain. Even if game companies provides patches and upgrades to their customers it is not comparable to the support commitment defence contractors give the military. Even if such a commitment can be established the game companies are not organized in this way. The development methods of game companies also may be seen as unorthodox from traditional software industries. If the military would finance the development of a game there are certainly issues regarding how the title development progress. Military, used to have contractors with a deep understanding of the basis of operations, will be faced with game developers and producers with a different view on traceability of requirements and how the game shall support the operations.Regarding cultural differences there are many prejudices and preconceptions from both camps. Suggesting game companies to be new contractors for military applications is sometimes controversial. Game developing is often discarded as unserious business from other high tech companies. Game developers on the other hand are seldom ecstatic about producing content to other instances than game market. “Game dev’s do what game dev want to play” is often heard in this context and it implies there are other things required in a creative process than just money. If you are planning to use the intellectual property of a game company the task must be motivating enough.One approach to override these potential problems is to make use of intermediaries. The intermediaries form a virtual organisation consisting of members from both industries; half customers and half game developers. The role intermediaries take is to bridge any potential differences between them, both technological and cultural. By having a team from both industries will set aside problems with confusions, ability to have dialogue and indistinctness. Hopefully this constellation also manifests the same creative environment associated with traditional game developing companies.Examples and ongoing activitiesThe examples and ongoing activities below have no ambition to cover the complete worldwide initiatives in this direction. Instead we have focused on typical activities worth mentioning because they are unique or because they are typical examples from their category.USASince a lot of the latest technology advancements, modeling and simulation efforts as well as defence developments have their origin from the USA there are a lot of activities to choose from.ICTInstitute for Creative Technologies in Los Angeles is an institute of University of Southern California partly funded by STRICOM (US Army Simulation Training and Instrumentation Command). The ICT's mandate is to enlist the resources and talents of the entertainment and game development industries and to work collaboratively with computer scientists to advance the state of immersive training simulation. The goal of the ICT is the creation of the Experience Learning System (ELS), which provides the ability to learn through active, as opposed to passive, systems. In addition to specific military training tasks, the ELS will have applications for a broad range of educational initiatives.Full Spectrum Warrior/CommandFull Spectrum Warrior is an ICT project and developed by Pandemic Studios. The game is a squad level light infantry training simulator with focus on critical tactical decision making. Densely populated cities are seen as the intensely dangerous battlefields of the future so simulates today’s urban combat, peace-enforcement and peace-keeping missions. Full Spectrum Command is a similar simulator for company commanders. Interestingly the player is not presented with a map as is common with this type of game/simulator the commander is only shown what he/she would actually see or hear. It also allows interaction with officers and local civilians both friendly and hostile. Full Spectrum Command is to be is released in 2003.Americas ArmyThis is perhaps the most known initiative where computer game world meets the military domain is Americas Army released in July 2002. Funded by the US Army the game has the ambition to market US Army towards the video and computer game audience and in the same time function as an eye opener for the military. For this reason the game is completely free. The project was a joint venture between U.S Army and the MOVES Institute [15] at the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, CA.The game is a First Player Shooter (FPS) set in a military environment that tries to be more realistic than the other games in the genre. The game is designed to be played in a multi-user mode where many players will form teams and fight each other over the net.Joint Force EmploymentJoint Force Employment (JFE) is a game prepared by the Joint Chief of Staffs and developed by Semi-Logic Entertainments. Released in 2000 the game was aiming at mid-level officers to prepare them for Joint Task Operations. The official description states it is designed exclusively for today’s U.S military to convey the concept that joint warfare is team warfare and to enhance knowledge of Joint Doctrine within the U.S military.The game is a typical realtime strategy (RTS) genre game similar to Command and Conquer and Starcraft. It was also released on the commercial gem market in a reshaped and declassified version called Real War. Developer Semi-Logic Entertainment also finished a game called Guard Force in 2002 for the Army National Guard with the same motivation of Americas Army (i.e recruitment).SwedenEven though there aren’t any defence government financed game developments like in the USA there has recently been Swedish initiatives working towards exploring the military-games domain. The activities within the organizations (and activities within) are continuously updated in the joint web site  HYPERLINK "http://www.defencegaming.org" http://www.defencegaming.orgFMV - Swedish Defence Material AdministrationIn the spring of 2002 Game Studio was launched with the support of the Research & Technology program of the Swedish Armed Forces.  The studio is an initiative to create an arena for the commercial gaming community and the defence aiming specifically at network centric warfare. The arena is a place where decisions makers and game developers can meet and exchange ideas, share experiences and build prototypes. With gaming studies and new conceptual ideas FMV will find solutions from the civilian development in conjunction with future defence needs. FOI - Swedish Defence Research AgencySince 1999 FOI conducts studies with modified game titles. The purpose of these studies is two-fold: Evaluate games and entertainment applications by their technical components (artificial intelligence, synthetic environments, architecture and user interfaces) Evaluate games for their “soft” parts and usage (like game play, command, decision making, situation awareness and other behavioural aspects) as low cost alternative for training and education of military officers. Recent activities includes:A modification of the game Unreal has been developed, successfully encapsulating the Swedish Field Manual for urban warfare and Close Quarter Combat. An experiment using First Player Shooter game in three separate LANs to train battalion HQ to lead many groups. The games are used to generate scenarios and events that are then passed to the HQ.FHS – Swedish National Defence CollegeThe work on using computer and video games can be divided into two parts – education and research. For education games are used as pedagogical instruments of future commanders. Game titles like The Operational Art of War from Talonsoft and Steel Panthers from SSI are modified with Swedish scenarios and used when the operational staffs are trained. Other game applications are under considerations to be used in different exercises. For the research part digital games and gaming are exploration how they can provide efficiencies in the operational staff process. Supporting this Game Net has been established as the research platform as part of the command laboratory. SummaryThe evolution of the game industry together with the increased need for modeling and simulation within the military has led to new possibilities regarding interdisciplinary work. There is a strong belief that digital interactive games will have a strong impact on various military activities. Not just training and education but also in planning, analysis and to support decision making. To avoid making mistakes it is very important to understand key differences, technical and cultural, between the domains which otherwise could undermine future collaboration between military and the commercial game market. References[1]	National Research Council: “Modeling and Simulation; Linking entertainment and Defense”, Washington D.C. 1997[2]	Interactive Digital Software Association,  HYPERLINK "http://www.idsa.com" http://www.idsa.com[3]	VRND, A Realtime virtual Reconstruction of Notre Dame,  HYPERLINK "http://www.vrndproject.com" http://www.vrndproject.com[4]	Markus Bylund and Fredrik Espinoza, "Using Quake III Arena to Simulate Sensors and Actuators when Evaluating and Testing Mobile Services", In Proceedings of the CHI 2001 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, March31-April 5, 2001.[5]	GameBots project, University of Southern California, HYPERLINK "http://www-2.cs.cmu.edu/~galk/GameBots/WEB/" http://www-2.cs.cmu.edu/~galk/GameBots/WEB/[6]	DiGRA, Digital Games Research Association,  HYPERLINK "http://www.digra.org" http://www.digra.org.[7]	Programmet för dataspelsutveckling, Högskolan Skövde,  http://www.ihu.his.se/program/dsug.html [8]	Marc Prensky: Digital Game-Based Learning, McGraw-Hill, New York 2001[9]	Jane’s Combat Simulations.  HYPERLINK "http://www.janes.ea.com" http://www.janes.ea.com[10]	High Level Architecture (HLA), IEEE 1516.[11]	US Department of Defense, Office of Readiness and Training.[12]	Marc Prensky: Digital Game-Based Learning, McGraw-Hill, New York 2001, p 145-179.[13]	Americas Army: operations,  HYPERLINK "http://www.americasarmy.com" http://www.americasarmy.com[14]	A.E.R. Woodcock (ed), The Strategic Management System (STRATMAS) II, Final Technical Report, Stockholm 2001[15]	Modeling, Virtual Environments and Simulation (MOVES) Institute, Naval Postgraduate School,  HYPERLINK "http://www.movesinstitute.org" http://www.movesinstitute.orgAuthor BiographiesANDERS FRANK is currently a researcher on games at the Swedish National Defence College. Previously he was director of Game Studio a Swedish Defence Materiel Administration. For the last seven years, Anders has developed and studied Virtual Reality and 3D graphics. He was recently stationed in Menlo Park, CA at the Swedish Attaché office analyzing the US computer and video games industry.ROBERT VIRDING is currently head of Game Studio at Swedish Defence Materiel Adminstration. As a professional developer Robert has long experience with computer science and telecom within Ericsson. He is also one of the creators of the programming language Erlang.