Progress Towards Applying Healthcare's HL7 Reference Information Model as a Federation Object Model for HLAWilliam BeavinThe Boeing CompanySaint Louis, Missouri, USAwilliam.c.beavin@boeing.comABSTRACT: Over the last two decades, the healthcare community has developed an internationally accepted standard interface definition for healthcare systems called Health Level Seven (HL7).  This standard is quite extensive, covering a wide range of healthcare issues from patient observations and care, to scheduling and billing, to records and information management.  It is expressed in object-oriented terms as a Reference Information Model (RIM), with version 1.19 being released in November of 2002.  The format and intent of this interface definition closely matches that of the Federation Object Model (FOM) associated with distributed simulation for use as a means to define the interfaces for the High Level Architecture (HLA).The healthcare community has deliberately taken an approach to defining the information to be distributed that is independent of any particular architecture or hardware because of the wide array of user needs, applications, and settings.  The tradeoff, however, is in interoperability, since two fully HL7 compliant systems may not be able to interoperate without some form of intermediary between them.  While the HL7 community has focused on a consistent definition and interpretation of the information to be distributed, the simulation community has developed the HLA with a focus on interoperability, regardless of the information or hardware.  When the HL7 RIM is input as a FOM into the HLA infrastructure, a powerful open system approach to interoperability for medical systems emerges.Previous work by programs such as NASA’s National Space Biomedical Research Institute that integrated medical models using HLA, and military exercises such as the Joint Medical Operations Advanced Concept Technology Demonstrations that showed integration of medical models into the HLA based Joint Semi Automated Forces (JSAF) simulation environment has laid the groundwork to show the need for a medically capable FOM.  By creating an HL7 FOM, the global standard already defined for medical interfaces can be applied directly, to achieve unprecedented levels of open system interoperability in healthcare. AUTONUMLGL  Problem StatementExtensive effort is currently underway to develop and define interoperability standards for the wide range of applications and domains within the global healthcare community.  While certainly commendable, and enabling a major positive impact on mainstream healthcare, there is still a large void in effectively leveraging these standards for medical modeling and simulation.  When considered at a very high level, the problem is similar in nature to interoperability limitations being addressed by recent developments in the Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) domain between operational systems and simulated systems.  The Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) has the opportunity to engage the global healthcare community to ensure seamless applicability of emerging healthcare interoperability standards to the medical modeling and simulation domain.  The SISO community could also serve as a bridge to the C4ISR community as medical information becomes an increasingly larger component of the Common Operating Picture (COP). AUTONUM  Health Level Seven BackgroundHealth Level Seven (HL7) is an ANSI-accredited Standards Developing Organization operating in the healthcare arena of clinical and administrative data.  The HL7 mission is: "To provide standards for the exchange, management and integration of data that support clinical patient care and the management, delivery and evaluation of healthcare services.  Specifically, to create flexible, cost effective approaches, standards, guidelines, methodologies, and related services for interoperability between healthcare information systems." [1]Quite similar to SISO, the HL7 community functions within technical committees and special interest groups to promote interoperability through the standardization of processes and procedures for information exchange, with the notable lack of focus upon medical modeling and simulation.The HL7 Version 3 Specification is expressed as an object model called the Reference Information Model (RIM), which is the basis for all HL7 Version 3 messages.  This RIM is available in several formats, including XML, XMI, and Rational Rose Model Files. AUTONUM  Related Work AUTONUMLGL  Joint Technical Architecture [2]The United States Department of Defense (DOD) Joint Technical Architecture (JTA) mandates standards for common core and domain specific systems (such as combat systems and modeling and simulation systems), and sub-domain standards within each domain, as shown in  REF _Ref32644149 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 1.Under the combat support domain are several sub-domains, including medical systems.  Specifications for medical systems include: HL7 for medical electronic data interchange, National Council for Prescription Drug Programs (NCPDP) standards for retail pharmacy claims electronic data interchange, and Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) for medical still imagery data interchange.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1: JTA Hierarchy [2]Just as the JTA is quite clear about the required standards for medical systems, it is also clear in its requirement for the use of HLA for the modeling and simulation domain.  An interesting paradox emerges in the area of simulation (requiring HLA) of medical devices (requiring HL7).  It is further complicated when these medical devices are integrated into the battlefield command and control infrastructure (requiring C4ISR/DIICOE). AUTONUMLGL  Computer Generated Force ModelsGroundbreaking work is already underway in the integration of “mainstream” military modeling and simulation with emerging medical modeling and simulation capability.For instance, as shown in  REF _Ref32644238 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 2, Courtemanche & Bimson [3] described in 1996 medical extensions to ModSAF creating MedSAF, including the ability to link to an interactive Human Patient Simulator (HPS).Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2: MedSAF Configuration [3]Each of the data links indicated in  REF _Ref32644238 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 2 could be represented with HL7 message formats for the vital signs and patient records messages, and a combination of C4ISR and HL7 messages for reports and orders.Building upon this work, Kraus et al [4] further expanded the medical modeling and simulation capability, including integration of a Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) based simulation, called Dismounted Infantry Semi-Automated Forces (DISAF), with an HLA based simulation called Combat Trauma Patient Simulator (CTPS).   REF _Ref32643599 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 3 shows an example mapping from DIS “Set Data PDU” format for a more descriptive medical application.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3: Mapping DIS Kill Levels to Medical Applications [4] AUTONUMLGL  USAMRMC/TATRCThe US Army Medical Research and material Command (USAMRMC) Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center (TATRC) plays a leading role in the development of Telemedicine technology, which pushes the limits of distributed medical system technology for the purpose of providing both patient care and provider training and rehearsal.  This focus positions them at the forefront of institutions concerned about both operational medical systems – oriented towards HL7 – and simulated systems – oriented towards HLA.  Since it is required to work in an operational battlefield environment, it also must balance HL7 and HLA requirements along with C4ISR domain requirements. AUTONUMLGL  NASA’s National Space Biomedical Research Institute (NSBRI)The NSBRI is conducting research in numerous areas, including Integrated Human Function (IHF) research efforts [5].  The effort links the highest fidelity human system models available in an effort to eventually create a working model of an entire human.  Initial efforts have focused on integrating high fidelity components of a complete heart model using HLA as the means to integrate the models.  The overall Federation consisted of various heart component Federates, and included an Electrocardiogram (ECG) federate based on HL7 interface specifications. AUTONUMLGL  JMedSAF [6]Similar to the way MedSAF adds medical modeling capability to ModSAF, JMedSAF adds medical modeling capability to JSAF. This HLA based simulation was demonstrated in numerous US DOD modeling and simulation events, including the Joint Medical Operations – Telemedicine (JMO-T) Advanced Concept Technology Demonstration (ACTD) and Millennium Challenge 2002.JMedSAF medical capabilities include:Hospital shipsMedical treatment facilitiesAmbulancesHelicoptersIndividuals capable of being wounded or sickMedical behaviors include:Combat injuriesDisease and non-battle injuriesMedical facilitiesMedical C2 reporting capabilities include:C2 message to Medical Equipment Workstation (MEWS)A combination of JMedSAF and Army distributed simulation will also be used to investigate the linkage between levels of medical support and operational effectiveness for future Objective Forces. AUTONUM  ApproachAn overall approach to address the interoperability needs of medical modeling and simulation would start by 1) forming a SISO study group to investigate the applicability of theHL7 RIM as the basis for an HLA Reference Federation Object Model (FOM) for medical modeling and simulation, 2) identifying any other relevant standards that need to be considered for inclusion in a medical modeling and simulation FOM, 3) engaging the HL7 Organization to ensure organizational and technical synergy, 4) creating a Study Group Final Report, and 5) potentially forming SISO Medical Modeling and Simulation FOM and/or Technical Reference Model (TRM) Product Development Group(s). AUTONUMLGL  SISO HL7 RIM FOM Study GroupDuring the Spring 2003 Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW), the first Medical Modeling and Simulation Forum is scheduled, with several paper presentations planned and a technical panel discussion with the participation of leading experts in the field of Telemedicine.  One of the expected outcomes of this initial gathering is the formation of an HL7 RIM FOM Study Group.  International participation is extremely important to this effort, so the opportunity for inclusion in the European SIW is most welcome. AUTONUMLGL  Consideration of Other Relevant StandardsWhile HL7 is a large and comprehensive interoperability specification, it is primarily intended to address distribution of clinical and administrative healthcare data.Consideration of other ongoing standardization efforts, such as those specified in the US DOD JTA, is necessary to ensure a comprehensive approach is taken towards the specification of a medical modeling and simulation interoperability standard.In addition to considering the US DOD JTA, an international healthcare industry initiative called Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise (IHE) should also be addressed, having already produced a Technical Framework building upon HL7 and DICOM. AUTONUMLGL  Engage HL7 Modeling and Methodology Technical CommitteeIn order to ensure FOM accuracy and concurrency, it is important to engage the HL7 Modeling and Methodology Technical Committee, as they are responsible for the HL7 RIM formats.  Technical exchanges may provide useful feedback to the HL7 working group for improvements in object model formats and distribution methodology.  If other standards with similar sponsoring organizations are identified for FOM inclusion, it is important to engage these communities as well. AUTONUMLGL  SIW Hosted HL7 TrainingThe HL7 organization has a mature, on site, readily available training support program that would lend itself well to the HLA community.  Introductory sessions could be held concurrently with Simulation Interoperability Workshops, for instance, as early as Fall 2003. AUTONUMLGL  HL7 Study Group Final ReportAfter the study group has run its course, a final report would make specific recommendations based on technical findings. AUTONUMLGL  SISO HL7 RIM FOM and/or TRM Product Development GroupBased on the study group report, some form of medical modeling and simulation interoperability product development group would be recommended. AUTONUM  ConclusionThe need for standardization to enable interoperability in medical modeling and simulation is clear, and SISO is uniquely positioned to take a leading role in the definition of these standards for several reasons.It is a leading organization for identification and implementation of a wide range of modeling and simulation interoperability standards.It bridges the gap between the medical sub-domain of the combat support domain in the JTA specification and the C4ISR and Modeling and Simulation domains.It is the leading organization in the specification of HLA related standards. AUTONUM  References[1] Health Level Seven Website,  HYPERLINK "http://www.hl7.org/about/" http://www.hl7.org/about/[2]	US Department of Defense, Joint Technical Architecture, Version 4.0, 17 July 2002[3]	Anthony J. Courtemanche, Anthony J.; Bimson, Kent; MedSAF: Prototyping a Vision for Medical Simulation in DIS; 96-CGF-009; proceedings of the 6th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation; August 1996[4] Kraus, Matthew K.; Cisneros, Jaime; Burmester, George M.; Pettitt, M. Beth H; Casualty Generation For The Combat Trauma Patient Simulator (CTPS) With The Dismounted Infantry Semi-Automated Forces (DISAF); 01F-SIW-202; Fall 2001 Simulation Interoperability Workshop[5]	Murphy, Sean; Coolahan, James; Lutz, Robert; Saunders, Randy; Feldman, Andrew; Integrating Cardiac and Cardiovascular Simulations Using the HLA; 02S-SIW-012; Spring 2002 Simulation Interoperability Workshop[6] Hardy, Douglas R.; Allen, Elaine C.; Adams, Kevin P.; Peters, Charles B.; Peterson, Larry J.; Cannon, Michael A.; Steinman, Jeffrey S.; Walter, Bruce W.; Advanced Distributed Simulation: Decade in Review and Future Challenges; Space and Naval Warfare Systems Center, San Diego (SSC San Diego) Biennial Review; 2001Simulation Interoperability Workshop – Euro 2003 EMBED MSPhotoEd.3  