A Collaborative Modeling and Simulation Environmentfor Space Biomedical ResearchDr. James E. CoolahanJohns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory11100 Johns Hopkins RoadLaurel, MD 20723-6099240-228-5155James.Coolahan@jhuapl.eduKeywords:Biomedicine, Space, Exercise, NASA, Physiological, HLA, Collaborative EnvironmentABSTRACT: The National Space Biomedical Research Institute (NSBRI) is a consortium of twelve not-for-profit institutions working under the sponsorship of the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) to prevent, and to develop countermeasures for, health problems related to long-duration space travel and prolonged exposure to microgravity.  Bioinformatics (research, development, or application of computational tools and approaches for expanding the use of biological, medical, behavioral or health data, including those to acquire, store, archive, analyze, or visualize such data) is essential to the Institute’s ability to carry out its mission of countermeasure development.  The NSBRI has recently expanded its planned bioinformatics effort to include development of a distributed, but integrated, data management and modeling system for all research, medical and environmental space-flight data.  One of the components of this plan is the development of multi-system models and simulations for use in countermeasure research, a step toward a long-term goal of the creation of a “digital astronaut” for use in countermeasure research.An initial step in this visionary task has been completed and reported upon – the creation of a federation of cardiac and cardiovascular simulations using the High Level Architecture (HLA).  The expansion of this federation using the IEEE 1516 specification for the HLA to include skeletal muscle, metabolism, and other simulations to develop a simulation of a human exercise protocol is well underway.  However, it is generally accepted that a single “one-size-fits-all” simulation to solve all countermeasure problems is not achievable.  Rather, it will be sets of simulations and their associated researchers that are applied to specific problems that will make progress toward achieving the long-term NSBRI objective.  The establishment of a distributed collaborative modeling and simulation (M&S) environment for space biomedical research is a means for facilitating this work.In addition to providing a summary of the progress and lessons learned thus far in the NSBRI’s multi-system modeling effort over its first two years of operation, this paper reports on the NSBRI’s ongoing efforts in this area, and presents a concept for the collaborative M&S environment for space biomedical research.1. Background1.1 Space Biomedicine IssuesDuring long-duration space flight, the human body is subjected to various risks associated with the space environment, microgravity, and confined working conditions.  The U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has categorized these risks as to their functional area and their criticality, and has produced a Critical Path Roadmap [1] that shows this categorization.  Risk areas include:Bone lossCardiovascular alterationsHuman behavior and performanceImmunology, infection, and hematologyMuscle alterations and atrophyNeurovestibular adaptationRadiation effectsClinical capabilityFrom a systems point of view, the human body during long-duration exposure to microgravity and other aspects of space travel can be viewed as a “system” that is subject to both the natural environment of the spacecraft, and a number of “threats” to its overall function associated with the previously enumerated risks.  Figure 1 depicts this human system and many of the threats and environmental effects.1.2 The National Space Biomedical Research Institute (NSBRI)Established in 1997 through a NASA competition, the National Space Biomedical Research Institute (NSBRI) is a consortium of twelve institutions working together to prevent or solve health problems related to long-duration space travel and prolonged exposure to microgravity.  The consortium institutions are:Baylor College of Medicine (consortium lead)Harvard Medical SchoolThe Johns Hopkins University (School of Medicine and Applied Physics Laboratory)Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyMorehouse School of MedicineRice UniversityTexas A&M UniversityBrookhaven National LaboratoryMount Sinai School of MedicineThe University of Arkansas for Medical SciencesThe University of Pennsylvania Health SystemThe University of Washington.The NSBRI’s primary mission objective is to ensure safe and productive human exploration and development of space beyond Earth orbit.  Its research is intended to lead to solutions, or countermeasures, to the harmful effects of microgravity and space radiation.  At the same time, NSBRI research is intended to lead to discoveries and products of clinical benefit to mankind on earth, enhancing treatments for conditions such as osteoporosis, muscle wasting, shift-related sleep disorders, and radiation-related conditions.  More information may be found on the NSBRI web site [2].The NSBRI has research teams focused in eleven areas, predominantly in individual research areas associated with specific effects of long-duration space flight on elements of the human body.  In 2000, the NSBRI began to look at an area that it termed Integrated Human Function (IHF), which sought to develop an understanding of the human body’s response to space flight from a holistic (i.e., total organism) point of view.  Thus, one of the major challenges within this area was to devise strategies and methods for linking together appropriate sets of individual physiological models into a framework for understanding the human as a total organism for purposes of space biomedicine.1.3  Physiological Modeling Just as military simulations have a hierarchy of aggregation levels often portrayed as a “pyramid” ranging from engineering to campaign simulations, physiological models have a hierarchy of aggregation.  The five levels of aggregation range from the molecular level to the whole body level, as shown in Figure 2.The NSBRI IHF effort was intended to address both “vertical” integration of models within systems and “horizontal” integration of models across systems.  It was recognized that creating a fully functional set of simulations that could address all space biomedical issues would take many years, particularly if all levels of the hierarchy were addressed.Physiological modeling within individual systems of the body has been the realm of specialists narrowly focused on those research areas.  During the Skylab program in the 1970s, NASA made an attempt at developing a “whole-body algorithm,” discussed in [3], which connected fairly high-level existing simulations of several subsystems.  Before being terminated, that effort noted the interoperability problems encountered, including the differences in structural detail among the models and the lack of correspondence in attributes that needed to be interchanged.2. Initial NSBRI Collaborative Simulations2.1 The Cardiovascular-Ventricular System (CVVS) FederationOne of the projects in the NSBRI’s IHF effort, currently assigned to the NSBRI Cardiovascular Alterations Team, sought from the outset to demonstrate the ability to simulate integrated human function over time by permitting simulations of different human physiological functions, to interact to produce synergistic results.  Given the success of the High Level Architecture (HLA) standard in facilitating the interoperability of military simulations, it was felt that this standard could be applied to physiological simulations as well.  The initial application addressed one particular risk in the area of cardiovascular alterations.Although there are little publicly available data on asymptomatic cardiac arrhythmias in space, the potential for developing life-threatening arrhythmias remains a major concern.  To address this area, one can benefit from modeling the responses of cardiovascular system variables (heart rate, blood pressure, etc.) following hypothetical perturbations of the system’s parameters, such as cardiac electrical state changes.  A research-oriented version of a cardiovascular simulation teaching tool developed at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, RCVSIM (available at  HYPERLINK "http://www.physionet.org" www.physionet.org), was known to be capable of representing a wide variety of cardiovascular phenomena.  However, it does not represent cardiac electrical-mechanical function in sufficient detail to model the effects of the cardiac rhythm disturbances.  Therefore, the integration of a model of ventricular electrical-mechanical activity with RCVSIM was undertaken, to form a Cardiovascular-Ventricular System (CVVS) federation.RCVSIM uses electrical circuit analogs of the mechanical system components, with blood volume analogous to charge, current to blood flow rate, and voltage to pressure.  The beating of the left and right ventricles is implemented as a time-varying capacitor that determines the elastance (capacitance-1) of the ventricles.  In the CVVS federation, this simple implementation was replaced with the output of a more detailed simulator of ventricular electrical-mechanical activity based on a hybrid cellular automata (HCA) approach for modeling cardiac electrical waves [4].  The federation also incorporated feedback of the peak elastance value set by the arterial baroreceptor reflex in RCVSIM into the ventricular model’s computation of mechanical activity.Each ventricle was modeled by a 700x700 array of HCA elements representing the endocardial ventricular surfaces, making propagation two-dimensional.  The grid was arranged into a cylinder 10 cm in length and 3.18 cm in diameter (characteristic values for human ventricular muscle).  At each 1-ms time step, the ventricle simulations returned to RCVSIM the instantaneous values of the right and left ventricular elastances and their time derivatives.  Feedback from the arterial baroreceptors in RCVSIM was implemented by modifying the parameters of the length-tension relationships for the HCA elements (updated on a beat-to-beat basis).As shown in Figure 3 (adapted from [5]), the CVVS federation is composed of three principal federates: the cardiovascular system (CVSystem) federate and the left and right ventricle federates, as well as an electrocardiographic (ECG) monitor federate.  The two ventricle federates each required the greatest processing resources and were run on separate Dell 530 Precision workstations with dual 1.7 GHz Pentium 4 processors and 2 GB of 400 MHz RDRAM.  The system that ran the left ventricle federate used the symmetric-multiprocessor-aware version of Red Hat Linux 7.1.  The system that ran the right ventricle federate used Windows 2000 with service pack 1, also supporting symmetric multi-processing.  The RTI executive, the CVSystem federate, and the ECG federate were run on one Pentium III machine with 1.5 GB of SDRAM using Red Hat Linux 7.1.  All machines were connected to a 100 Mb/s Ethernet local area network.Figure 4 (also adapted from [5]) shows some initial results from the CVVS federation.  Figure 4(a) shows the simulated ECG during normal rhythm and during a rapid ventricular arrhythmia that initiates spontaneously at 60 s.  For normal beats, the ventricles were paced (electrically excited) simultaneously over a large section of the cylindrical ventricle, resulting in nearly synchronous electrical activation of the HCA elements (within 40 ms from pacing onset).  This produced “normal” (for this model) contractile force and blood flow out of the ventricle during the ejection phase. The arterial pressure tracing Pa obtained from RCVSIM is the upper trace in Figure 4(b).  The systolic/diastolic blood pressure is roughly 120/80 mmHg, typical for a healthy adult.  After onset of the arrhythmia, Pa drops precipitously.  The lower tracing in Figure 4(b) shows the left ventricular pressure tracing Pl recorded by RCVSIM.  During the arrhythmia, the maximum value of Pl is roughly 40 mmHg.  Because no blood can be pumped into the arteries through the aortic valve until Pl exceeds Pa, the arterial pressure decays for about 2 sec, until pulsatile activity continues at a dramatically reduced mean arterial blood pressure.2.2 The Human Exercise FederationDuring the spring of 2002, NSBRI researchers and management reviewed the progress of the several projects dealing with the IHF area.  Following some discussion, the effort to integrate physiological models for space biomedicine was made a part of the NSBRI’s core bioinformatics effort, which was defined to include research, development, or application of computational tools and approaches for expanding the use of biological, medical, behavioral or health data, including those to acquire, store, archive, analyze, or visualize such data.As a near-term goal, the integrated modeling effort was focused on the goal of producing a simulation of human exercise, with the rationale being that exercise is a principal countermeasure that has been used during space flight for decades.  In August, 2002, an NSBRI Exercise Workshop was convened in Seattle, WA.  Researchers with specialties in cardiac, cardiovascular, muscle, bone, and whole-body metabolism modeling participated, along with NASA astronaut exercise program representatives, and researchers who participated in physiological modeling efforts during the Skylab program.Several exercise devices have been used during U.S. and Russian space flight missions [6].  Of these devices, the one common to the most (Skylab, Soyuz/Salyut, the Space Shuttle, Mir, and the International Space Station (ISS)) is the cycle ergometer.  The same cycle ergometer exercise protocol has been used on U.S. missions since Skylab [7]:5 minutes of rest5 minutes at a work level corresponding to 25% of each astronaut's preflight VO2,max5 minutes at 50% VO2,max 5 minutes at 75% VO2,max  5 minutes recovery.Based on the Exercise Workshop, work began on developing the concept for an HLA-based federation that could mimic the above exercise protocol.  The Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) 1516 HLA standard was chosen for this expanded federation.  Key elements of the federation, described in [8], were drawn from models developed by researchers in three NSBRI teams:A streamlined version of the CVVS federation discussed in the previous section;A blood flow federate based on work done at MIT as part of the NSBRI Cardiovascular Alterations Team, described in [9];A whole-body lactate metabolism model developed by researchers on the NSBRI Nutrition, Physical Fitness and Rehabilitation Team [10]; andA skeletal muscle energetics model developed by researchers on the NSBRI Muscle Alterations and Atrophy Team [11].Figure 5, adapted from [8], shows the working version of the Exercise Federation.After completion of its integration, the Exercise Federation will be used to compare its outputs to real cycle ergometer data collected on the ground, and subsequently, in space, for validation purposes.  The long-term hope is that an evolved version of this federation might be used to evaluate other exercise protocols, in an attempt to reduce the time consumed by astronauts during exercise, currently on the order of 2.5 hours per day.3. Collaborative Environment Concepts3.1 Collaborative Environment DefinitionThe concept of a collaborative environment to facilitate interaction between subject matter experts has been advanced in a number of contexts.  For example, in the context of U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) M&S for system acquisition, a collaborative environment has defined in one study [12] as:an enduring collection of subject matter experts (SMEs) supported by interoperable tools and data bases, authoritative information resources, and product/process models that are focused on a common domain or set of problems.The collaborative environment concept has been used in the U.S. DoD over the last several years as a means for focusing the efforts of various stakeholders from different disciplines involved in the M&S of systems during their acquisition.  Major DoD programs such as the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) and the U.S. Army Future Combat Systems (FCS) have adopted the collaborative environment concept for their M&S activities [13, 14].3.2 Elements of Collaborative EnvironmentsRegardless of the domains or sets of problems that individual collaborative environments are focused upon, all can be expected to have some essential common elements [15]:a defined purpose for which the collaborative environment is intended to be used;the involvement of SMEs from all functional disciplines that are stakeholders in the domain or set of problems on which the collaborative environment is focused;availability of a set of interoperable models, simulations, tools, and data appropriate to the domain or problem set;systems for electronic collaboration over a distance for exchange of information, access to authoritative data, and execution of simulations;a systems architecture for the collaborative environment;an agreed upon set of processes for configuration management and for verification and validation of models, simulations, and data; an agreed upon set of standards, rules, and local conventions, to which collaborative environment users and components adhere; andcoordinated policy, planning, and investment strategies to ensure continuation of the collaborative environment.4. A Collaborative Environment for Space Biomedical Research4.1 Characteristics of the NSBRI M&S CommunityThe following are characteristics of the NSBRI M&S community as it currently exists:The subject matter domain crosses many areas of physiological function.There are “legacy” simulations of value.Simulations exist across all levels of the “physiological simulation pyramid” (i.e., from cells to whole body).Researchers are spread across several NSBRI teams.Researchers are spread throughout the country.Ultimately, this M&S community, along with new researchers, needs to be brought to bear on the overall objective of the NSBRI: to produce countermeasures for long-duration human space flight.4.2 Concept for an NSBRI M&S Collaborative EnvironmentThe following is a concept for a “way ahead” for achieving the collaborative use of space biomedical M&S resources.  It does not represent an approved NSBRI M&S plan, but outlines some elements of the bioinformatics core effort and ways in which they could be interconnected for effective use.The NSBRI has recently expanded its planned bioinformatics effort to include development of a distributed, but integrated, data management and modeling system for all research, medical and environmental space-flight data.  One of the components of this plan is the development of multi-system models and simulations for use in countermeasure research, a step toward a long-term goal of the creation of a “digital astronaut” for use in countermeasure researchIt is generally accepted that a single “one-size-fits-all” simulation for a “digital astronaut” to solve all countermeasure problems is not achievable.  Rather, it will be sets of simulations and their associated researchers that are applied to specific problems that will make progress toward achieving the long-term NSBRI objective.Given the above, reasonable goals for the NSBRI M&S effort, from a computer science perspective, areto achieve interoperability among models and simulations addressing related subareas of integrated human function; andto enable reuse of models and simulations for subsequent investigations.Building upon the general collaborative environment concepts in the previous section, one can readily envision an M&S collaborative environment that includes other key NSBRI bioinformatics resources such as the NSBRI data archive and the NASA life sciences data archive [16].Figure 6 provides the top-level view of a collaborative environment architecture for NSBRI M&S. It includes two principal layers: a tools layer and a resources layer.The tools layer contains all of the NSBRI modeling tools, simulations, and simulation federations. The modeling tools class, as distinguished from the two simulation classes, includes “static” analytical models that do not involve execution over time. The simulations class includes all standalone simulations (models executing over time). The simulation federations class includes all simulations that are constructed as federations of interoperable simulations, whether executing in a single location or geographically distributed, federated using simulation interoperability standards such as the HLA.The tools could be physically located at any organization in the NSBRI enterprise, but can access the necessary resources via computer networks.  Inputs to the tools may be obtained locally, but may also be obtained from the authoritative data repositories resident in the resources layer.  Translator tools are used to reformat data from the repositories (stored, ideally, in an application-neutral format, but, more likely, at least initially, in the native formats in which they were created).  Results of the execution of the tools, after review by appropriate researchers, can be placed in the NSBRI Archived M&S Results portion of the resources layer.The resources layer contains a variety of authoritative data sources appropriate for use by the NSBRI tools.  Access to these data sources would be done through a common interface mechanism with access controls, so that the resources themselves are physically distributed but logically unified into a single NSBRI Bioinformatics Resource Repository.  This repository structure would permit access to the NSBRI Data Archive, the NASA Life Sciences Data Archive, and other physiological data resources as are deemed appropriate in the future. 5. SummaryThe NSBRI is working to prevent or solve health problems related to long-duration space travel and prolonged exposure to microgravity.  In 2000, the NSBRI began an effort to develop an understanding of the human body’s response to space flight from a holistic point of view, including devising strategies and methods for linking together appropriate sets of individual physiological models into a framework for understanding the human as a total organism for purposes of space biomedicine.  An initial success in this area was the development of the Cardiovascular-Ventricular System federation, and significant progress is underway in the development of the Exercise Federation.  Further progress in the area of bioinformatics for space biomedicine will be aided by the establishment of an M&S collaborative environment linking appropriate researchers, M&S tools, and data and information resources.  This paper has documented the progress thus far, and presented a potential “way ahead” for the development of the collaborative environment.6. AcknowledgmentsThe author wishes to acknowledge the contributions of collaborators on the distributed simulation project that produced the CVVS federation at JHU/APL, including Dr. Andrew Feldman, Sean Murphy, Robert Lutz, and Randy Saunders; and the contributions of NSBRI researchers on other projects that are contributing directly to the Exercise Federation, including Dr. Roger Mark, Dr. Ramakrishna Mukkamala, Thomas Heldt, Dr. Martin Kushmerick, and Dr. Marco Cabrera.  7. ReferencesNASA Critical Path Roadmap,  HYPERLINK "http://criticalpath.jsc.nasa.gov" http://criticalpath.jsc.nasa.gov.National Space Biomedical Research Institute web site,  HYPERLINK "http://www.nsbri.org" http://www.nsbri.org.Srinivasan, S. R., Leonard, J. I., and White R. J., “Mathematical Modeling of Physiological States,” in Space Biology and Medicine, Volume III, Humans in Spaceflight, Book 2: Effects of Other Spaceflight Factors, pp. 559-594, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Reston, VA, (1996).Feldman, A. B., Chernyak, Y. B., and Cohen, R. J., “Wave Front Propagation in a Discrete Model of Excitable Media,” Phys. Rev. E, 57(6), pp. 7025-7040 (1998).Murphy, S. P., Coolahan, J. E., Lutz, R. R., Saunders, R., Feldman, A. B., and Mukkamala, R., “Integrating Cardiac and Cardiovascular Simulations Using the HLA.” in Proc., 2002 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL (Mar 2002).Hagan, R. D., and Schaffner, G., “Exercise Countermeasures Used During Space Flight,” in Proc. Second Joint EMBS/BMES Conference, Houston, TX (Oct 2002).Hagan R. D., “Exercise Countermeasures on the International Space Station,” presentation at the NSBRI Exercise Workshop, Seattle, WA (Aug 2002).Murphy, S. P., Coolahan, J. E., Lutz, R. R., Saunders, R., Kovalchik, J. G., and Feldman, A. B., “Human Physiology Simulation Integration Using the HLA: ExerFed1516,” in Proc., 2003 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL (Mar-Apr 2003).Heldt T., Shim, E. B., Kamm, R. D., and Mark, R. G., “Computational modeling of cardiovascular response to orthostatic stress,” J Appl Physiol 92, pp. 1239-1254 (2002).Cabrera, M. E., Saidel, G. M., and Kalhan, S. C., “Lactate metabolism during exercise: analysis by an integrative systems model,” Am J Physiol 277(5 Pt 2)  pp. R1522-1536 (1999).Vicini, P., and Kushmerick, M. J., “Cellular energetics analysis by a mathematical model of energy balance: estimation of parameters in human skeletal muscle,” Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 279(1), pp. C213-224 (2000).A Roadmap for Simulation Based Acquisition – Report of the Joint Simulation Based Acquisition Task Force, Acquisition Council Draft for Coordination (Dec 1998).Coolahan, J. E., Case, F. T., and Hartnett R. J., Jr., “The Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Strike Warfare Collaborative Environment (SWCE),” in Proc., 2000 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL (Sep 2000).Eirich, P. L., Coolahan, J. E., and Purdy, E. M., “A Collaborative Environment Architecture for Future Combat Systems (FCS) Modeling and Simulation,” in Proc., 2002 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL (Mar 2002)Coolahan, J. E., Keane, J. F., and Sinex, C. H., “SBA Collaborative Environment Concepts for Mission and Product Areas,” in Proc., 2000 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL (Mar 2000).NASA Life Sciences Data Archive, http://lsda.jsc.nasa.gov.Author BiographyDR. JAMES E. COOLAHAN is the Supervisor of the Modeling, Simulation and Decision Support Group at the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, where he also served as the Assistant to the Director for Modeling and Simulation from 1996 to 2001.  In his 30 years at JHU/APL, his technical activities have included modeling and simulation, test and evaluation, and the development of oceanographic data acquisition systems.   Dr. Coolahan served as the Associate Team Leader of the National Space Biomedical Research Institute (NSBRI) Integrated Human Function team from 2000 through 2002, and is now coordinating M&S efforts as part of the NSBRI’s core bioinformatics effort.  In SISO, he is currently chair of the System Acquisition and Product Development (SAPD) Forum, and has been Vice-Chair of the Test and Evaluation Forum and a member of the Research, Development and Engineering Forum Program Review Panel.  Dr. Coolahan holds B.S. and M.S. degrees in aerospace engineering from the University of Notre Dame and the Catholic University of America, respectively, and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from the Johns Hopkins University and the University of Maryland, respectively.Figure 6. Top-level view of a potential NSBRI M&S collaborative environment architecture.The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) supported this work through the NASA Cooperative Agreement #NCC9-58 with the National Space Biomedical Research Institute.Figure 5. Exercise Federation block diagram (work in progress).Figure 2. Levels of physiological modeling.(a) Simulated Electrocardiogram(b) Arterial and Left Ventricular Pressure (RCVSIM)Figure 4. Hemodynamic response to cardiac arrhythmia.Figure 3.  Block diagram of CVVS federation.Figure 1. A systems perspective for human function in long-duration spaceflight.