A socio-technical view of a VV&A methodologyRené JacquartONERA2 avenue Edouard Belin31055 Toulouse – Francejacquart@cert.frPierre BoucALEKTO37, traverse de la Serviane13012 Marseille – Francealekto@wanadoo.frDaniel GirardotDGA/CAD16bis avenue prieur de la Cote d'Or 94114 ARCUEIL – Francedaniel.girardotcad@laposte.netKeywords :VV&A, Validation, Accreditation, MoM, ABSTRACT: This article surveys the results of a cooperation study in an Anglo-French defense setting : the Anglo-French Defense research Group (AFDRG). The study was leaded in France by DGA/DSP/CAD and in UK by DSTL/CDA. The study on VV&A started from the current DMSO proposals but departed from them by stressing the importance of a slightly different concept and definition of Validation. An important aspect of the evolution is related to the anchoring role, at informal level, of the "users intended purpose", which shall be refined into formal requirements. Another evolution is the emphasis of VV&A activities within a socio-technical and decision-making perspective.1. Introduction1.1 Context: simulation for defense businessThe use of models and simulations has a long history continuously evolving.  M&S is used in many aspects of defence business as presented below:The study's results reported in this article focus on OA and SBA that where chosen as primary application domains.ApplicationPurposeOperational AnalysisSupport to Balance of Investment decisionsDoctrinal DevelopmentEquipment AcquisitionUndertake concurrent Performance, Cost and Time trade-offsTest and EvaluationTest and evaluate designs over a scope that is beyond that of live testingTrainingBring individuals and units to a skill level that will maximise the benefit of live training1.2 Verification & ValidationConsiderable VVA researches have been conducted by the international community in order to support of M&S interoperability, much of them leaded by US teams in relation to development of the FEDEP.  It is to note that  the United-Kingdom, France and Germany have all been active in this field.An important issue is as follows. For the full potential benefits of M&S to be realized mechanism is required such that all stakeholders can be confident that the M&S is appropriate to their needs. All stakeholders need to be assured that M&S use will be of benefit i.e. that they are fit for the intended purpose. That involves to firstly define the purpose and to establish some criteria acceptable by stakeholders. Assurance is provided through the process of Validation (are we building the right system?) and Verification (are we building that system right?).The state of art regarding verification and validation (V&V) depicts some interesting remarks. On one hand the process of verification is understood and practised, on the other hand a satisfactory process for the validation of M&S does not yet, we believe, exist. In particular V&V is largely regarded as an M&S development tool, to be used at the end of development - if funds are available (see: classical V-cycles).Although VVA comes at a cost, if VVA is completed as an integral part of the M&S development starting at the earliest stages, VVA will help safeguard against developing a solution which does not satisfy the stakeholders’ requirement. There are great potential consequences.  A M&S solution that not fit for purpose and, because no VVA is applied, is subsequently used in support of decision makers could result in much more costly – including human -consequences.1.3 The joint studyThe UK and France decided in 2000 to conduct a study, under the auspices of the AFDRG (Anglo-French Defence Research Group). As an introductory paradigm, both recognised the need for integration of V&V within the development process and agreed the necessity to develop a common framework encompassing both a rigorous V&V process and socio-technological aspects inherent of M&S projects. It has been decided that an important aspect of this study was to disseminate findings amongst the wider VVA community - primarily done through presentation at international conferences even if the results were partially studied.Study Aim:The aim of the study was therefore to develop a generic methodology that addresses some particular concerns identified in following §2.There were four research and development streams:Application Definition: Starting from the premise that Validation is a demonstration of fitness for purpose, this stream establishes what the applications of M&S are and, in a second time,  assesses the advantages and disadvantages of each application from the point of view of selecting the test vehicle for that application.Methodology: The development of a generic V&V framework that would integrate a V&V process with the socio-technology aspects was undertaken.Selected application of methodology: A case study was conducted to exercise the methodology in order to refine the methodology and also increases confidence and credibility in the V&V approach.  The UK selected an equipment acquisition case study and the French selected an Operational Analysis application.Synthesis of results and conclusions: The documentation and dissemination of the study findings and identification of an appropriate way forward.2. Current positionThe current official definition of validation [DMSO VV&A Guide, 96] is based on the premise that a model is valid if it contains an accurate representation of the real world:Validation: is the process of determining that a model or simulation is an accurate representation of the real world from the perspective of the intended use of the model and simulation.2.1 IssuesThis approach has a number of significant shortcomings.  For example useful training simulations could be built that either have a crude representation of the real world or even represent a world that can not be reached due to system complexity, time-distance to applicable action or are used through scenarios that are very seldom on real world but that are critical for mission performance.   This is particularly true in Operational Analysis used to predict military outcomes in a future world. In this last case, the concept of validation as behavioral equivalence against a measured referent is impossible. In such case, M&S are used to explore a multi-dimensional decision-making that demands a critical post-analysis.When approaching organizational issues, Any problem will have a main ‘holder’ but there will also be a number of stakeholders each with their own view.  The stakeholder views and environment must be accounted for.Both nations therefore recognize that fully validated M&S is not possible in most of the application domains.  However some step to validation is essential to provide confidence to the stakeholders that the available M&S solution is ‘fit for purpose’.3. The VVA Methodology processThis study started using the DoD/DMSO existing works and as initial objective the definition of a "VV&A process". This objective was discussed and criticized in the earlier study phases.A first critical concern has to deal with the fact that the VV&A process was mainly inspired by and dependant of M&S development process. This is a drawback when M&S are reused without any knowledge or control on previous developments (COTS, GOTS, federations, etc.). The study then explores M&S development process and emphasized non-process components (cf. 4).The first results, coming from a state of the art analysis, distinguished the four important items presented below.3.1 Problem definition and M&S development processThe initial step in the process is to extract from the problem owner a precise statement of his own problem and the context.  This should be independent of any M&S connotation to avoid imposing a technical solution on the problem from the beginning.  This approach was developed by Hone and Moulding, who emphasised two sources which both have to be addressed during validation process (Figure 1). These domains are defined as:- The problem domain: the world environment in which the problem operates.- The application domain: the definition of the type of problem.This set encompasses different items: organization (employment and available resources), purpose expression (problem to be managed), knowledge of the reality (referent)…3.2 Measures of merit (MoM)Without a mechanism of validity assessment it is difficult to show how validation could be achieved.  MoM specifications are an approach to capture the requirements/objectives at all stages.Essentially the problem owner defines the outputs and acceptable uncertainties of each output.  These can be graphically represented by a Kiviat Diagram as follows. The same diagram is used to compare achieved results against required ones:EMBED Word.Picture.8 3.3 Constraining the Conceptual ModelThat kind of process is certainly idealistic as it is not taking into account in a first time constraints evaluation and then relaxations using MoM and their evaluation.A more detailed process should be studied as this process of composition of models and relaxation of constraints is generally not documented with respect to the fit for purpose demonstration.This involves an iterative process taking into account both the idealized conceptual model and the achievable one including risk/benefit assessment.3.4 ProcessConcerning the process issue, we have not prescribed an explicit VV&A process because this is itself dependent on non-process components (see following chapter) in particular the organization and relationships between stakeholders in the delivery of products. We believe that this is not an inconvenience but an opportunity and freedom for the program manager and the application sponsor to actually tailor this process. A good practice would include such adjustments into the insurance quality plan relating the development.4. Non-process componentsAs introduced earlier, non-process components (products, organization, justification documents, decision-making, etc.) have been considered as very important in application.4.1 IntroductionThe key non-process components are seen as being:- A good balance among Products, Organization and process,- Justification evidences for increasing confidence,- Organisational aspects and actors.4.2 The “3 pillars” conceptThe 3 pillars approach recognizes that at each stage of a M&S development, which includes V&V, three interdependent components must be considered to formalize and encompass the previous issues:- Existing and operational organisation (WHO);-  Product to implement (WHAT);-  Process to apply (HOW) - as a result to both others.EMBED Word.Picture.8None of these components could be considered in isolation:- Products depend on the current state of the development of the project, its field of application and the problem to be addressed.- Organization depends on the activity to be accomplished, the products required and the resources available.- Process must be adapted to < product – organisation>.4.3 The organization (roles and actors of the project)When considering a complete M&S development, 4 groups of roles come to play:- Those who own the problem, and are the M&S results beneficiaries- Those in charge of developing the M&S- The VVA agents- The Subject Matter Experts (SME).These roles relate to obligations and activities and can not be confused with real actors (resources). The management must define the process of allocating roles to actors.4.4 M&S productsThe M&S products tackled by the methodology have been strongly framed to three steps: Requirements (including MoM), Simulation Conceptual Model (SCM), and the Simulation system as employed.The SCM is probably the level which currently is the less well understood and practiced despite its actual importance.The stakeholders’ “Conceptual Models” present the characteristics that are appropriate to fulfil the purpose. The validity of the M&S will be compromised if there is a misunderstanding between all the people involved. Robust, common conceptual models are therefore essential and will require significant effort to achieve. Further, fitness for purpose of the SE is compromised if too narrow a view is taken, so a framework that encourages a holistic approach is essential. CM in the development of SE that is fit for purpose (FfP) has widely appeared as a fundamental and appreciated issue4.5 Argument Based JustificationAs described above Validation is a judgmental activity regarding fitness for purpose.  It is suggested that validation (and VV&A) can therefore be considered to be an argument based activity.It is our belief that the confidence / credibility put on M&S results is based not only on elementary technical results of V&V, but probably more on the way to show that these elementary results are properly linked to the original requirements and adequately traced all along the development stages.The approach proposed here is to structure, relate and put in perspective, both products / results / data, meta-product and the justification argument. The aim is to give the objective evidence that the risk associated with using the M&S conforms with the willingness to tolerate it in the specific use.The proposed model is a 5-ary relations which links specific and meta-products in the following way:EMBED Word.Picture.8As an example, the validation argumentation is substantiated by the use of criteria and MoMs, required and observed on the different kind of products linked by the relation:EMBED Word.Picture.85. Understanding of V&V5.1 IntroductionOur common view of the nature of validation could be as follow:- Validation is not absolute. Trade-offs must be achieved by the validation authority (or people) to ensure that an acceptable level of FfP is established in regard of available resources. - General validation is not possible. Any validation must be conducted with respect to purpose. - Validation is a partially subjective process; two different validation authorities will see different models as valid and may establish different criteria for fitness for purpose (FfP). - Validation could not be generally achieved through logical falsification; that is, a validation authority can never prove that a model is valid but can show that it is not in some context / scenarios. In the absence of a "real world" referent, validation can only be done against users requirements, properties and then against conceptual models. - Models considered to be valid may continue to be used until a deepening understanding exposes weaknesses that render them no longer FfP. - The validation of federated models requires the validation of component models, the interactions between them and the side effects. 5.2 Common definitions5.2.1 ValidationIt is not easy to capture all the subtleties of validation within a single definition.  Consequently we have proposed two derived definitions, addressing the ‘what’ and ‘how’ question:- What-definition:  Validation is the process of determining that a model and or simulation is fit for purpose from the perspective of its intended use.- How-definition: The process of validation is essentially a comparison of the outcomes against factors and criteria required by the problem owner and stakeholders.  The evaluation and assessment is conducted against a set of Measures of Merit (MoM) that primarily characterise the intended use and specify the acceptable uncertainty tolerances.5.2.2 VerificationIf validation asks the question ‘are we building the right M&S?’ then verification is asking whether we are building the M&S right. Hence verification is a test and what is verified depends on the point in M&S development.  Early stage verification will ensure that the specification is consistent with the requirement or conceptual model and late stage verification will test the delivered M&S with the specification.5.2.3 AccreditationThe point of any M&S activity is to alleviate a problem, and the final stage of VVA is the agreement of the problem owner that his problem has been alleviated. This essentially is the Accreditation process.From this point of view Accreditation is only valid for that problem and can only take place after using the M&S.  However, complex simulations do not deliver knowledge, decisions, or actions in a binary mode (i.e. valid / non-valid). Rather, complex simulations have to inform decision-makers and to balance between confidence, usefulness, cost and time, that is to help decision makers. It is therefore crucially important to determine the “just good enough” factor and to manage both time and costs to be efficient.5.3 VV&A Process issuesThe study identified that a VVA methodology consists of both process and non-process components.  Validation is however a subjective activity and thus the process approach have to be complemented by non-process considerations that reflect VVA as a socio-technical-economic decision-making activity.From this point of view, VV&A could be seen mainly as a pro-active activity informing decision makers (application sponsors, beneficiaries or users) of the risk / benefit of developing M&S all along the life-cycle (during early phases of development, as well as, later when the M&S will be put in use).6. PerspectivesThis study has developed a VVA methodology and has tested this against operational analysis and acquisition case studies.  These case studies go some way to indicating that the approach is practicable.  They were themselves academic exercises looking at the application of the approach on historical M&S activities.  Several real issues need to be addressed to gain further confidence in the approach.It is recommended that a practical VVA experiment should be conducted to:- Establish the how the VVA approach holds up the real world situation of cost and time constraints forcing the use of legacy models.- Evaluate the role of the VVA methodology as a dialogue tool between the problem owner (and relevant stakeholders) and the M&S suppliers.- Examine the cost of the VVA approach in terms of money, time and resources and the benefits of the applying the approach (evaluate the return on investment).- Determine how the VVA approach may be applied in an incremental M&S development.  This is particularly pertinent to the SeBA approach of spiral development.- Establish how VVA may be undertaken within the commercial constraints of industry supplied models in support of acquisition.- propose a modified VV&A glossary, mainly for the concept of validation and for the organization and roles clarification.These perspectives are mentioned here in order to identify research directions for the M&S community. They are at the basis for potential international cooperation studies as exemplified in the ITOP 7.2 group or as by the EUCLID/THALES JP 11.20 (REVVA project).7. ConclusionsCurrent state of VVA is inadequate because many practitioners forget the  socio-technical issue involved in VV&A. Therefore the emerging validation processes do not actually support the development of M&S that is fit for purpose.  One consequence is that M&S developers apply VV&A methodology much more in the letter than in the spirit.For a VVA methodology be worth implementing it must take part of simulation development and it must be proactive.Further VVA has to be seen as part of the overall simulation lifecycle cost. However, it must be recognized that it is not possible to quantify the benefits in monetary terms.The application of the VVA methodology outlined in this study will, increases confidence in the M&S solution.  It does not  guarantee 100% validity.Imposing VVA as a standardized process is not our recommended approach. Process Standards are difficult to apply to complex situations.  Rather the methodology emerging from this study is offered as a way of doing VVA backed up with supporting evidence from product documentation and justification.The intermediary results of the methodology have been presented in international forums, in particular the SISO Simulation Interoperability Workshops.  Feedback from these workshops has increased the team’s confidence in their approach to VVA.The application of the methodology to the case studies has allowed the methodology to be refined in the light of practical experience; it has added credibility to the study and increased confidence that the methodology is practicable.What has been produced so far is a significant step forward in understanding the VVA issues and addressing them. However these are only the initial steps and there is some way to go; hence the proposals for further work.AcknowledgmentsThe results presented here have been produced in the context of an Anglo-French project and we have to thank the UK team composed by Dr. Robin Miller, Prof P. John, Marcus Coombs, Sean Price and Mark Dumble.Author BiographiesRené Jacquart is a senior research scientist of ONERA – Toulouse research centre. He is involved into VV&A research and studies for defence simulations since 1995. His major interest topics are dealing with requirements formalization, justification arguments and multi-criteria decision-making.Daniel Girardot is a Software Quality Engineer of the French Centre d'Analyse de Défense (Center for defense analysis). After a master's degree in physics, he was involved in operational analysis studies. Then, he worked on different domains of information science and also software methods and quality. In charge of VV&A methodology since 1996, he is currently taking part of miscellaneous working groups, in particular with UK and NATO.Pierre BOUC (LTC Ret) was assigned to the French Army General Staff - Operations Research & Simulation Centre from 1990 to 1998. He was responsible on the data gathering for JANUS and the BBS databases, and was involved in the studies to increase simulation validity. He has managed ALEKTO, a consultancy organisation, since 1998 when he retired from the army.ProblemDomainApplicationDomainImplementationSpecificationM&S Requirement