Establishing a German Simulation Co-ordination Office to support Procurement and R&D of ArmamentsCol Albert WimmelGustav SchulzKay PixiusBundesamt für Wehrtechnik und Beschaffung (BWB)Ferdinand-Sauerbruch Str. 1D- 56073 Koblenz, Germany{AlbertWimmel|GustavSchulz|KayPixius}@bwb.orgABSTRACT: Unlike most other nations, Germany distinguishes due to its constitution sharply between R&D efforts in order to pursue the development of doctrine, logistics and in short: operational relevant issues and those relevant to support the procurement of weapon systems. While military personnel is responsible for operational issues, procurement is under the civil service’ authority.As the capabilities of federated simulation increased during the last years, it became evident that an overlap between those parties would require some co-ordination as technologies to develop doctrines and to determine parameters of new weapon systems are similar.In consequence, a German Simulation Co-ordination Office was established in early 2003 (GeSimCO/“Leitstelle Simulation”). This paper focuses on the organisational, procedural and technological background of this office: which are the tasks,  duties, and responsibilities; how are those tasks accomplished and which is the technological framework to perform those tasks. As an example, an R&D effort - recently launched to broaden the scope of the German Combat Exercise Simulation Centre - is highlighted with its interrelations to NATO R&D project PATHFINDER and other national efforts, like the German National Infrastructure for Simulation PSI-SA/GERTICO.Keywords: Leitstelle Simulation; Pathfinder; PSI-SA; GERTICO; Procurement1. IntroductionThe German constitution demands for a rigid separation of using military systems and technologies and procuring and developing them. In this, German policy differs from many other armed forces within NATO. The usage of systems is under the responsibility of military personnel, while procuring and developing is under those of the civil service. This concept was very successful in the past, as it allowed the military to concentrate on their business. Consequently, there are nowadays various simulation systems in use, each of which perfectly suited to fit their original purpose, but not equipped with any kind of standardised and/or well-documented interface. As, however, the requirements for interconnecting simulation systems came up, costly and complicated changes in the software became necessary. It is remarkable that many of these requirements were driven by the involvement in international R&D programmes and co-operations.Similar to many other nations, Germany became convinced that a national co-ordination “facility” is necessary to bring the national stakeholders into discussion, to enable beneficial use of emerging technologies, and to serve as a focal point for M&S within the German Federal Armed Forces (Bundeswehr).2. German Defence Policy on M&S: the Simulation CubeThere are different viewpoints on Simulation out there in Germany, which are somehow peculiar and reflect the current policy on Simulation.From the viewpoint of a Technical Manager responsible for the development and procurement of simulation systems the focus is on well-defined, single projects. Procurement projects in GE are defined by an operational requirement document (prepared by military personnel), a time-line and assigned money. This is the Project view.From a technological point of view, however, one has recognise that there are wonderful methods and technologies out there, and that it would be nice to play with them. The user is really not welcomed in this view, but a disturbing factor. This is the Technology view.From the taxpayer’s viewpoint there is the strong wish for controlling the flow of money. Hence, one may neither trust the scientists nor the military; they always want the best and/or most expensive. Hence, a governmental department needs processes and procedures to manage and negotiate with the scientists/developers as well as with the military. This is the Organisation view.Figure 1: The Simulation Cube.Summarising: there are mainly two different driving forces for simulation policy: one origins directly from operational demands for the development of doctrines and procedures, the other origins from technological demands for re-usability of simulations for procurement purposes. These driving forces meet each other in R&D programs dealing with federated simulations. From a technical point of view, many application areas rely on similar technologies and, hence, the creation of a common Modelling & Simulation Infrastructure was recognised as an important task. Furthermore, there are some (and becoming more) issues, where there is an overlap: if either simulations were able to interconnect or rely/exploit on the same technology, then a cost saving effect and/or perhaps a gain in performance could result.As a consequence, it was decided to establish a co-ordinating facility: The German Simulation Co-ordination Office (GeSimCO/Leitstelle Simulation), which reflects the Organisation view of the simulation cube.3. A M&S InfrastructureObviously,  the intersection of areas of interest (the domains) of military and civil service issues is not empty; however, we have discovered in Germany that the one domain relies on technologies that are in many case different from technologies exploited in the other domain: the differ in the use of different data models (although they may deal with similar virtual realities); they sometimes differ in the usage of different IT-standards, and they differ in the use of different interface standards. This makes interoperability very hard and expensive.Therefore, Germany is undertaking efforts to create one Technology which comprises all the other technologies in terms of enabling interoperability. This Technology is denominated as “M&S  infrastructure”, i.e. a structural concept accompanied by the software prototype PSI-SA/GERTICO among others.Figure 2: The M&S Infrastructure comprises an HLA-OMT compliant API generator, a Runtime-Infrastructure, and a prototypical CIS/Simulation Proxy.Figure 3: The M&S infrastructure is tasked to be used in a national workbench e.g. at the Combat Exercise Simulation Centre located in Wildflecken; there the combat simulation system SIRA and others will be interconnected based on  the German Army Core Data Model and supporting technologies. Furthermore, the prototypical C2SimProxy would be used to interconnect to the CIS.The purpose is to join different software components (regardless of their origin) to establish a federated application. A software component always comes along with a data model or  a data structure; running a simulation simply means performing operations/calculations on data as contained in the data model yielding a flow of information (the change of the data). This is, what usually is referenced as a Synthetic Environment (SE).The problem is now, of course, how to interconnect those components: U.S. DoD has developed the HLA standard; there are other standards, too (e.g. CORBA). Although this helps very much, it is still expensive and is still a giant management effort.The approach proposed here is to take from the HLA only the idea of describing the data structure as far as relevant for the exchange of information (by making use of the HLA OMT) and transforming this into an API which comprises pure virtual classes to speak in terms of object orientation as generated from the OMT description. The concept and its prototypical implementation is discussed elsewhere [1-4].4. Coupling CIS to M&S: A national workbenchA major driving force for the decision to establish the GeSimCO came from international programmes like the NATO M&S Group 027 “PATHFINDER: Integration Environment for the Multi-Purpose Application of Distributed Networked Simulations” among others.To keep pace with this very ambitious R&D project, the GeSimCO will support the establishment a workbench located e.g. at the national Combat Exercise Simulation Centre. This serves as a proof of concept for the M&S infrastructure as well as the modelling technology exploited for the Army Core Data Model.5. SummaryWith establishing a national Simulation Co-ordination Office, Germany is following other nations who have already established similar offices.The function of this office is to serve as glue between the project divisions within the German Federal Office for Defence Technology and Procurement (BWB) and the military governed domain of developing doctrines and carrying out computer-assisted exercises.The main tasks of the GeSimCO are:to give advice with the application of a national “Guideline for the Use of Simulation in the German Procurement Process” (denominated as CPM 2001);to take the national lead in representing Germany in the international R&D business as far as M&S is concerned;to foster the development and beneficial use of the national M&S infrastructure.Figure 4: The German Simulation Co-ordination office gives practical advice on how to use simulation within the procurement process and the beneficial use of the national M&S infrastructure. ReferencesH.-P. Menzler, U. Krosta, K. Pixius: “HLA in an Nutshell: y-SA Proposed Standard Interface for Simulation Applications“; (00S-SIW-026) in: Proc. Simulation Interoperability Workshop SIW Spring 2000.H.-P. Menzler: „A Proposed Standard Interface to Improve Interoperability of Simulation Applications“; (01S-SIW-022) in: Proc. Simulation Interoperability Workshop SIW Spring 2001.R. Herzog, T. Usländer, J. Mulder, K. Pixus, H.-P. Menzler: „A CORBA Infrastructure plugged into the German pSISA Architecture“; (00F-SIW-040)in: Proc. Simulation Interoperability Workshop SIW Fall 2000.R. Herzog, T. Usländer, J. Mulder, K. Pixus, H.-P. Menzler: „ HLA on top of CORBA Common Object Services “; (01E-SIW-009) in: Proc. Simulation Interoperability Workshop SIW Spring 2001.Authors BiographiesCol. ALBERT WIMMEL is head of the German Simulation Co-ordination Office. Prior to this assignment he headed the department for Computer-Based Training at the Federal Office for Defence Technology and Procurement (BWB).GUSTAV SCHULZ is a Senior Technical Manager and a Deputy Head of the German Simulation Co-ordination Office at the Federal Office for Defence Technology and Procurement in Koblenz, Germany. His assignment before was the leadership of a liaison office  for air defence at the Aviation and Missile Command (AMCOM) in Huntsville, Alabama, USA. Prior he worked as a Senior Technical Manager and Team Leader for computer based training (CBT),  video training and concepts for training technology and as a Technical Manager for communication equipment and video technology. He holds a masters degree in electrical engineering and communication technology from the college for mechanical and electrical engineering in Hagen. As a auditor at the college for pedagogic in Koblenz he got a background in educational psychology.KAY PIXIUS is a Technical Manager in the recently established German Simulation Co-ordination Office within the Federal Office for Defence Technology and Procurement (BWB). Prior he worked for the Department for Simulation Infrastructure at the Federal Armed Forced Technical Centre for Communication and Electronics. His background includes a trainee program in Defence Technology at the BWB. He holds a masters degree in semiconductor physics from the University of Cologne and earned his PhD in Material Sciences from RTWH Aachen. He worked at the Institute of Materials Research of the German Aerospace Research Establishment (DLR), where he finally was Assistant to the Board of Directors before joining the BWB.		2003 European Simulation Interoperability Workshop		Stockholm, Sweden, June 200303E-SIW-030