03E-SIW-065Transmission of Simulated Entities on a T-1using an Aggregate Process:The ResultsJoe SorrocheASRC Communications, Ltd.Distributed Mission Operations Center4500 Aberdeen Blvd St. SE, Building 942Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico 87117505-853-0372, DSN 263-0372joe.sorroche@kirtland.af.mil.com Keywords:DMOC, JQUAD, ALSP. ABSTRACT: Paper 02E-SIW-069 “Transmission of Simulated Entities on a T-1 using an Aggregate Process” presented how an aggregate ground constructive environment generator, JQUAD, could send several thousand aggregated ground entities via a T-1.  The paper was presented at the Summer 2001 SIW. The project was delayed due to funding and requirements changes; hence, the test results were unavailable.  To recap, JQUAD is capable of generating several thousand-ground entities in aggregates, where one data packet can represent several individual entities.  JQUAD can also send DIS data, which results in several thousand-entity state Protocol Data Units (PDUs), and using several megabits of bandwidth on the AFC2TIG local LAN, but will exceed the bandwidth of 1.5 Megabits per second for a T-1.  However, thousands of entities could be sent from the AFC2TIG to the DMOC by taking advantage of JQUAD’s aggregate process This paper presents the results of how JQUAD sent several thousand-ground entities via a T-1 from the AFC2TIG to the DMOC, with phenomenal bandwidth reductions, thus proving that bandwidth reductions are possible using this process, without sacrificing exercise fidelity.IntroductionThe Theater Aerospace Command and Control Simulation Facility (TACCSF), Det-4, AFC2TIG located at Kirtland AFB, NM 87117Det-4, AFC2TIG, is now the Air Force Distributed Mission Operations Center of Excellence (DMOC).  The DMOC, located at Kirtland AFB, NM 87117, conducts and participates in several Air Force distributed simulation exercises. Each exercise requires some or all of the existing T-1 links between DMOC and other sites. The DMOC also participates in several Blue Flag (BF) Exercises each year, which are conducted by the AFC2TIG. Currently, there is one T-1 between DMOC and the Air Force Command and Control Training and Innovation Group (AFC2TIG). The data on the T-1 WAN follows the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) 1278.1a, 1998 Standard for Distributed Interactive Simulations (DIS). To date, only air and some ground entities generated by Distributed Information Warfare Constructive Environment (DICE) have been sent to DMOC. Another environment generator, JQUAD, generates several thousand ground-entities. JQUAD can also send DIS data, which results in several thousand-entity state Protocol Data Units (PDUs). JQUAD can also send aggregate data, where one data packet can represent several individual entities. This paper addresses how JQUAD can send several thousand-ground entities via a T-1 from the AFC2TIG to the DMOC, and present the test results.JQUAD DescriptionJQUAD is a suite of simulation models, which permits the computer to play out many components of command and control warfare. JQUAD is multisided, able to portray red, blue, and other players, and is designated to play at the collateral level and below. JQUAD generates United States Message Text Format (USMTF) products in the volume and format expected during actual combat operations. JQUAD also produces binary data link feeds such as Tactical Information Broadcast Service (TIBS), Tactical Related Applications (TRAP), and Tactical Digital Information Link (TADIL). For Blue Flag (BF) exercises, JQUAD interacts directly with the Air Warfare Simulator (AWSIM) model to provide information to the control staff and the Air Operations Center (AOC). JQUAD also provides a TADIL-J feed to the Air Defense System Integrator (ADSI). JQUAD consists of four different simulations: Joint Electronic Combat/ Electronic Warfare Simulation (JECEWSI), Joint Command and Control (C2) Attack Simulation (JCAS), Joint Networks Simulation (JNETS), and Joint Operations Information Simulation (JOISIM). A fifth module, JQUAD Ground Game (JGG), simulates ground combat outcomes and acts as a ground mobile force generator for JOISIM intelligence collection activities. JQUAD is Aggregate Level Simulation Protocol (ALSP) compliant, and ALSP will be the interface between AWSIM and JQUAD. JQUAD is also partially DIS compliant (currently one way from JQUAD) and can interface with DIS compliant virtual simulations and simulators. A description of the JQUAD components follows:JECEWSI JECEWSI is a near real time interactive simulation of the Electronic Combat (EC) environment. JECEWSI allows opposing sides to employ Electronic Warfare (EW) systems and procedures and view the effects on game situations in AWSIM and other ALSP compliant simulations.JCAS JCAS accesses fixed target data from the Rapid Application of Air Power (RAAP) database. JCAS simulates Bomb Damage Assessment (BDA) on these fixed targets using approved Joint Munitions Effectiveness Manual (JMEM) data. JCAS links to the Portable Space Model Navigation (PSM/NAV) to incorporate Global Positioning System (GPS) accuracy effects upon Precision Guided Munitions.JNETS JNETS simulates relationships between static C2 nodes, as well as dynamic connectivity for communications, transportation, and power distribution networks. JNETS is a white cell visualization tool only. JNETS provides controllers a visual representation of the cascading effects of attacks on the nodes of these networks. JNETS does not directly degrade the operation of these networks, it merely shows a controller where it would be justifiable to manually do so.JOISIM JOISIM simulates various air and space based intelligence sensors, and collects and reports intelligence information in real world USMTF TIBS, TADIL, TRAP, and OTH-Gold.The AFC2TIG produces, in electronic format, a data file (format TBD) containing current JQUAD ground truth status of command and control facilities at the DMPI level. This data is prepared and provided to the “Adversary Ground Truth” system operator approximately every 2 hours in order to maintain a control view of threat C2.JQUAD Ground Game (JGG)JGG is a fifth model hooked into the JQUAD suite of models. JGG is used to present a map overlay and moving ground targets to the wargame environment. JGG provides a feed to the DIS Local Area Network (LAN) making it easy for the players to identify moving targets using Virtual Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (VSTARS) and Air Force Synthetic Environment for Reconnaissance and Surveillance (AFSERS). JGG also attrits ground forces by utilizing a JMEM table. JGG allows controllers to manually adjudicate force on force engagements and passes the data to JOISIM, which generates the appropriate reports.JQUAD sends entity state PDUs to the DIS LAN by transmitting them one by one, spacing the transmission by several microseconds. This transmission allows JQUAD to send several thousand-entity state PDUs on the DIS LAN and avoid bandwidth spikes. This has been verified during integration testing with JQUAD in preparation for a Blue Flag exercise. JQUAD can also spread out the update rate, thus reducing bandwidth usage even further. However, by using the ALSP protocol to transmit entities can reduce bandwidth usage such that other sites can use the T-1 network. The next section will describe how that can be accomplished.Sending JQUAD data to the DMOCJQUAD uses the Aggregate Level Simulation Protocol (ALSP), which is a message-based protocol. The ALSP architecture is described in the next section.ALSP ArchitectureThe basic architecture of a two-actor confederation is shown in Figure 1.  Each actor is required to have an ALSP translator, which converts ALSP messages to formats used internally by the simulation. The translator is connected to an ALSP Common Module, or ACM. The ACM is responsible for both object management and time control.The ACMs are connected to each other by an ALSP Broadcast Emulator (ABE). The ABE transfers data between the ACMs, performing source level filtering to minimize network traffic. As confederations grow in size, more ABEs can be added to improve network efficiency. ABEs can also be strategically placed to facilitate the conducting of exercises with sites spread out over large geographic distances.The two remaining components shown in Figure 1 are for system control and exercise management. The ALSP Control Terminal (ACT) is a monitor for the specific ACM or ABE to which it is attached. It allows viewing of the component’s status, which can include AIS and actor data, as well as changing and updating selected pieces of data. ACTs were the first exercise management tools for ALSP; unfortunately a separate display area (either a VT100 terminal or a window on a workstation) is needed for each ACT. In order to control a large exercise, the number of ACTs can easily exceed a dozen, cluttering displays and hindering exercise management. Additionally, most ACT capabilities affect only the component to which it is attached, requiring typing commands at each ACT to effect changes on a confederation-wide basis.The unwieldiness of trying to manage a confederation with just the ACTs led to the development of the Confederation Management Tool (CMT). The CMT is, in effect, a “super” ACT. One CMT can attach to all the ACMs and ABEs in a confederation, summarizing the status on one display, allowing confederation wide changes to system parameters, as well as supporting all the capabilities of the ACT for each individual ACM and ABEEMBED UnknownJQUAD uses this ALSP architecture to represent several tracks as one entity. Using this format, several entities can be sent using very little bandwidth. The ALSP format can be used to send entity data via T-1 to the DMOC, where a de-aggregation process could receive the data and convert it to entity state PDUs to be sent out on the DMOC DIS Ground LAN. The next section describes how this would be done.Sending JQUAD data via T-1 to the DMOCJQUAD aggregate data can be sent via T-1 to DMOC, and could be sent to a machine which contains the De-aggregate process; to a specific IP address. The following sections will estimate the required bandwidth; verify the estimates by testing with JQUAD and analyzing the network, and then building and testing the de-aggregation process.Bandwidth EstimatesThe T-1 has a bandwidth of 1.5 Mbits/sec. An entity state PDU is 1280 bits, and each entity state PDU is updated every 5 seconds for straight and level movement, and every second for other movements. The total number of DIS entities that can be sent is: EMBED Equation.3  where:B is the number of bits in a PDU,Tu is the update time in seconds,NE is the number of entities, andRb is the channel data rate in bits/second.For a one second update rate, the number of entity state PDUs that can be sent is: EMBED Equation.3  For a five second update rate, the DIS standard, the number of entity state PDUs that can be sent is: EMBED Equation.3  1.5 Mbits/sec is not an accurate bandwidth limit. The T-1 has some overhead, and using Class B network protocol, some data collisions start to occur at around 1 Mbit/sec.  Also, there are a number of different PDUs sent during a DIS exercise; entity-state PDUs comprise about 80% of the DIS data.  Entity-state PDUs usually have a 5 second update rate for straight and level flight or travel, and no change in velocity.  For turns or other changes, the update rate is at 1 second. Bandwidth usage varies for a typical DIS exercise. The variables include update rates, PDU types, and other IP data on the T-1 network. Observation of several DMOC exercises shows that the limit is at approximately 1700 entities. JQUAD can generate up to 50,000 entities that are aggregated into several thousand aggregates. Using an aggregate protocol could result in several thousand aggregate updates sent to the DMOC.The network diagram for such a setup is shown in Figure 2.JQUAD testAn initial test was conducted and verified the bandwidth estimates. The test showed that the JQUAD aggregate data did not need any special data packaging before sent via T-1 to DMOC.  JQUAD Test PlanEquipment required for test:JQUAD, with a scenario of 20,000 – 30,000 tracks.T-1 Hardware connection set up between JQUAD and DMOC.Cisco 2600 Routers configured to send and receive JQUAD ALSP Data.SUN Ultra 60 Machine at the DMOC, with two Ethernet cards.DISNAT logger at DMOC to measure the bandwidth usage and analyze data sent by JQUAD.JCATS Environment Generator with a blank scenario, to monitor all JQUAD Entity State PDUs.VSTARS Simulator, to track and determine if the VSTARS radar can adequately detect red ground entities sent by JQUAD.Figure 2. JQUAD Aggregate Networkadequately detect red ground entities sent by JQUAD.Simulyzer DIS recorder, to record all DIS data for analysis at a later time.JQUAD Test Procedure.The test procedure is as followsThe JQUAD operator will bring up a scenario with 20,000 – 30,000 tracks. The operator will record the approximate number of tracks.DMOC configured the Cisco routers to accept the JQUAD ALSP data, then connected the DISNAT logger to the network and recorded the bandwidth usage.The SUN Ultra 60 machine was configured such that one Ethernet card was on the DMOC Air LAN, and sent and received aggregate data, and the other was on the DMOC ground LAN, which sent the Entity State PDUs.  The configuration file was set up such that it read the JQUAD machine at the AFC2TIG, where point-to-point transmission of aggregate data occurred.Once the scenario was at the maximum number of tracks, the JQUAD operator will inform the DMOC Hardware engineer, who will record the bandwidth usage.Test ResultsThe initial test was conducted the week of 3 February 2003.  The JQUAD De-Aggregation process was brought up at the DMOC, and the JQUAD simulation suite was brought up at the AFC2TIG facility.  The T-1 connection between the two facilities was working properly, and the software established initial connectivity.  Unfortunately, the process was stopped due to connectivity being terminated by the JQUAD process.  The hardware and software was investigated, but no problem was found.  The same software at the JTASC facility in Suffolk, VA, and the software engineer who wrote the JQUAD De-Aggregation process was able to get the software working.  The software was sent to a facility in San Antonio, Texas, the week of 10 February 2003, where again, the process worked.  The software engineers could not duplicate the error between the DMOC and the AFC2TIG.Measurements were taken on the internal LAN at the San Antonio facility, where each aggregate update was measured, the number of units updated, and the total number of units in the JQUAD scenario.  The results are:JQUAD generated 5,766 individual units.  These units were aggregated into 938 aggregate units.  Each aggregate update is 116 bytes.   The updates were sent once each 60 seconds.  Initial bandwidth usage calculations are:Aggregate Unit Size ∙ Number of Aggregate Units = Total size in bits:116 bytes ∙ 8 bits/byte ∙ 938 aggregate units = 870464 bitsTotal Size in bits ∙ Update rate = Bits per second870464 bits ∙ 1/60 seconds = 14507 bits/sec2.	For 5766 DIS Entity State PDUs, the bandwidth usage calculations are:DIS Entity State PDU Size ∙ Number of Units:1280 bits ∙ 5766 Entity State PDUs = 7380480 bits.Total Size in bits ∙ Update rate = Bits per second7380480 bits ∙ 1/60 seconds = 123008 bits/secA ratio of the aggregate bandwidth usage versus the DIS Bandwidth usage shows the JQUAD De-aggregate process uses approximately 88% less bandwidth.  However, the following assumptions are considered.The actual bandwidth usage was not measured, only the size and update rate.  The bandwidth usage was calculated based upon those measurements.   This assumes that the updates are not sent all at once.  If so, the software would need to be modified to smooth out the bandwidth “spike.”Only one scenario was used, and the number of aggregates per unit is dependent on the scenario. The measurements were taken over an internal LAN, not a T-1, as originally proposed.The initial results were obtained in order to meet the extended SISO deadline for this paper.  It is clear that the process works over an internal LAN, but has not been tested over at T-1.  The software engineers at both facilities as well as JQUAD Software engineers are working to resolve the problem between the AFC2TIG and DMOC.Additional testing is scheduled for the week of 21 AprilJune 2003.  Once.  If these tests are conducted and results obtained, they will be added to this paperincorporated into the Euro SIW presentation.  ConclusionThis experiment proves that it is possible to send several thousand DIS entity state PDUs on an internal LAN, but using very little bandwidth by taking advantage of JQUAD’s aggregate process.  The next step is to send the same data over a T-1.The de-aggregate process now makes it possible to send several thousand ground tracks over a T-1 with a significant reduction in bandwidth usage when compared to DIS.   Additional upgrades are scheduled for this year, which include de-aggregation of all ground types, reaction to kills, and removal of the correct entity state PDU when the aggregate is decremented, and transmission of the aggregate data over another link.  Additional tests will be conducted, and put into this paper as time permits.References[1]	IEEE 1278.1a, 1998 [2] Federation Management Tool Development for the ALSP-HLA Transition, Steven A. Specht, The MITRE Corporation, 1997.Author Biography Mr. Sorroche has 16 years professional experience; seven years experience in the Modeling and Simulation field.  He currently works at the DMOC as an Exercise Engineer for distributed exercises, and has been the Engineering lead for the DMOC for Millennium Challenge 02, JEFX 00, JEFX 99, EFX 98, Desert Pivot 01-3, 01-2, 01-1, and many Blue Flag exercises.  He is the Vice Chair for the SISO Signal PDU Study Group, and the Vice Chair for the Signal PDU Product Development Group.  Mr. Sorroche was a co-recipient of the Fall 2002 SIWZIE Award for paper 02F-SIW-119 titled “TADIL TALES”.  He has   Bachelor and Master Degrees of Science in Electrical Engineering from New Mexico State University.  He is a member of Tau Beta Pi and Eta Kappa Nu Honor Societies.  	Page  PAGE 8 of  NUMPAGES 1THIS PAPER IS CLEARED FOR PUBLIC RELEASEPage  PAGE 1 of  NUMPAGES 1THIS PAPER IS CLEARED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE	Page  PAGE 6 of  NUMPAGES 6THIS PAPER IS CLEARED FOR PUBLIC RELEASETHIS PAPER IS CLEARED FOR PUBLIC RELEASEPage  PAGE 1 of  NUMPAGES 1JQUAD Aggregate DataJQUAD De-Aggregation Process NetworkAWSIM164.217.48.XXDMOC Air DIS LAN164.217.151.XXAFC2TIG Air DIS LANXXVSTARSXXJCATSResults to JQUADSend InteractionTo DMOC Ground DIS LANPDUsSend DIS Entity State SUN Ultra 60Cisco 26001-TCisco 2600198.10.20.XDMOC Ground DIS LANAFC2TIGDMOCDIS FilterC2TIG ALSP LAN.XXJQUAD