HLA Compliance Certification:future developments within NATO and NATO nationsJean-Louis IgarzaNATO/RTA/MSCO7, Rue AncelleBP 2592201 Neuilly sur Seine Cedex, Franceigarzaj@rta.nato.intPascal CANTOTEMAA/CASIAir Force Analysis & Simulation Center24 Bd Victor00460, ARMEESFrancecantotp@wanadoo.frMark CROOKSHLA Testing ManagerDefense Modeling & Simulation Office1901 N. Beauregard St.Suite 400Alexandria, VA 22311, USA HYPERLINK mailto:mcrooks@msiac.dmso.mil mcrooks@msiac.dmso.milDr. Hans-Peter MENZLERGerman Armed Forces Technical Centre for Communication and Electronics (WTD 81)SimulationInfrastrukturKalvarienbergD-91171 Greding HYPERLINK mailto:HPmenzler@bwb.org HPmenzler@bwb.orgCol. Prof. Andrzej NAJGEBAUERMilitary University of TechnologyFaculty of Cyberneticsul. Kaliskiego 200-908 Warszawa, Poland HYPERLINK "mailto:anajgeb@isi.wat.waw.pl" anajgeb@isi.wat.waw.plNeil SMITHDstl/ Simulation & Synthetic EnvironmentsPolicy and Capability StudiesRoom 127, Bldg 115Bedford Technology Park (Enclave)ThurleighBedford, MK44 2FQ, UKnsmith@dstl.gov.ukKeywords:HLA Compliance, Certification, Technical Interoperability ABSTRACT: The US DoD adopted the HLA standard as the preferred interoperability standard for M&S in 1995. Early on, it was clear that the application of the standard would be difficult without a dedicated methodology, (a development and execution process), a set of associated supporting tools and an efficient compliance certification process.  Since then, the HLA has  matured considerably and is now widely accepted by the international community.  As an example, it was accepted by NATO in 1998 and became an IEEE standard in 2000 (IEEE 1516, 1561.1 and 1516.2).  It should be recognized in 2003 as a NATO STANAG (Standard Agreement).  A large number of major programs are already using it in the US and other nations.  Previous Euro-SIWs have demonstrated that it is now also used outside the military world.In 1999, NATO established a new M&S organization in charge of coordinating and promoting the use of M&S within the Alliance. This organization was set-up within the NATO Research and Technology Organization (RTO) and mainly consists of a steering committee, the NATO M&S Group (NMSG), and a supporting permanent organization, the NATO M&S Coordination Office (MSCO). In 2001, the NMSG created a task group (named MSG-011) in charge of examining how an HLA compliance certification capability could be established within NATO, its member nations and the Partnership for Peace (PfP) nations. This group completed its work in a one-year time frame and published its final report in mid-2002. The purpose of this paper is to introduce the results of the task group activities.This paper describes the current compliance certification process (as it is largely unknown in Europe), identifies lessons learned in the US since the first compliance test in 1997 and discusses why NATO nations should consider a complementary implementation outside the US as important.As a living standard, the HLA will naturally evolve, following the state-of-the-art progress and the normal standardization cycle.  Therefore this paper will also address how compliance testing might be expanded to keep pace with the future HLA evolution.1. The HLA and the NATO Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Organization The High Level Architecture was developed by the US DoD in response to the clear recognition of the value of simulation to support a broad range of military applications, as well as the need to manage simulations to ensure they provide a cost effective tool. In particular, simulations developed for one purpose can be readily reused in other applications, either individually or in combination. This reuse and interoperability is critical if simulations are to be affordable and meet the changing needs of the DoD.In response, the High Level Architecture (HLA) was developed, a preliminary version was published in 1995, and then HLA was mandated for use across the US DoD, in 1996 (see references [1] and [2]). Since then, the HLA was recognized as a key standard by a large part of the M&S community. It matured and was accepted as an IEEE standard in 2000. It is assumed that readers of this paper are already familiar with HLA main features and concepts. People looking for deeper or more specific information on HLA can refer to references [3] to [8].1.1 History of the NATO M&S OrganizationIn 1996 a temporary working group was set-up within NATO to assess the possibility of establishing a permanent M&S organization within the Alliance. This working group was named the Steering Group for M&S and reported to both the Conference of National Armament Directors and the NATO Military Committee, via the Research and Technology (R&T) Organization (RTO). The NATO RTO is composed of a leading committee (the R&T Board or RTB), meeting twice a year and a permanent organization known as the NATO Research and Technology Agency (RTA).In 1998, the Steering Group for M&S published two important documents:aa final report proposing the current NATO M&S organization andaa NATO M&S Master Plan (MSMP).Both documents were approved by Tthe North Atlantic Council and the above-mentioned hierarchy approved and by the both documents North Atlantic Council in December 1998. Since then the M&S organization has been set up under the auspices of the RTO, as shown on the following Figure 1.Similar to the RTO, the NATO M&S Organization is composed of a leading committee (the NATO M&S Group or NMSG) supported by a permanent organization: the M&S Coordination Office (MSCO), which is implemented within the RTA.Concerning the M&S standardization aspect, both the approved MSMP and the Steering Group for M&S final report recognized the HLA as the NATO main interoperability standard. Since then HLA is being progressed to become an official NATO standard agreement (a STANAG) that should be officially approved by end 2003.Figure 1: The NATO M&S Organization1.2 The HLA compliance certification technical activity within NATOThe origin of this NATO activity comes directly from the objective 1 of the NATO M&S Master Plan (“Establish a common M&S architecture”) and, more specifically, from sub-objective 1.1, which recommends the adoption of HLA as the interoperability standard for NATO. The US experience on the HLA has demonstrated the interest of establishing an HLA compliance certification capability. The interest of this approach for NATO is justified in section 3. The setting up of an HLA compliance certification capability is not explicitly identified as an objective within the Master Plan, but its existence is mentioned as obvious!At the beginning of the NMSG activity (1999), the US proposed to support NATO with this capability as a national voluntary contribution, while waiting for NATO and/or some non-US member nations to establish their own capability. In response to this, the NMSG started to investigate how to implement a similar capability within NATO and nations. Subsequently this NMSG technical activity was approved by the RTB in spring 2000 and actually started work in May 2001, when a number of participating nations were identified.Nations supporting the technical activity were France, Germany, Poland, UK and US. The NATO MSCO chaired the task group was chaired by the NATO MSCO. The work was completed in an eight-month timeframe. The main deliverable of this work is a final report and the recommendations it provides [reference 10]. The main objective assigned to the task group was to “Do a investment/appraisal benefit analysis for establishing a NATO capability in assuming that the US capability becomes unavailable”. It is hoped that the NATO Task Group has globally addressed the general objective.The current US HLA certification activity concerns two different but interrelated activities, i.e.First, the HLA compliance certification of federates, which has a direct interest for NATO with respect to enhancing its capability for establishing and running HLA federations for its own operational requirements,Second, the verification that commercial or government-supported RTIs comply with the HLA standard.The NATO task group has recognized the importance of the activity associated with verifying HLA RTIs for the overall M&S community. has been recognized by the NATO task group as very important for the overall M&S community, but Nevertheless this is a very technical and specific issue, with only a few candidates applications, thatus it could not be addressed by NATO as a priority area. Consequently there was no requirement identified in the Master Plan for establishing such a capability within NATO or member nations. This issue has therefore not been addressed in the Task Group work.2. The current US HLA compliance certification processCompliance with the High Level Architecture (HLA) was mandated for U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) simulations in 1996. The US Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) established a federate compliance test process to evaluate simulations and certify them as HLA compliant to HLA Rules, Interface Specification and the Object Model Template (OMT). Testing began in October 1997 and as of December 2002 over 250 federates have undergone HLA compliance testing. (to be checked upon  and updated by Mark).The process is described below. It is quite simple: to be certified as HLA compliant, a federate must demonstrate its adherence to the three specification documents defining the HLA: the HLA Rules, the Interface Specification (IF), and the Object Model Template Specification (references [3] to [5]). The current process has four steps outlined below.2.1  Step 1: Completing a test applicationThis is achieved via the DMSO test web page. Information needed to complete the application includes:Point of Contact Information,Sponsorship Information,Federate Name, Version, and Brief Description,HLA Specification Version,RTI Version (verified using DMSO RTI verification process),Expected Interface Test Date.2.2  Step 2: Submission of a Conformance notebookThe federate developer submits a conformance notebook via the web site for the Federate Under Test (FUT). The conformance notebook consists of the following, i.e. a Simulation Object Model (SOM), a Conformance Statement (CS), and optionally, a Scenario File. The Certification Agent conducts three tests on the SOM and CS. These are the CS Dependency Check, the SOM Parseability Test, and the SOM/CS Cross-Check. The Certification Agent will notify the FUT having either passed the three tests or showing problems.Once the Federate Under Test successfully passes Step 2 it is notified to proceed to Step 3.2.3  Step 3: Submission of interface (IF) environmental data.In preparation for the IF test the following information is requested, i.e.FOM (.fed file),RTI Configuration File (RTI.rid file),API, Hardware, and Operating System used,RTI Execution hostname and Internet (IP) address,Federation Execution hostname and IP address,Whether or not a firewall is in place,Additional Comment Section.2.4 Step 4: Interface Specification Testing & Reporting.The IF Test requires the Federate Under Test to demonstrate every service and SOM capability in the predetermined test sequence, which is designed to represent a subset of the complete capability of the FUT. The IF Test has two parts:Tthe Nominal Test, which ensures that the FUT can invoke and respond to all services for which it is capable, according to the CS andtheThe Representative SOM (RepSOM) test, which ensures that the FUT is capable of invoking and responding to services using a range of data contained in its SOM.The Federate Certification Agent will log service data from the test, analyze the data, generate results, and return a Certification Summary Report (CSR) to the federate developer. The CSR is the official record of HLA compliance for the specific version of the federate code tested.The final part of Step 4 is the After Action Review (AAR) and paperwork to document the federate’s certification of compliance with the HLA. The submission of the SOM to the HLA Object Model Library (OML) is also required before receipt of the Certificate of HLA Compliance. The Object Model Resource Center (OMRC) has now replaced the OML.3. Rationale for establishing a certification capability within NATO 3.1  Interoperability aspectsWhen compiling a distributed simulation, all aspects of interoperability must be examined, in order to add some stability to the process of federating. Some interoperability aspects may need a federation level investigation, while others can be accomplished by the individual federates, and declared, or stated during federation gatherings. The federation manager (or designated individual) can perform the interoperability assurance in a variety of ways; and it may be prudent for the federation manager to employ many methods. One of the best, unbiased methods is to examine federate “certification”.Concerns and problems associated with interoperability are currently categorized into two broad areas: technical interoperability, and substantive interoperability. Technical interoperability is the capability of federates to physically connect and exchange data in accordance with the HLA standard. Substantive interoperability is driven by the needs of the federation and has to be addressed by each federation in a federation specific way. HLA federate compliance deals only with technical interoperability. However this is a prerequisite for substantive interoperability assurance.In the HLA, there is currently an accepted set of tests under which a federate can receive a level of compliance, based on their stated inputs to a variety of steps (see Section 2), and their ability to meet the standards. There is a general agreement that tests should be conducted by commercially independent organizations, and employ a standard set of tools and question and answer sessions. These do not totally satisfy all the interoperability concerns of a federation manager, but do provide a level of assurance that:Tthe federate produces and consumes what it claims it can, Tthe federate manages itself in a manner consistent with what it claims,Tthe federate can call and receive call-backs from a verified RTI as it states it can.The need to check HLA compliance has resulted in a US HLA compliance testing process specifically aimed to evaluate simulations and certify them as HLA compliant to HLA Rules, Interface Specification and the Object Model Template (OMT). The requirements for a compliance testing method and a set of relevant support tools were identified in early HLA development projects, including the “HLA proto-federations” which were developed as soon as 1996.3.2 HLA Compliance certification as a technical helpAwareness and availability of the HLA compliance testing process is to be considered as a technical help to facilitate the integration of federates in a federation, saving time and money, in addition to encouraging reuse of federate applications.Experiences of some past federations within NATO/Europe where the compliance testing process was not used include the NATO DiMuNDS experiment (2000) and the UK Future Offensive Air System (FOAS) Synthetic Environment (2000). As a consequence of not using this process, the developers on each of these projects were forced to re-invent a local Federate Testing Process (FTP) to test the capability for each federate to interface to the HLA federation in accordance with the HLA standard.3.3 HLA Compliance certification in support of federate reuseThe experience of other distributed simulation standards such as DIS (IEEE 1278.1) have demonstrated that technical people have the tendency (or cannot avoid!) to deviate from the documented standard.In the case of DIS this was because the set of defined protocols were considered to be too rigid and subsequently could not cover all requirements. Although the HLA philosophy is more flexible than the DIS Standard, HLA interoperability requires a strict adherence to the current version of the standard. The consequence of some former practices, as outlined earlier in DIS, was a loss of reuse capability and also a lack of interoperability when using DIS support tools or when adding new simulations to extend the capability of a pre-existing federation.One of the two objectives of the NATO MSMP is the reuse of simulations. In this context the HLA testing process forces the development of SOMs in the HLA paradigm and provides the best way to record SOMs in a repository, which subsequently facilitates the reuse of federates. Typically, SOMs are not a prerequisite for interoperating federates when considering only the software aspect – only a FOM and a RTI are really required from the technical point of view to interconnect federates. However, the availability of SOMs provides some guarantee on the claimed capability of federate applicationss, even if it is not a full insurance of their interoperability.3.4 Intermediate ConclusionThe compliance tests provide a first level of assurance to the federation manager that the federate conducts itself as it says it can.However, this is not the answer to the entire interoperability issue of the federation manager. For example the functional capabilities of a given federate are likely to evolve once initial compliance certification has been achieved. However, the fact remains that following this first step the federate developer knows how the HLA operates, and what is expected of both the HLA and the federate itself. Indeed, because of the documentation required during the compliance process, when capabilities of the federate changes, it is merely a matter of updating documentation, which is already in the correct format. It is recommended that federates should be re-certified when significant changes have been introduced, such as the use of additional HLA services, changes to the SOM or implementation of a different interface specification.It is very important to have a formal method to verify that developers of modeling and simulation applications (e.g. HLA federate developers), understand the HLA concept and associated standard. In this context the HLA compliance testing process should be considered as an integral part of the High Level Architecture.4. General opinions expressed by nations participating in the NATO technical activity on HLA compliance certificationNations participating in this task group were France, Germany, Poland, the UK and the US. All emphasized the importance of the HLA certification process in facilitating technical interoperability based on the future NATO HLA STANAG. The establishment of a NATO certification capability is a desired goal for all those nations.This process was generally considered as a generic service offered to HLA federate developers to facilitate their integration in future federations and helping to improve their skills in the HLA domain. The common feeling was that it should not be considered as a mandatory requirement for every developed simulation application. However this flexibility should not prevent any future NATO program to require the HLA certification process to be applied prior to federates being integrated within a NATO federation.While nations participating in the Task Group have identified the need for establishing national certification capabilities they found that, except in the US, the number of federates to be annually certified for HLA technical compliance could be relatively low and therefore this would not justify the establishment of a permanent capability within all individual nations. Access to a NATO certification capability by nations for their own requirements has been initially discussed within this Task Group. Reviewing these requirements was considered as a prerequisite before national support towards the development of a NATO capability takes place.Some participating nations have raised the issue of a need for a conformance test procedure relating to simulation frameworks. It is recognized that HLA federate developers (“problem solvers”) are more efficient when using a dedicated and well defined set of processes, frameworks and tools, providing them with easy access to HLA services at minimal cost. To date the DMSO compliance process only applies to federate applications and a separate process is available for RTI verification. This apparent limited scope of compliance and verification checks raised some concerns about the current compliance and verification process. In the case of development tools and simulation frameworks being HLA certified then, by transitivity this could provide some assurance that federates which are developed based on the corresponding tools and frameworks are inherently HLA compliant. This evolution of the current certification practice was considered as being highly desirable by a majority of the nations and this issue should be addressed by a future NATO NMSG Task Group.5. Directions for the evolution of the current certification processThis section addresses different types of enhancement issues. The first issue is associated with software upgrade/maintenance aspects and the second issue is relevant to how the compliance test suite is utilized with respect to middleware and federation testing. Interested readers should refer to the final report of the Task Group for an in-depth presentation.5.1  Software aspectsThe DMSO compliance test suite needs tois being enhanced to maintain currency with the evolving HLA standard, e.g. the capability to support both DMSOv1.3 and the IEEE1516 standard. The test suite must also be able to handle other RTI implementations in addition to the RTI1.3NG. Further enhancements will be identified by member nations upon their implementation of the compliance test suite.5.2 Testing scopeThe current Conformance Testing process as outlined in section 2 requires at least two HLA-relevant information contents to be supplied by the Federate Under Test (FUT), i.e. the SOM and the Conformance Statement (CS).The CS provides the functional interfaces to the Certification Agent being necessary to communicate the FUT’s SOM contents properly. The DMSO compliance test suite passively records any function invoked by the Federate Under Test. Since the CS is to be delivered by the SOM proponent it seems that at this level of information, the FUT’s conformance test shows some limitations. These remarks lead the group to propose some new directions to improve the current process.5.3  Increasing testing scopeThe general question which that arises is: What is the definition of HLA Compliance from a general point of view in accordance with the federate SOM? If we limit ourselves to a certain level of syntactic interoperability we claim that the FUT should be able to at least:Rreflect objects based on subscription,Rreflect receipt of interactions based on subscription.The current compliance test suite already covers the publication of objects and interactions is already covered by the current compliance test suite. As a consequence, the test suite would need to be extended to provide an enhanced Federate Conformance Testing Tool that is capable of stimulating federates. This would incorporate the essential capabilities to send necessary information to the FUT and thereby analyzing its behavior in terms of stability and limited functionality, e.g. destruction of objects upon receipt of certain kinds of interactions.From this general observation another question arises, i.e. To what extent could the CS be predefined based on the SOM only? It is expected that to a certain degree the CS may be defined based on its SOM and according to the HLA I/F Specification, e.g. any publish, update, subscribe and reflect mechanism to be invoked by the FUT.On the other hand, certain mechanisms cannot be derived from the SOM, e.g. Time-Management capabilities of the FUT. Figure 2 : Extending the SOM role ?As long as some kind of “Guidance, Rationale and Interoperability Modalities” (GRIM) document does not exist this will result in a lack of information which that can be captured. However, it is up to the FUT proponent to fill this information gap by a FUT-specific CS.Consequently, it is suggested to divide the former Conformance Statement into a SOM-dependant part (i.e. the generic CS), and a FUT-specific part. 5.4  Middleware issuesIn order to avoid uncertainties related to whether the FUT fulfils its requirements of being HLA compliant, one possible solution is to rely upon a generic (i.e. FUT independent) interface to the HLA RTI, which completely encapsulates the HLA interface in order to make this available to any federate application. This aims to achieve HLA-compliance by separating the application, i.e. the SOM implementation, from the HLA-interface by an appropriate layer of generic middleware.Figure 3: The middleware approachIf this middleware layer could be approved to be HLA compliant in terms of the HLA interface it would be up to the FUT developer to apply those functions properly.Using this approach there is more potential benefits to the M&S community. Specifically, a generic concept on a distributed and object oriented simulation space would significantly help to specify how objects and events in space and time behave and are to be matched to the existing HLA interface standard, i.e. for effective support of HLA conformance testing, there is need for an object oriented extension of the HLA-OMT.5.5  Conclusion on possible enhancementsBoth previous paragraphs provide some typical examples of ideas which that could be addressed when discussing future improvements of the HLA compliance certification process. Some other thoughts may raise in the course of future HLA developments.Paragraph 5.3 deals with what can be considered to be HLA Compliant. Paragraph 5.4 deals with the use of middleware. Middleware has been and will be of a continuous use by federate developers to assist them in the implementation of the HLA Standard for their federates. Currently, the US DoD will not certify a middleware application alone as being HLA compliant. This is a policy matter although each member nation could test middleware applications linked to a generic federate and certify that it is complete. This would have to be all-inclusive (i.e., handle all the RTI services) and would just use any SOM that defines all the possible capabilities as an absolute minimum.Another issue raised was federation testing. The current Federate Compliance Testing Tool can test multiple federates as the federation is running and provides results for each federate; nevertheless there is no determination that the federation as a whole is compliant.These issues suggested reviewing of what it means to be HLA compliant. Currently to be certified as HLA compliant a federate must demonstrate its adherence to the three specification documents defining the HLA: the HLA Rules, the Interface Specification, and the Object Model Template Specification. The development of the federate compliance test process was guided by a few specific principles. The first was that HLA compliance would require demonstration of technical interoperability only, not substantive interoperability as discussed in an earlier paragraph. That is, certification of HLA compliance in and of itself does not automatically mean that a particular federate is suitable for a particular federation.Another guiding principle for federate compliance testing was that the tests should require as little additional work for the federate developer as possible. Some documentation, such as the SOM, is required by the HLA specifications, but extra documentation not explicitly required by HLA is deliberately minimized and simplified wherever possible. The Conformance Statement, for example, can be filled out with any text editor by editing a sample CS.Exhaustive testing, where the federate would be required to demonstrate every capability (possibly hundreds or more) indicated by its SOM, was rejected as an unnecessary and expensive burden for the Federate Under Test developers. Instead, the FUT is asked to demonstrate a representative subset of the capabilities indicated by its SOM. For example, if the FUT’s SOM indicates that it can update a large number of different attributes, the FUT is asked to demonstrate updating at least three specific different attributes.It was recommended that these issues should be addressed further, e.g. in a future NATO M&S working group.6. Conclusions and Recommendations of the NATO Task Group on future HLA certification activitiesHLA compliance testing provides a first level of assurance to the federation manager that the federate conducts itself as it says. Even if HLA certification does not provide a full guarantee of interoperability, it provides the first and necessary step in establishing the future NATO interoperability infrastructure.Within NATO the HLA was recognized as the preferred M&S interoperability standard in 1998. The NATO M&S Master Plan was approved at the higher level in NATO. The corresponding HLA STANAG is not yet officially approved, but it is on the right way.Nevertheless, no mandatory directive was ever issued by NATO requesting that HLA federates which form part of a NATO federation should be “HLA compliant” certified. However, HLA compliance is clearly mentioned as an important prerequisite in the NATO M&S Master Plan.This does not mean that the HLA certification should become mandatory within NATO. Nevertheless, the task group has the strong opinion that the establishment of a NATO HLA compliance certification process is to be provided as a general and useful technical service to participating organizations in establishing HLA federations.6.1  Way forwardFollowing discussions during the task group meetings and considering the numerous issues raised by a sheer NATO solution, those participating nations agreed that the best solution would be to share the HLA certification capability between nations. This solution is described in some detail in reference [10]. Every nation supporting the establishment of the NATO HLA certification capability would be granted access to this service in the context of meeting national requirements. In this case NATO would delegate the HLA certification of national federates to those respective nations responsible for federate development.Nations participating in the task group recognize the leadership of the US on this activity and agreed on the requirement of establishing a unique testing suite based on the current US software.The preferred solution is based on the share of capability between nations offers an attractive advantage compared to a “pure” NATO solution, since this avoids the difficult and time-consuming process of securing central funding from NATO.6.2 Testing suite evolutionThe specific constraints, conditions and requirements for the evolution of the HLA certification process are discussed in details in section 5 of this report.First, it is recognized that the current HLA testing suite shall evolve consistently and in accordance with the evolution of the HLA standard: such a move is currently taking place to evolve from the current US DoD version 1.3 to the IEEE 1516 standard.In fact, the requirements for any particular evolution may have two distinct causes:Ffirst, a normal evolution of the standard as mentioned above,secondSecond, an unforeseenunanticipated improvement which should emerge as the number of certified federates is increasing and additional experience is gained with new nations being involved in the certification process bringing different perspectives and mentalities. Section 5 provides examples of such improvements.Currently the US is the unique nation dealing with the HLA certification process. When non-US nations join the process, it is considered that future evolutions should be decided on a consensus basis to ensure that a common testing suite is maintained by participating nations. The task group proposed that a users/testers club (or working group) should be established. This group should meet once or twice a year and would be tasked to propose, discuss and decide the necessary evolution of the HLA certification process and of the supporting software, according to the existing technical and political constraints.Participating task group nations recommend that this supporting organization should be integrated within the NMSG, although the task group recognizes that it is also possible to establish it in another military (NATO/national) or non-military organization such as IEEE or SISO.6.3  Recent evolutionsIn 2002, the final conclusion of the former Task Group was presented to the NMSG. Main conclusions were accepted and new nations are now interested in participating in a future NATO activity. Some of themnations will implement a national HLA compliance certification capability as was proposed by the former Task Group.A new working group should be established in 2003 with new nations participating such as Canada, Spain and Sweden.References [1]	Paul Kaminski, “DoD High Level Architecture (HLA) for Simulations,” USD(A&T) Memorandum, 10 September 1996[2]	Jacques Gansler, “DoD Transition to the High Level Architecture (HLA) for Simulations,” USD(A&T) Memorandum, 1 April 1998[3]	US Department of Defense, “High Level Architecture Rules Version 1.3,” 20 April 1998[4]	US Department of Defense, “High Level Architecture Interface Specification Version 1.3,” 20 April 1998[5]	US Department of Defense, “High Level Architecture Object Model Template Specification Version 1.3,” 20 April 1998[6]	IEEE 1516-2000 : “IEEE Standard for Modeling and Simulation (M&S) High Level Architecture (HLA) - Framework and Rules”[7]	IEEE 1516.1-2000 : “IEEE Standard for Modeling and Simulation (M&S) High Level Architecture (HLA) - Federate Interface Specification”[8]	IEEE1516.2-2000 : “IEEE Standard for Modeling and Simulation (M&S) High Level Architecture (HLA) - Object Model Template (OMT) Specification”[9]	Simulation Interoperability Workshop, paper #00F-SIW-036, “Improvements to the HLA Federate Compliance Testing Process”, by Margaret M. Horst, David Rosenbaum, Kyle A. Crawford, Georgia Tech Research Institute, September 2000[10]	NATO RTO Technical Report 50, “NATO HLA Certification”, work performed by the RTO NATO Modelling and Simulation Group “Task-Group 008”, June 2002Author BiographiesJEAN-LOUIS IGARZA is the Chief Scientist of the NATO Modeling and Simulation Co-ordination Office (MSCO) since October 2000. He was formerly head of the Simulation Department of the “Centre d’Analyse de Défense” (CAD, Center for Defense Analysis of the French MoD). He has a Ph.D. in Applied Mathematics (University of Paris, 1969) and a background in Statistics. The main part of his career has been in Operational Analysis (air domain). In the recent past, he taught “Statistics and Probability” at Colleges of Engineering, and he is now teaching “M&S” at the University of Versailles.Major (Armament) Pascal CANTOT is head of the simulation co-ordination team of the French Air Force HQ since January 2003. He was formerly responsible of common simulation tools, standards and methods in the Complex Systems Engineering Department of DGA (French Procurement Agency) and had worked in the French Center for Defense Analysis (CAD) as deputy head of the Simulation Department. He has also taught M&S at ENSIETA armament academy since 1998. He has been involved in many national, NATO and European projects, and is a former NMSG member. He has an Engineering Degree in Electronics (ENSIETA, 1992) and a Master's degree in Computer Sciences (ENSICA, 1993).Mark CROOKSMark CROOKS is the Alion HLA Testing Manager in support of DMSOs HLA program since March 1999.  He served as a simulation analyst for both RAND and CSC. Prior to retiring from the U.S. Army he served as the Chief of the Simulation Division Fort Stewart, GA and has served in positions from Platoon leader to Corps Staffs.  He has a Masters from Troy State and his undergraduate degree from The Citadel.  He was also a voting member of the IEEE standards body at the time of the adoption of HLA by the IEEE.Dr. Hans-Peter MENZLER studied Physics and earned his PhD in applied mathematical physics in 1989. He worked for three years as a scientist at the Max-Planck Institute for Plasma-Physics. In 1992 he became an industrial system engineer and project manager in the field of object oriented distributed simulation. In April 1999 he became head of the simulation infrastructure section at the German Armed Forces Technical Centre for Communication and Electronics, in Greding, where he developed the simulation infrastructure concept PSI-SA.Col. Prof. Andrzej NAJGEBAUER is the Deputy Dean of Cybernetics Faculty in Military University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland. He was formerly Chief of Decision Support Systems Department and Professor in the Institute of  Computer and Information Systems. He has Master’s degree in  Computer Science (Military University of Technology, 1981), Ph.D. in Computer Sciences, System Optimization (Military University of Technology,1988), Certificate, Doctor of Science in Computer Science, Decision Support Systems,  (Polish habilitation in Warsaw University of Technology, Faculty of Electronics and Information Technology, 1999). His scientific and professional work is connected with theory of systems modeling and simulation, modeling and designing of military decision support systems, conflict analysis, war games designing, exercise and training systems (CAX) – designing and development. He is member of  IFORS and member of  Polish Society of Operations Research and Systems Analysis, Polish Society of Computer Simulation. He is Polish representative of  RTO/NMSGNeil SMITH has gained over 30 years experience in the use of simulation technology mainly for real-time, human-in-the-loop flight simulation applications. Since 1992 he has been involved with a range of UK research projects which have provided a focus on the application of processes and technologies to integrate real-time simulation systems as part of larger scale networked simulation environments, known in the UK as Synthetic Environments (SEs). These studies have involved the application of Standards for Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) and a review of SEDRIS (Synthetic Environment Data Representation and Interchange Specification), in addition to managing the implementation of distributed simulation frameworks using the US High Level Architecture (HLA). Having previously worked for the UK Defence Evaluation & Research Agency (DERA) he is currently working for the MOD Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl), providing advice and technical support to the UK Synthetic Environment Co-ordination Office (SECO) on technology, standards and architectures relevant to the use of Simulation and Synthetic Environments (SSEs) for Defence applications.