Using JTIMS to Support Modeling and Simulation (03E-SIW-018)Ronald SmitsDynamics Research Corporation60 Frontage RoadAndover, MA 01810978-475-9090 ext.1498rsmits@drc.comCOL Peter M. Limoges, USAJoint Staff, J-7/JDETDRoom 1E1019, The PentagonWashington, DC  20318-7000703-692-6300limogepm@js.pentagon.milThomas BravoDynamics Research Corporation60 Frontage RoadAndover, MA 01810978-475-9090 ext.1426tbavo@drc.comKeywords: JTIMS, start exercise data, executable mission content, transformationABSTRACT: The Joint Training Information Management System is a platform-independent (Java and html), collaborative, portal-like, data and process management system. As part of the effort to implement a fully developed requirements-based system, the US Joint Staff J7 and the United States Joint Forces Command-Joint Warfighting Center (USJFCOM-JWFC) revise, update and develop improved capabilities for this integrated, automated system for managing exercises, operational, and other related events. The Joint Training System consists of four phases: Requirements, Plans, Execution, and Assessment. JTIMS provides the automation and information management tools that support key processes in each of the four phases, affording a turnkey solution.JTIMS continues to integrate datasets and expand its data handling capabilities, providing an ideal platform for concept and training requirement development, exercise planning, scenario development, and data collection for After Action Reporting and Assessment. Some of the current enhancements include the Joint Event Scheduling System (JESS), a Joint Master Scenario Event List editor and manager, and improved reporting and data exchange methodologies. The Defense Modeling and Simulation Office is continuing its efforts to integrate the Unit Order of Battle Force Editor and its authoritative data set into JTIMS as part of its push for Executable Mission Content (EMC). Within DMSO, Knowledge Integration enables the transformation from a Forces-based, materiel-centric (focused on the “players”) Cold War posture to a Mission-based, capability-centric (focused on the “playbook”) asymmetric warfare focus. The EMC Project makes the statements of the transformation concept executable. Executability ensures sufficient detail, consistency, and completeness has been captured to enable rapid interaction and effective communication of what the concept is (and is not) to stakeholders both within and across domains. By separating the “players” (entities) from the “playbook” (activities) explicitly, the balance between them can be redressed at runtime. EMC provides a rigorous, scalable framework for rapidly composing credible content from reusable components to enable the required stakeholder iteration.This paper will report on the state-of-the-art of JTIMS as a foundation for Joint and Service operational and exercise management and its support to M&S and readiness.1. IntroductionHistorically, the military has relied on event-based training, but under the auspices of then Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Shalikashvili, the entire DoD culture began addressing the paradigm to make the change to requirements-based training.In event-based training, there was no objective way to capture training effectiveness for an organization. Translating event-based training to “readiness,” a commander subjectively deemed his unit “ready” simply because they “participated” in “X” events over a “Y” period of time. It became exceedingly difficult to justify requests for increased (training) dollars when the status quo could not be effectively measured. The continued evolution of the “requirements-based” paradigm resulted in the Strategic Plan for Training Transformation and the leadership’s vision to “Provide dynamic, capabilities-based training for the Department of Defense in support of national security requirements across the full spectrum of service, joint, interagency, intergovernmental, and multinational operations.”[1]The Strategic Plan goes on to outline three basic elements needed to implement that vision:Dynamic training, i.e., training must respond and adept quickly to changing strategic environments and technologies.Capabilities-based training, i.e., assessment will shift from “threat-based” to “capabilities-based” with the goal of providing comprehensive and systematic training that is focused on the needs of the combatant commanders (COCOM) and linked to readiness assessment.Expanded Jointness Perspective, i.e., the ability to plan, coordinate, and synchronize actions across the full spectrum of service, joint, interagency, intergovernmental, and multinational operations. The Department recognizes that training must address interagency operations, as well as training for multinational operations with allies and coalition partners.2. “How-To” or Means, Methods, and ModesSince the publication of the Universal Joint Task List (UJTL) 3.0 in September 1996, “requirements-based training” has been a growth industry in both the live training and simulation arenas. The key in this paradigm is isolating the “What”, i.e., those missions that must be accomplished by an organization. The missions are comprised of operations, and the operations are comprised of tasks. The tasks are performed under a set of conditions to a particular standard set by the commander. When the tasks are performed, the effectiveness of the training can be measured objectively. The basic taxonomy of military capabilities has not changed with the Transformation vision. The UJTL taxonomy undergoes periodic revisions, but remains the cornerstone for US COCOMs and Combat Support Agencies to address mission requirements and required capabilities. 2.1 MeansIf there is no organized means of operating with the data, the existence of a tasks/conditions/measures of performance database alone means little. Within the Joint Training System, organizations determine the “What” by using the Missions, Operations, and Tasks paradigm (Figure 1).Figure 1. Mission Analysis ParadigmEach organization has a series of missions it must perform. These can be further decomposed into operations and tasks. Importantly, missions are contextual, and one organization’s mission could very well be a second organization’s operation, and a third organization’s task.2.2 MethodsMission Analysis cannot be accomplished in a vacuum. Figure 2 illustrates the force field present when a Commander (at any level of command) and his or her staff engage in a comprehensive review of assigned mission(s). The degree of freedom a commander has to define their mission requirements is constrained in certain respects. Higher headquarters or National Command Authority directives may dictate or limit the degree of flexibility in defining the Concept of Operations for the mission at hand.A limitation in the Concept of Operations in turn restricts the available alternatives for mission execution and thereby drives the mission requirements. Mission Requirements in this context refer to the “What” needs to be accomplished. It does not necessarily determine “How”: that is to be done, or by “Who.” The available systems to the Commander, ranging from weapons systems to C4ISR systems, also limit the available options for mission execution. The budget allocation by Congress and the Services largely determine the potential courses of action available to the commander.Figure 2. Mission Analysis Force Field Because of the commander’s detailed mission analysis and the resulting mission requirements, a number of derived requirements become apparent. Among these are readiness, acquisition, and training (which includes simulation). Based on the requirements of the mission, a commander should define the unit training needs, the required readiness posture, and influence the acquisition process.To understand “mission utility” one needs to understand that missions are assigned to commanders and that the mission will include a number of operations. Operations are comprised of multiple tasks. Finally, operations and tasks are the fundamental building blocks of missions and are executed by specific units or organizations. These assigned missions may originate in the Joint Strategic Capabilities Plan (JSCP), National Command Authority (NCA) taskings, or treaty obligations in accordance with the principles and procedures found in the Unified Command Plan (UCP) or the Unified Action Armed Forces (UNAAF). At lower levels higher headquarters will assign tasks that then become the mission of that unit. As shown in Figure 3, for each assigned mission, one or more commands will be in a supported role while others will be in a supporting role. It follows that mission utility is about one’s ability to complete a task to a standard under a given set of conditions. The good news is that both the Joint community and the military Services have developed and structured a comprehensive, hierarchical listing of the tasks that can be performed by a military force. For joint forces this is the UJTL and for the military Services these are their respective Service Task Lists (STLs). Figure 3. Task RelationshipsThe UJTL uses the levels of war (strategic, operational (OP), and tactical (TA)) as the hierarchy for task placement. The strategic level is further divided into strategic national (SN) and strategic theater (ST) due to the uniqueness of certain task categories (i.e., mobilization is only done at the national level). The UJTL also contains a common language of conditions that are used to describe the operational context in which tasks are performed. Lastly, the UJTL contains a menu of measures of performance (MOPs) for each task and these MOPs are used to develop standards of performance to meet mission requirements. The tasks contained in the UJTL, when associated with mission based conditions and standards, describe a required capability. And, this required capability can be directly linked to a materiel solution.2.3 ModesAs part of the effort to implement a requirements-based Joint Training System (JTS), the Joint Staff, J7, and the United States Joint Forces Command-Joint Warfighting Center (USJFCOM-JWFC) support and maintain an integrated automated system for managing training exercises and related events, the Joint Training Information Management System (JTIMS). The JTS, as defined in the Joint Training Manual (JTM), consists of four phases: Requirements, Plans, Execution, and Assessment. JTIMS was designed to support key processes described in CJCSM 3500.03, the Joint Training Manual, published in 1996. The current version is 3500.03A [5].JTIMS is an automated system specifically designed to assist users in developing the key products related to each of the four phases of the JTS. JTIMS provides a Web-based, Graphical User Interface (GUI) for developing and viewing the JTS product data and is specifically designed to support the task-based, closed-loop features of the JTS. More specifically, JTIMS facilitates the development of an integrated, task-based, "thread" to guide the application of all four JTS phases. Requirements, Plans, Execution of events, and Assessments can all be derived from, or linked to, essential mission tasks. JTIMS facilitates collaborative development of JTS products by supporting multiple users within a user group (e.g., COCOM), working from geographically dispersed sites. Different subsets of users within a user group may develop the products associated with the various phases or steps of the JTS. As one set of the products for an earlier phase in the JTS life cycle is complete, the information associated with these products can be made available to users associated with the next phase or step in the life cycle. Any users within a user group can participate in the integrated development of the JTS products, as long as they have access to a computer with a Web-browser. As JTS products are completed and approved by users within a user group, the data associated with them can be copied to a central space within the database where the other user groups in the JTS community can access it.3. Leveraging Data for Training ManagementThe Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) is the lead for modeling and simulation (M&S) activities within the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD). DMSO is a technology transition and support organization charged with maximizing the efficiency and effectiveness of M&S efforts across the DoD and fostering interoperability and reuse among the DoD’s models and simulations. Guided by the Department of Defense (DoD) Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Master Plan [1], DMSO functions as the focal point for the DoD-wide coordinated effort to implement DoD objectives on modeling and simulation (M&S) throughout the Department. Through the Knowledge Integration Program, DMSO enables the transformation from a Forces-based, materiel-centric posture to a Mission-based, capability-centric asymmetric warfare focus. The Executable Mission Content (EMC) Project makes the statements of the transformation concept executable.3.1 Types of Operations TemplatesThe UJTL, as contained in CJCSM 3500.04C, 1 July 2002, is “….designed as an interoperability tool for use by joint force commanders to communicate mission requirements.” In addition to the 815 tasks, 352 conditions, and approximately 7,500 measures of performance in the UJTL, the memorandum describes the concept of “operations templates.”Operations templates provide a graphical depiction of the activities performed as part of a military operation, derived from instance data, stored as enumerations of the various tasks and its associated attributes. These graphical templates then depict activities and interactions among the enumerated tasks and attributes (activities). The activities represented in an operations template can include tasks performed by the commander and staff, tasks performed by subordinate commands or organizations (e.g., supporting tasks), and tasks performed by other combatant commands or agencies (e.g., command-linked tasks).In general, operations templates represent operations and tasks at a single level of war. Operations templates, however, can be developed across levels of war (e.g., OP to TA or OP to ST to SN). The CJCSM recognizes three basic types of task characteristics and interactions among tasks that can be depicted in operational templates: temporal, spatial and informational.Figure 4. Temporal Operations TemplateTemporal templates (Figure 4) depict whether a task occurs once, more than once, or continuously. Temporal views are actually sequential views wherein one task must be completed before another can start (Input-Process-Output relationships). One task might start at the same time as another task, or one task may have to be completed at the same time as another task. It is also possible to further amplify the sequential view by adding information on task duration as well as initiation, termination, and interrupt cues (branching and sequels). Spatial templates (Figure 5) normally depict the location of task performance in geographical terms, either in a 2 or 3-dimensional view. This is especially important in support activities (i.e., communications, engineers, intelligence, logistics) where spatial considerations often determine the allocation of organizational resources. Figure 5. Spatial Operations TemplateSpatial tasks either can start or be completed at a specific location, or a task may be performed at multiple locations. A variety of the spatial interactions exists among tasks, to include the need to perform a task in the same area as another task is being performed. Spatial task characteristics include multiple locations, point/route/area of performance, and changes in location over time.Informational interactions among tasks affect the input and output relationships among various tasks in an operation. Informational templates depict the need for information in order to perform tasks (e.g., the task of selecting targets to attack requires intelligence input), the transformation of one type of information into other types during task performance, and the output of information after a task is performed (e.g., production of an Air Tasking Order). Some tasks feed other tasks while other tasks receive information. By using an IDEF-like structure, one can depict these tasks and task relationships. Figure 6 is an example of an information template.Figure 6. Informational Operations TemplateAll these data items are required to achieve a fully developed mission analysis. As argued earlier, the (authoritative) mission analysis forms the basis from which to train, organize, and equip the force. The JTIMS Strategic Plan envisions four goals:Full implementation of the Joint Training System/JTIMSJTIMS as the authoritative information source for Combatant Command mission preparednessPolicies and directives promulgating standardized JTS implementationImproved responsiveness to warfighter information needs (requirements)JTIMS facilitates these goals through implementation of dynamic data exchange among users and databases.4. An Approach to Dynamic Data ExchangeThe JTIMS software consists of two types of Java software—Java servlets and Java applets. The Java servlets dynamically generate HTML pages and follow traditional user interface guidelines for Web-design. Hyperlinks provide the connectivity among pages, allowing users to navigate through the JTIMS Web-site via many alternative pathways. The JTIMS Web site supports navigation to the pages above and below the current one in the structure, and navigation to sibling pages and other portions of the application. The Java applets, while being displayed within the browser, have an interface that is more similar to that used in traditional stand-alone applications. Therefore, they require separate user interface guidelines. The separation of a component’s model (data structure) from its user interface (display and interaction behavior) is one of the key features behind the “pluggable look and feel” architecture of the Java Foundation Class (JFC). One JFC application can present a Java look and feel style, another a MS Windows look and feel style, and another a Motif look and feel style. To provide a consistent interface, all JTIMS applets and servlets employ the JAVA look and feel theme. This theme was chosen because it is not tied to a particular platform. The Java look and feel (JLAF) is designed to provide: Consistency in the appearance and behavior of common design elements Compatibility with industry standard components and interaction styles Aesthetic appeal that does not distract from application contentFigure 7. JTIMS User InterfaceFigure 7 provides a screen shot of a common application component within the JTIMS GUI. All major functions within JTIMS are handled through separate applets, providing a data-centric approach to collaborative product development. The mission data-entry applet (Figure 7) displays the majority of UI components available. The left window pane provides a real-time view of the underlying data on the server, while the right pane provides the data entry options, which are cached client-side, until ready to safe to the server side. Modal dialogs enable data entry on the server-side, while the use of droplists is common for library data selection through list-to-list transfers.4.1 Selected JTIMS UI and Data ComponentsThe Unit data that JTIMS users select from is resident within the JTIMS database and obtained from the DMSO-sponsored Unit Order of Battle Data Access Tool (UOB-DAT). The UOB-DAT utilizes a Data Interchange Format (DIF) to standardize the data extracted from the original authoritative data sources (such as the Conventional Forces Database and others). The DIF, developed by Computing Technologies for DMSO, separates UOB data into four logical files, Unit, Personnel, Equipment, and Aircraft. Within these files, all data elements are captured as fixed length, comma-delimited ASCII. The data elements share the Unit Identifier Code (UIC) as the primary key to link an associated field between the files. The Unit file can be viewed as the parent with the remaining three files representing the children. Within JTIMS, the unit data is updated by the database administrator by synchronizing with the UOB update cycle. Users can add units, but there is no associated data for the added units, i.e., no equipment, personnel, or aircraft data. Future enhancements will include the ability to task-organize UIC derived units. Efforts are underway with the Joint Event Scheduling System (JESS) to implement non-UIC unit task organization and resource deconfliction. Figure 8. Analysis and Data FlowThe dynamic exchange of authoritative data about Units and associated data offers clear benefits to all JTIMS users, from force providers to exercise planners. Figure 8 depicts the analysis and data flow throughout the JTS. By having the JTIMS users select the responsible organizations and training audiences directly from authoritative sources the need for user-defined units is greatly reduced and enhances not only conflict identification, but also transportation planning, costing, exercise preparation, and other areas as well.The objective of the integration of external data sources, such as the Joint Master Scenario Event List (JMSEL) tool and the UOB-DAT, with JTIMS is to develop round-trip interfaces. These interfaces will enable JTIMS users to view, extract, and store related data to the JTIMS data structure for JTS products development. This interface should also enable JTIMS users to locate data in JTS products and extract that data to the export Data Interchange Formats (DIF) and associated data coding specifications (usually XML) fo use in external programs.5. Status of the Integration EffortOne of the areas where the JTIMS integrated data environment is extremely useful is in resource deconfliction. Event resources, ranging from Units to Low Density-High Demand (LDHD) equipment and range facilities, can be inventoried based on a number of selection criteria and compared internally as well as across events for potential over-allocation. Because of the collaborative use of the authoritative source data, a “Gantt”-style resource-allocation planner (Figure 9) is generated, with options to display Unit, facility, LDHD, and other equipment schedules (OpTempo and PersTempo). The use of simulation facilities and simulation support for exercises is also part of the resource deconfliction engine.Figure 9. Deconfliction GanttThe UOB-DAT data exchange is completed, while the JMSEL data exchange is awaiting the completion of a JMSEL Oracle database management conversion. Upon completion of the conversion, JMSEL will be integrated fully into the JTIMS toolset for seamless data exchange.As stated earlier, the JESS will leverage JTIMS data and for its initial (Interim JESS) capability utilizes the GUI of JTIMS for Force Management. The JESS is the force provider toolset that will enable data exchange with JTIMS, as well as Service scheduling tools, GSORTS, and other authoritative data sources, to provide an integrated, near-real time status of forces. These major components will be integrated to provide the completed JESS, a system of systems integrating a force provider functionality module, a modified data export module, a modified JTIMS force assignment module, and a GOTS scheduling system for operational events modified to USJFCOM specifications. In use, JESS will be fully integrated using an enterprise approach with JTIMS Version 4.0.6. Simulation Development Support In the Plans Phase of the JTS (JTIMS automation), a Command’s Mission Essential Task List (METL or Joint METL (JMETL)) is the key element in formulating the Joint Training Plan. In this phase, the Joint Mission Essential Tasks are linked to specific training audiences and training objectives. These combinations are linked to specific exercises or events that can subsequently be evaluated in the Execution Phase. Data observed and evaluated over a series of exercises or events are compiled in the Assessment Phase enabling the commanders to more readily evaluate the training readiness of their units in specific, measurable areas. In support of the DoD Transformation effort, it is vital that military planners, operators, and analysts not merely concentrate on “doing things right” but also focus on “doing the right things.” The “right thing” of winning the heavy-armor battles in Europe has given way to multiple and diverse “right things” of unconventional warfare, homeland defense, peacekeeping operations, etc. The DMSO has set out to address these complex objectives by developing a framework for representing the synthesis of military operations and the employment of materiel/forces to accomplish missions. The framework formalizes the mission space, details how framework components need to be linked and instantiated, and provides a robust means to rigorously specify operational purposes and goals, then explicitly relate, map, and allocate them to the proposed means for accomplishment. Clearly, identifying training audiences and other organizations from the authoritative data sources (i.e., the UOB-DAT data set) creates a much more robust foundation for systematic analysis, conflict resolution, and process automation. It is in the area of process automation that DMSO has been most interested. The natural consequence of the COCOMs' and Services' constrained live exercises, especially at the strategic and operational levels of war, is the explosion of modeling and simulation as a positive way to compensate for shrinking training resources. DMSO is hard at work sponsoring various research endeavors. The UOB-DAT and JTIMS integration efforts are part of the software toolsets that connect the various simulations and, work continues with the J-7, Joint Staff, to connect the DMSO tools to the JTIMS to enhance start exercise data collection/automation. The task information, along with the associated Unit data, generated during the training requirements analysis could be used to feed the scenario generation activities that take place before a simulation exercise. More specifically, the simulation software would “recognize” the mission and tasks, and based on this recognition would produce templates of scenario events [sometimes called “Master Scenario Event Lists” (MSELS)] scripted CGF behaviors, and mission/task performance measures. Analysts at the simulation site could then review and update the templates to reflect the unique circumstances of a particular training situation. The JTIMS will capture the MSEL information by integrating the Joint Staff-selected stand-alone MSEL generator as part of the JTIMS/JTS support tools.Simulation systems must have several features to properly process task information and take advantage of the reduced data/knowledge acquisition. First, the simulation systems must have the capability to semantically analyze the task information. Several recent advances in the semantic representation of simulation data should facilitate this analysis. [3] Second, the simulation systems must have the additional semantic data or libraries to fill-in and supplement any information missing from the task data provided by the training requirements analysis process [4]. These potential gaps in the data libraries can be addressed through the JTIMS export features.The JTIMS database contains data on the Joint and Service task lists and their associated condition and measures taxonomies, as well as a taxonomy of missions and task templates. These templates specify the tasks to be performed in each mission, a concept that the US Navy has extended. The Navy includes a description of the temporal relationships among tasks within a mission. This temporal relationship will be part of the future versions of JTIMS, along with graphical representations and drawing tools. Figure 4 represents the graphical depiction of the temporal relationship. The color coding of the task boxes is currently driven by the values of the Training Proficiency Assessment, but could be used to represent the task criticality in the overall mission template, as well as overall Unit readiness to perform the task, based on detailed assessments of Doctrine, Organization, Training, Materiel, Leadership, Personnel, and Facilities.The plans for JTIMS include exports of mission/task data and associated templates. All JTIMS data exports will be formatted in the XML (http://www.w3.org/TR/WD-xml-lang-70331.html). XML provides an industry standard for exchanging data that directly facilitates the development of automated tools for data processing. Additionally, DMSO has developed a detailed Data Interchange Format (DIF) for describing various elements of military operations including processes such as missions and tasks. The primary intent of this DIF is to guide knowledge acquisition associated with the development of simulations. This knowledge is stored in both native and common format in the Knowledge Integration Resource Center (KIRC), designed to facilitate the exchange of FDMS data among various simulation programs. While there are no plans to include the JTIMS exports within the KIRC, primarily because of classification issues, selected datasets could be made available to authorized simulation developers to support training activities for DoD-sponsored simulations. 7. SummaryThe Joint Training Information Management System continues to evolve, as does the Joint Training System. Significant additional interest in the data associated with the authoritative mission analyses contained within the JTIMS has led to increased involvement of the Office of the Secretary of Defense, DMSO, and COCOMs. JTIMS has the potential, and it is the vision of the Joint Staff, to become the authoritative source of mission preparedness data for DoD. Continued integration of critical data resources and dynamic data exchange processes provide a powerful incentive for the Modeling and Simulation community to look at the JTIMS data for authoritative startex data loads.8. References[1]	Department of Defense, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, Director, Readiness and Training Policy and Programs, Strategic Plan for transforming DoD Training, March 1, 2002.[2]	Department of Defense Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Master Plan, DoDD 5000.59-9P, October 1995. [3]	Jack Sheehan et al.: “Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS): Basic Concepts, Advanced Techniques, and Pragmatic Examples,” Spring 1998 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 1998.[4]	Lawrence H. O’Brien PhD.: “Development of Task-Aware Simulation Systems,” I/ITSEC’00 Proceedings, November 2000[5]	CJCSI 3500.02B, Joint Training Master Plan 2000 for the Armed Forces of the United States, 1 May [6]	CJCSM 3500.03A Joint Training Manual, 1 September 2002. http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/jel/cjcsd/[7]	DoD Directive 5000.59, "DoD Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Management," January 4, 1994.[8]	CJCSM 3500.04C. "Universal Joint Task List (UJTL)." 1 July 2002.[9]	Bray, Britt. “Scenario Generation – Common Operating Environment (SGCOE).” paper presented at the 41st Army Operations Research Symposium, Fort Lee, VA, October 2002.[10]	Department of Defense, Joint Chiefs of Staff. Joint Publication 0-2, Unified Action Armed Forces (UNAAF). Washington: Pentagon, 10 July 2001.[11]	Department of Defense, Joint Chiefs of Staff. Joint Publication 3-0, Doctrine for Joint Operations. Washington: Pentagon, 10 September 2001.[12]	Limoges, Peter, et al, “Data Integration for Simulation Support,” Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization’s European Simulation Interoperability Workshop 2001, paper 01E-SIW-102Author BiographiesCOL PETER LIMOGES, USA is the Chief, Joint Training Branch for the Joint Staff. He is also the Program Manager, (PM) for the Joint Training System (JTS). He holds an Associates Degree in Automotive Engineering, a Bachelors Degree in Management from the University of NH, and a Masters Degree in Strategic Studies from the US Army War College. He was commissioned as a Reserve Officer in 1976 and has been on Active Duty as an Active Guard/Reserve (AGR) officer since 1988. Upon graduation from the Army War College in June 2000, he was nominated to his current position on the Joint Staff. As PM for the Joint Training System, his duties include oversight of JTIMS, the automated tool for the JTS.RON SMITS is the system integrator for JTIMS at Dynamics Research Corporation. As such, he is responsible for studying and recommending strategies to incorporate existing tools and technologies within JTIMS. He is also involved in the ongoing efforts to broaden the applicability of the mission-to-task analysis methodology employed within JTIMS, a paradigm that continues to gain appeal with a wide variety of audiences. Mr. Smits has acted as the DMSO liaison to the NASM program and continues as the DRC PM for DMSO projects. He served as an Air Force pilot, bringing 16 years experience flying operational fighter aircraft to the simulation world. He has been involved with the Mission Space Models Data Dictionary and NASM conceptual models since joining DRC in 1998. He holds an MA in International Studies from Old Dominion University and has previously written papers for the Society for Computer Simulation International and the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization, as well as the Military Operations Research Symposiums and Industry/Interservice Training, Simulation and Education Conferences.TOM BRAVO is the Program Manager for Decision Support System Services at DRC. He has over 17 years technical experience in the areas of automated systems requirements, database development and design, prototyping systems and displays, system development, implementation, fielding, support, and simulation modeling. He holds an MS in Industrial Engineering, Management Information Systems from Northeastern University and is the Program Manager for the JTIMS web-based development effort.