The Validation and Verification of Models and Simulations to Support Smart Acquisition (03E-SIW-051)Mark Dumble Robin MillerDefence Science and Technology Laboratory,Ively RoadFarnboroughHampshire, UK HYPERLINK "mailto:mdumble@dstl.gov.uk" mdumble@dstl.gov.uk,  HYPERLINK "mailto:rjrmiller@dstl.gov.uk" rjrmiller@dstl.gov.ukKeywords:Validation, Verification, Conceptual Model, Smart Acquisition.ABSTRACT A wide variety of models and simulation (M&S) is required to support equipment acquisition, ranging from High Level Operational Analysis to physics models. Smart Acquisition requires these M&S to be applied coherently throughout the acquisition process.  The achievement of ‘smart’ will only be realised if appropriate validation and verification (V&V) processes are applied.Building on previous work, which postulates that the Conceptual Model for M&S can be derived by considering both the Problem Domain and the Application Domain, we show how the M&S can be organised into a hierarchical framework. This framework matches the requirements of Smart Acquisition and allows for a systematic and realisable approach to the V&V of all the M&S required to support the acquisition process. Examples of the practical application of the approach are given.1.  IntroductionMany countries have embraced the concept of Smart Acquisition, with its key enabler Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA). SBA is defined, in the UK, as:‘The robust, collaborative use of Simulation technology that is integrated across acquisition phases and programme’This definition highlights the problems of validating Models and Simulations (M&S) underpinning SBA. Not only is there a wide range of M&S, from high-level decision support tools to physical models and virtual manufacturing simulations.  Further these M&S must evolve by increasing the level of resolution through the acquisition process. This paper proposes a validation framework that will allow the validation to be integrated across phases and programmes. 2.  BackgroundPrevious work has led to the validation concept of the Y-model [1]. This has been devised as an abstraction over the early-stages of the development process for computer-based information systems, to encourage a balanced view of the concerns of Application Domain Modelling (ADM) and Problem Domain Modelling (PDM).  The thrust is that such a balanced view will improve the early-stage Verification and Validation (V&V), and result in the procurement of M&S that are cost-effective and fit-for-purpose.  A more complete discussion of these issues can be found in reference [2], which provides an umbrella paper for earlier publications in this area.The Y-model, in its general sense, is underpinned by two axioms:A computer-based information system exists to serve the needs of some business enterprise.  It does this by providing an application to its users.  The application domain is the business environment in which those users operate.  Application Domain Modelling provides the means by which we can understand the needs of the business enterprise, to define and rationalise the user-based requirements for the system.  In order to provide an application to its users, a computer-based information system maintains some internal computational model to solve some problem.  Typically, a problem reflects some aspect of the real world.  The problem domain is the world environment in which that problem exists.The Y-model approach asserts that the overall requirement for M&S – the Conceptual Model (CM)- can only be derived by a consideration of both these domains (Figure 1). EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure 1 – The Y model EMBED Word.Document.8 \s This diagram is also one of the foundations of the Anglo-French approach to Validation, Verification and Accreditation. It forms the framework in which the Validation process – the derivation of the requirement from a consideration of both domains – can begin from a consideration of the problem that the M&S is supposed to alleviate [3].  This paper proposes a framework based on the Y-model approach that will allow an integrated approach to V&V and a sequential development/re-use of the necessary M&S.3.  UK Smart AcquisitionThe UK approach to Smart Acquisition postulates that acquisition only starts:When there is a perceived operational problemWhen it is likely that an increase in equipment capability would mitigate the operational problem.The decision process and the consequential requirement for supporting M&S is shown in Figure 4 below. EMBED MSDraw.Drawing.8.2  Figure 2 – Decision Process and M&S SupportThis suggests that a hierarchical M&S structure is required and this is developed below.4.  Extending the Y –modelPrevious work (Reference 2) proposed that a CM should be developed for each of the two domains, such that the requirements for each could be formally captured.  Combination of these two CMs will provide the overall CM for the M&S (Figure 3). EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure 3 - Deriving the Overall Conceptual ModelA key concept in this approach is that V&V activities start immediately.  There is, therefore, a validation step that confirms that the CMs for the two domains are indeed consistent with the descriptions of the two domains, and a validation step that confirms that the overall CM is consistent with the individual domain CMs (Figure3). EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure 4 – Early Stage ValidationGoing back to Fig 2, operational problems can be defined as a politically unacceptable level of operational risk with respect to one or more of the politically endorsed Military Tasks. The first M&S requirement is therefore a tool to estimate the operational risk, as a function of time, associated with the politically endorsed Military Tasks. The Y-model for this first element might look like Figure 5. EMBED MSDraw.Drawing.8.2  Figure 5 –Y- Model for Operational RiskExtending this consistently (figure 6) we get: EMBED MSDraw.Drawing.8.2  Figure 6 – CM Inclusion in Y-ModelThe CM for the Application Domain (Operational Risk) might look like this:An analytical framework:The inputs are:A description of the Military Task including ‘success’, warning time, distance, duration etc’.The force elements on both sides expressed in Capability termsCost vs. Capability relationships The outputs are:The probability of achieving the Task as a function of time into the future, with uncertainties and confidence levels.The CM for the Problem Domain (politics) might look like this:A formal description of:The range of acceptable probabilityThe priority of the Military TaskBudgetary considerationsAssumptions about allied contributionsThe combination of these two CMs gives us the CM for required OR predictor, whose output is the likely Operational Risk for actual Military Tasks in the real political environment, as a function of tresources.5.  Building the Hierarchical FrameworkAs noted above (Fig. 4), the M&S required for Smart Action are essentially hierarchical. We now develop the hierarchical framework by postulating that the combined domain (Application and Problem) at one level becomes the problem domain of the level below (Figure 9). EMBED MSDraw.Drawing.8.2  Figure 7: Cascading Problem DomainsExtending in this way we obtain (Figure 8): EMBED MSDraw.Drawing.8.2  Figure 8 – Cascading Operational RiskIn turn the CM for Military Capability theory might look like this:An analytical framework:The inputs areLevels of Equipment Capability, People Capability, Strategic Sustainability.Relationships of the above to Cost and Time.The outputs are:Levels of achievable Military Capability as a function of Budget and Time with uncertainties and confidence levels.The CM for the Problem Domain (Operational Risk) in turn might look like this:A formal description of:The desired reduction in ORThe desired timescales for remedial actionThe resources available for such actionThe relationship of any remedial action to wider Defence issuesAs above the combination of these two CMs gives us the CM for a Decision support tool for treading off the elements of Military Capability, time and cost. The output of this will be actual requirements for uplifts in the elements of Military Capability.Following the decision process in Figure 2, we now have a requirement for tools to trade off the elements of Equipment Capability. Following the arguments developed above, the Problem Domain is the domain of Military Capability and the Y-diagram of this level looks like Figure 9. EMBED MSDraw.Drawing.8.2  Figure 9 –Y Diagram for Equipment Capability Balance ToolIn turn the CM for Equipment Capability theory might look like this:An analytical framework:The inputs areLevels of different elements of Equipment Capability.Relationships of the above to Cost and Time.The outputs areLevels of achievable Equipment Capability as a function of Budget and Time with uncertainties and confidence levels.The CM for the Problem Domain (MC) in turn might look like this:A formal description of:The desired increases in Equipment CapabilityThe desired timescales for remedial actionThe resources available for such actionThe relationship of equipment solutions to the other elements of Military CapabilityAgain, as above, the combination of these two CMs gives us the CM for a decision support tool for trading-off the elements of Equipment Capability, time and cost. The output of this will be actual requirements for uplifts in the major elements of Equipment Capability.In turn, each major element of Equipment Capability is composed of a number of sub-capabilities. Exactly as in the case of Equipment Capability, we require the ability to trade-off the elements at sub-capability level. The Y-model looks like this. EMBED MSDraw.Drawing.8.2  Figure 10 – Y-model for Equipment Sub-Capability Balance ToolSimilarly the CM for Equipment Sub-capabilities might look like this:An analytical framework:The inputs areLevels of different elements of Equipment Sub-Capability.Relationships of the above to Cost and Time.The outputs areAchievable levels of an element of Equipment Capability as a function of Budget and Time with uncertainties and confidence levels.The CM for the Problem Domain (Equipment Capability) in turn might look like this:A formal description of:The desired increases in that element of Equipment CapabilityThe desired timescales for remedial actionThe resources available for such actionThe relationship of that element to the other elements of ECAgain, as above, the combination of these two CMs gives us the CM for a Decision support tool for treading off the sub-elements of Equipment Capability, time and cost. The output of this will be an actual requirement for uplifts in one of the major elements of Equipment Capability, known in the UK as the User Requirement Document (URD).Finally we arrive at the design phase – the phase of Spiral Development. As above, the CM for Spiral Development would beAn evolving design framework allowing:Risk ManagementThe ability to trade-off Performance, Cost and TimeIncreasing levels of detailThe outputs areAn evolving design, with cost and time estimatesThe CM for the Problem Domain (Equipment Sub-capability) in turn might look like this:A formal description of:The URDContributions/Constraints from the providers of other elements of MC5.1  The Complete HierarchyWe can now integrate all the Y-diagrams into an overall framework. Using this framework those responsible for Validation of M&S for Smart Acquisition can see not only what kind of information they need for Conceptual Models, but also where the essential information should come from. The overall hierarchy the looks like Figure 13.. EMBED MSDraw.Drawing.8.2  Figure 11-Y Model for Smart Acquisition6  Practical ExampleAs part of the UK research into SBA a number of worked examples were undertaken, both to test the evolving methodology and to show potential beneficiaries that there was some practical experience underlying the advice.One of these concerned the operational risks associated with the deployment phase of expeditionary operation. Given that the work was exploring how SBA could be made to work, it was clearly not possible to engage all those associated with the problem domains (the stakeholders). Moreover since the SBA research and the research on V&V was being undertaken at the same time, it would be surprising if the results of the V&V research had been implemented. The VV&A framework developed here has therefore been used to:Identify what V&V activities should have taken place and what CMs would have been required to populate the framework.Identify what actually took place and note the omissions and to comment on the problems, if any, of rectifying the omissions.Table 1 lists the CMs required and notes whether they were constructed (explicit/implicit/notType of CMExplicit/implicit/not constructedCommentsApplication Domain CMOperational Risk TheoryImplicitMilitary Capability TheoryExplicit for 1/3 elements of MC. Implicit for restCurrently based on platform performance for equipment element not capabilityEquipment Capability TheoryExplicit for one element of ECTherefore no real trade-off at EC levelEquipment Sub-Capability Not constructedDepends on comprehensive EC matrixSpiral Development.ExplicitPartially undertaken by industry. Industry not used to being asked to provide capabilityProblem Domain CMPoliticalNot constructedTop-level Problem owners are not used to this kind of decision support. Construction in principle feasible.Operational Risk predictionsExplicitMilitary Capability balanceExplicit for EC part. Implicit/partial for rest of MCEquipment Capability balanceNot constructedDepends on comprehensive EC matrixURD development.PartialContribution/constraints of other elements of MC not identified. This should not be impossible however. Table 1- Conceptual Models Required for Smart Acquisition6  SummarySimulation Based Acquisition will only be successfully adopted if there is confidence in the underpinning M&S.  This confidence is delivered through the process of validation and verification.  The M&S required to support SBA ranges in abstraction from very high level decision support tools to detailed M&S at the physics level. Further, the M&S range in application to include capability and performance models, to whole life cost models and virtual manufacturing M&S.This paper has presented an integrated approach to the V&V of SBA that also supports the sequential development/re-use of the necessary M&S.  This approach has taken the Y-model for V&V and recognising that SBA requires a hierarchy of M&S has developed a coherent hierarchy of integrated Y-models.  Further we have taken the opportunity within this paper to suggest the type of information that can be expected to form the basis of the conceptual models at each level within the hierarchy.The UK research into SBA included a number of worked examples, both to test the evolving methodology and to show potential beneficiaries that there was some practical experience underlying the advice.  We have appraised one of SBA worked examples against the proposed V&V framework to identify what V&V activities should have taken place, to identify the CM requirement, and to identify what actually took place.7  References[1] M.R. Moulding:“Verification, Validation and Accreditation of Synthetic Environments: A Research Programme at the Royal Military College of Science”, 2nd International Synthetic Environments Symposium, Shrivenham, UK, October 1999.[2] RJR Miller, M. Dumble: “Unified Approach to Validation and Verification of Synthetic Environments, – Final Report”, DERA Report, DERA/CDA/MBS/CR000009/1, March 2000.[3] M. Dumble, RJR Miller, D. Girardot, R Jacquart: “Validation and Verification of Synthetic Environment Based Acquisition – Final Report”, DSTL Report, DSTL/CR05962, February 2003 