Representing Human Behaviors in Military Operations Other Than WarBradley C. Schricker, Sonia R. von der LippeAT&T Government Solutions, Inc., 11315 Corporate Blvd., Orlando, FL USA 32817-8340ABSTRactModeling and simulation (M&S) professionals have chronicled for decades the extreme difficulty involved in modeling individual human behavior truthfully.  That hardship originates mainly from an inability to accurately account for individual qualities that are intrinsic in human beings, such as fear, adrenaline, anger, individual capacities for learning, and personal values.  To date, such military training systems as ModSAF/OneSAF have minimized this shortfall because of the predictable nature of threats that are modeled and the clear response to those threats as detailed by military doctrine and unambiguous rules of engagement.  As the United States military has evolved in recent years, however, forces are required to engage in actions categorized as Military Operations Other Than War (MOOTW).  As opposed to war operations that are composed of “large-scale, sustained combat operations”, MOOTW concentrates on “deterring war, resolving conflict, promoting peace, and supporting civil authorities”.  These types of operations can include both combat and non-combat actions [1].  Because of the blurred nature of this class of military operations, convincingly modeling the behaviors of individual human entities becomes more arduous.  This paper identifies and examines the complex issues concerning modeling human behaviors for MOOTW.  The first section provides a background of previous simulation systems and their behavior representations.  That is followed by a more detailed explanation of the intricacies of MOOTW.  The final section details the problems that have become more prominent as a result of increased need for MOOTW training.Keywords: MOOTW, behavior modeling, simulationintroductionConventional warfare has long focused on the concept of large and sustained combat campaigns.  Because of the predictable military engagement style of its foes, this brand of warfare has been appropriate for the type of adversaries that the United States’ military has encountered.  That is, until recently.  Since the end of the Cold War, the United States military has shifted its focus from that conventional paradigm to a paradigm known as Military Operations Other Than War (MOOTW) [2].  Instead of concentrating attention solely on the combat operations taking place on the battle field, MOOTW focuses on activities such as preventing war operations, resolving current conflict, promoting peace, and providing support to civil authorities in addition to the aforementioned combat activities.  This class of actions often includes both combat and non-combat actions, depending largely on the immediate situation.  The broad and unpredictable nature of these types of operations presents complicated challenges when attempting to persuasively model the behaviors of individual human entities for the purpose of training.After the Persian Gulf War ended, current United States Secretary of State Colin L. Powell wrote in 1992 that when an event occurs that might require military intervention: “Relevant questions include: Is the political objective we seek to achieve important, clearly defined and understood? Have all other nonviolent policy means failed? Will military force achieve the objective? At what cost? Have the gains and risks been analyzed? How might the situation that we seek to alter, once it is altered by force, develop further and what might be the consequences?” [3]In any situation, the answers to these questions are likely to be unclear and highly debatable.  However, in the murky conditions that usually characterize MOOTW, these questions devolve into ambiguous riddles.  Those murky conditions stem from not fully understanding the motives, intentions, capabilities and strategies of the enemy, among other characteristics.  When dealing with the little-known enemies that are prevalent in today’s world environment, these questions stand out as far more difficult to accurately answer.  Tending to this lack of fundamental knowledge and understanding is a prominent goal of MOOTW.For example, conventional warfare often focuses on mobilizing as many troops as possible to match or exceed that of the enemy.  Having the ability to mount a force as large as or larger than that of the enemy can allow military planners to more easily answer all but the first two questions on the previous page.  However, when an enemy attacks with small forces using unconventional tactics such as suicide, planning military actions becomes far more onerous.  This description is characteristic of some of the current enemies of the United States.  Unfortunately, this type of engagement tactic is not well understood by the conventional warfare strategists in the U.S. military.Because of the ambiguities with attempting to understand MOOTW as well as the world conditions that make MOOTW necessary, modeling the relevant behaviors is an arduous task.  Not fully understanding the enemy’s motives, capabilities, and unpredictable tactics causes formidable challenges in modeling this type of behavior for the purpose of training.Mootw simulation systemsTo fully appreciate what has been done to this point in attempts to model MOOTW behaviors, one must first grasp the conceptual differences between a constructive simulation and a virtual simulation.  According to [4], constructive simulation is defined as “aggregate level, force-on-force simulation where interactions between entities … occur by means of statistical techniques and predetermined probabilities.”  In essence, constructive simulation systems tend to require attributes and characteristics to be defined before execution.  They then perform according to those predefined models with little or no human intervention, aside from processing and executing command orders that may be given.  This type of simulation system does not immerse a soldier into the training environment, but simply provides several different objective views of the situation.  Examples of constructive simulation systems are Modular Semi-Automated Forces/OneSAF Testbed (ModSAF/OTB), the Deployable Exercise System (DEXES), SPECTRUM, the Joint Conflict and Tactical Simulation (JCATS) and the Improved Performance Research Integration Tool (IMPRINT).  By contrast, the same source defines virtual simulation as “real-time simulation, where interactions are driven by human perceptions of time and space.”  Typically, this exemplar involves systems that rely heavily upon human interaction.  Virtual simulation systems specialize in immersing a participant in the fabricated environment, suspending disbelief, and providing as real of an environment as possible.  This immersion into the virtual world provides a realistic and convincing training environment for soldiers that serves as a superb foundation for MOOTW training.  Examples of these systems includes flight simulators, driving simulators, and infantry training simulations such as the Soldier Visualization Station which is used for dismounted infantry and chem/bio team training [5]. Because of the nature of constructive simulation systems, they do not effectively support MOOTW behavior modeling for at least two reasons.  First and foremost, the aggregate level behaviors can not fully and convincingly model the sophisticated individual behaviors required for MOOTW.  The unpredictable and asymmetric nature of MOOTW tactics necessitate disaggregate, low-level behavior modeling.  Furthermore, the use of statistical models based on predetermined probabilities clashes with the need for human intervention for the purpose of training individual soldier training in highly unpredictable situations.  Instead, a more flexible simulation system with a more sophisticated and cognitive decision-making model can more effectively tackle the task of modeling the complex MOOTW behaviors.The following sections detail the backgrounds of different simulation systems and the efforts made by various groups to implement MOOTW behavior models in those systems.  It is important to point out that, as constructive simulation systems, all of these suffer from the same pitfalls mentioned above.Modular Semi-Automated Forces/OneSAF Testbed (ModSAF/OTB)The development of ModSAF and OTB traces back to the DARPA SIMNET project of the mid 1980’s.  For that effort, large numbers of simulation systems were linked together to form a large collective training simulation.  However, the use of fully manned OPFOR units proved too costly and time consuming, prompting the birth of Semi-Automated Forces.  By the early 1990’s, the decision to further modularize the components led to the creation of ModSAF.  ModSAF was designed in such a way that researchers could constantly add capabilities to the system, with selected augmentations being added to the baseline version.In an effort to model MOOTW behaviors, Lockheed Martin Information Systems (LMIS) developed an architecture based on a forces and sides conceptual model.  This model is predicated on having large numbers of forces and sides with constantly changing relationships.  The intention of the conceptual model is to provide the simulation with basic knowledge of the current relationships between the forces and the sides in addition to complementary information about each force and side.  According to LMIS, this architecture will allow an accurate modeling of the complex cognitive processes necessary to engage in MOOTW.Deployable Exercise System (DEXES)Developed by the United States Southern Command as a training simulation to model the military, political, social, economic, and public health outcomes typical of MOOTW, DEXES was used to support Foreign Military Interaction operations such as Civil Affairs, Psychological Operations, Peace Keeping Operations and Humanitarian and Disaster Relief Operations.  Like ModSAF, DEXES is an integrated model that was often used in conjunction with another high-resolution simulation, such as the Joint Conflict Model.DEXES, originally not a High Level Language (HLA) compliant application, uses an HLA conversion to allow simulation of MOOTW objects and processes while taking advantage of the capabilities of other simulations, such as the Joint Conflict and Tactical Simulation (JCATS) and the Consequence Analysis Tool Set (CATS), to model other military objects and processes in real time [6][7].SpectrumAmong the group of simulations known collectively as Complex Contingency Operation (CCO) simulation, SPECTRUM is the most well known.  Developed in the mid 1990’s, SPECTRUM is a tool designed to combine “conflict modeling with a multivariate sociological model,” with a goal of replicating “the unpredictable and chaotic environment associated with military missions and CCOs.”  While SPECTRUM, much like DEXES, is intended to simulate political, economic, and sociological environments where political strategies and operational plans can be applied and analyzed, its primary objective is to allow for deterministic political forecasting and predicting the outcome of strategic and operational policies, projects, and campaign plans.SPECTRUM’s long list of functionality includes:Replicating social regions according to specific societal groupsModeling societal groups possessing the cognitive abilities to react to policies, projects, and campaign plansModeling layered and clustered political polls to gauge popular reactions to policies, projects, and campaign plans and measure successModeling popular perceptions and media problemsThe chief goal of SPECTRUM is to produce thorough decision-making procedures, to promote staff coordination and to facilitate interagency coordination and interagency communication [7].2.4 Joint Conflict and Tactical Simulation (JCATS)Developed by the Conflict Simulation Laboratory (CSL) at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), JCATS is a multi-sided, interactive, entity-level simulation that spans all branches of service.  Unlike the aforementioned systems, JCATS does have the ability to simulate at both aggregate and disaggregate levels.  In addition to being able to simulate small group tactics in both rural and urban terrains, including a wide array of detailed building features, JCATS can also support far larger scenarios.  For example, JCATS has been shown to be able to simulate approximately 28,000 of the required 30,000 entities for the Millennium Challenge 2002 (MC02).  More specifically, JCATS is capable of modeling chemical and biological weapons, beam weapons, and some human characteristics such as suppression, fatigue, and health.  As of 2001, JCATS was used by all major commands, laboratories and other government agencies [8][7]. 2.5 Improved Performance Research Implementation Tool (IMPRINT)IMPRINT is a stochastic network modeling tool that can be used to “help set realistic system requirements; to identify soldier-driven constraints on system design; and to evaluate the capability of available manpower and personnel to effectively operate and maintain a system under environmental stressors.”  As a research tool, IMPRINT is able to incorporate task analysis, workload modeling, performance shaping and degradation functions and stressors, and embedded personnel characteristics data to produce its results.  This is done using an embedded discrete event task network modeling language called Micro Saint.  Additionally, IMPRINT can use embedded algorithms to simulate the effects of varying personnel characteristics, an assortment of training frequencies, and diverse environmental stressors on the overall performance of the system [9][10].intricacies of Mootw behaviorsWhen one army has advantage over another army by either a large number of troops, or superior weaponry, then there is an asymmetry between the conflicting groups.  Typically, in this case the inferior group will do whatever is necessary to gain advantage over the superior group.  This type of combat is designated as asymmetric warfare.  It is often considered “non-traditional” because it does not employ equal force on force strength to fight one another, but seeks to challenge the superior force’s weaknesses to gain the advantage [11].  Post cold-war operations have called upon the United States to focus its’ operations more on deterring war, peace-keeping operations, and lately prevention and defense against terrorist attacks.  Due to the unpredictability of terrorist actions, our soldiers need preparation for erratic tactics and behaviors that are now present within their common operating environment.Within [1], there is a clearly defined goal to “ensure individuals and units have the necessary skills for a given MOOTW and that the staffs can plan, control, and support the operation.”  To develop the skills for the individual to effectively train, realistic cognitive behaviors for individual entities should exist within a virtual simulation system that are more representative of asymmetric warfare.  These entities should represent the gamut of what the individual soldier might encounter.  A general example would be a diverse civilian population with unfamiliar social, political, and religious values, and an unknown threat with unconventional tactics and unfamiliar motives.  Because of the diversity within a situation, each virtual entity should be represented individually.  Each entity would have its own emotions and memory, and goals that represent how that individual reacts and perceives.  With each entity modeled individually, the virtual simulation has a greater ability to provide a realistic foundation to provide dynamic training to the soldier.A specific example of the difficulties associated with MOOTW can be derived directly from real experiences in Somalia in the early 1990’s.  Operation Restore Hope was a United States led, United Nations sanctioned operation to protect humanitarian workers charged with the duties of leading international famine relief efforts in Somalia.  The main objective of the U.S. led force was to maintain peace in the area, but they were authorized by the U.N. to use military force, if necessary.While famine had essentially been eliminated by March of 1993, prompting Operation Restore Hope to widely be considered a success, the operation clearly demonstrated some of the dilemmas that can be experienced as a result of insufficient and ineffective political analysis.  As a result of the distinction between peacekeeping and peace enforcement became blurred, the United States Army engaged in a police action to apprehend a Somali warlord on the night of October 3, 1993.  The raid pitted approximately 100 Army Rangers and commandoes against several hundred Somali soldiers, resulting in the deadliest operation in the history of U.N. peace operations.  As a result of misdiagnosing the situation, nineteen U.S. servicemen were killed, seventy-seven wounded, and one pilot was taken prisoner [12][13].Architectural CONSIDERATIONS for modeling mootw behaviorsTo be effective, the virtual training environment must present the audience with realistic and unpredictable scenarios and challenges.  This can be accomplished with role players and/or automated behaviors representing the threats.  An example of the role-player approach is for these entities to initiate terrorist attacks on a variety of infrastructure targets such as communication centers, power plants, and transportation networks.  This approach is costly, however, as it necessitates the use of exercise support personnel to perform the threat role in the simulation.  A more appropriate solution is to automate the threat forces against which the individual will fight, in addition to the varying civilians the individual might encounter.  To individually represent each entity is complex.  Because each entity will be viewed as an individual within the playing environment, each entity must contain its own emotions, goals, and a capacity to learn from past and current situation.  Additionally, the entity must communicate with other entities within the simulation environment.  However, it must be borne in mind that, at times, individuals often act as a single, collective group.  For example, if a gunman started shooting at a populated area, the individuals would collectively scatter from the area.  Each would not be representing an individual goal at that time.  Since each entity has an individual model and is contained within a collective model, the complexity and processing needs of the simulation increase dramatically.  To account for the resource demands without sacrificing performance, the processing must be distributed.  To address these conditions, the virtual simulation environment must be architected with the following constraints in mind:Visualization Capability:  To fully immerse an individual within the virtual environment, the system must have a realistic representation of the training space. Individual Behavior:  Each automated entity must contain its own memory based on cultural, sociological and psychological values, possess the ability to receive stimuli and react to those stimuli, contain its own goals and plan accordingly, and have cognitive, decision-making capabilities. Collective Behavior:  At some point, individuals will act as a group, and the flexibility must exist to group individuals together to form a collective task. Adaptability:  The system will be responding to multiple soldiers’ actions within the virtual environment and must adapt accordingly based on the participants’ responses. Communications Framework:  Each entity must have the capability to communicate either with the live participants or with the virtual entities realistically. Processing Resources:  Increasing the realism of the virtual environment by having individual entities displayed with their own emotions and memory will add tremendous strain upon the processing resources needed for the simulated environment.  To construct this effectively, the environment must address the processing difficulties.Before a successful implementation geared toward MOOTW behaviors, these constraints must be fully considered and addressed.summaryThe changes in the collective world environment since the conclusion of the Cold War have prompted the United States military to change its operations from those of force-on-force combat to those characterized as Military Operations Other Than War.  Unlike conventional warfare that focuses on large-scale and sustained combat actions, MOOTW is generally typified by deterring of war, resolution of conflicts, peacekeeping operations, and support of civil authorities, in addition to occasional combat operations.  Because of the extreme diversity of parameters involved with MOOTW, decision-making processes evolve into behemoth problems.  As one might expect, this reality only makes training for MOOTW that much more difficult than training for conventional military operations.Several efforts have been made to deal with MOOTW in simulation and training.  Those efforts have included, but are not limited to development with both ModSAF and its successor OTB, DEXES, SPECTRUM, JCATS, and with IMPRINT.  While all of these simulations have proven their worth to the modeling, simulation and training communities, they fail to address some of the most crucial aspects of modeling MOOTW.  In general, their status of being constructive simulations instead of virtual simulations immediately hurts their effectiveness for MOOTW simulation and training.In an effort to address this difficult quandary, this paper has not only explained the elements that comprise MOOTW and their challenges with real examples, but has also attempted to provide architectural considerations for implementing MOOTW behaviors for the purpose of training.  Among those considerations are: 1.) available processing power and memory for behavior modeling; 2.) communication protocols; 3.) operational goals; 4.) aggregate and disaggregate behavior concerns; 5.) modeling of human emotions for both friendly and opposition entities; and, 6.) capacities to learn for individual entities.  Each of these considerations individually and collectively influence the development of an architecture that can effectively model the situations and behaviors required to successfully train for MOOTW.Future ideasAT&T has begun attacking the issues stated in this paper, starting first with an intensive survey study into the issues regarding MOOTW.  It has been meticulously established that to accurately model the components necessary for MOOTW, a firm understanding of the problems involved with such operations must be fashioned.  To further the progress, AT&T has designed a behavior engine intended to manage the intricate matters concerned with these extraordinary types of operations.  Like other behavior implementations, this engine has three tiers, with each layer responsible for a different level of the cognitive process.  The behavior engine also built on a Parallel, Discrete Event Simulation (PDES) engine.  PDES eliminates waste of computing resources, promotes exercise repeatability, correctness, and causality, and allows the intensive processing necessary for the complex MOOTW behaviors to be distributed across multiple nodes [14].  This work firmly lays the foundation required to deal with the MOOTW behaviors that will be necessary to effectively train for the world environment of the new century.references[1] “Joint Doctrine for Military Operations Other Than War,”  HYPERLINK "http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/jel/new_pubs/jp3_07.pdf" http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/jel/new_pubs/jp3_07.pdf.[2] Gray-Briggs, Abigail and Lt. Col. Michael MacIver, USAF, “Bombs, Then Bandages – Preparing the War Fighter for the Sojourn to Peacekeeping,” Airpower Journal, Summer 1999.[3] Powell, Colin L., “U.S. Forces: Challenges Ahead,”  HYPERLINK "http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/military/force/powell.html" http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/military/force/powell.html.[4] Campbell, Charlotte H., Kathleen A. Quinkert, and Billy L. Burnside, “Training for Performance: The Structured Training Approach,”  HYPERLINK "http://www.ari.army.mil/pdf/structuretr09-00.pdf" http://www.ari.army.mil/pdf/structuretr09-00.pdf.[5] Metzger, Paul J., Paul T. Barham, and Joanne L. Metzger, “Soldier Visualization Station,” 1997 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 8-12, 1997, Orlando, FL.[6] Alfaro, J., “Fact Sheet,” Subject: Deployable Exercise System (DEXES),  HYPERLINK "http://www.msiac.dmso.mil/ootw_documents/DEXESFactSheet.doc" http://www.msiac.dmso.mil/ootw_documents/DEXESFactSheet.doc.[7] Barry, Philip S., Paul Blemberg, and Michael Loesekann, “Modeling Operations Other Than War/Complex Contingency Operations,” 2001 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 25-30, 2001, Orlando, FL.[8] Bowers, Andy and David L. Prochnow, “JTLS-JCATS: Design of a Multi-Resolution Federation for Multi-Level Training,” 2002 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 8-13, 2002, Orlando, FL.[9] Hoagland, David G., Adward A. Martin, Ph.D., Bryan E. Brett, “The Combat Automation Requirements Testbed (CART) Program: Improving the DoD’s Requirements Process Through Inclusion of Realistic Operator Performance,” 2000 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 17-22, 2000, Orlando, FL.[10] “IMPRINT – Improved Performance Research Integration Tool,”  HYPERLINK "http://www.arl.army.mil/ARL-Directorates/HRED/imb/imprint/imprint.htm" http://www.arl.army.mil/ARL-Directorates/HRED/imb/imprint/imprint.htm.[11] Allen, Robert H., “Asymmetric Warfare: Is the Army Ready?”  HYPERLINK "http://www.amsc.belvoir.army.mil/asymmetric_warfare.htm" http://www.amsc.belvoir.army.mil/asymmetric_warfare.htm[12] “Operation Restore Hope,”  HYPERLINK "http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/ops/restore_hope.htm" http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/ops/restore_hope.htm.[13] Allen, Maj. Robert D., “Lessons from Somalia:  The DILEMMA OF Peace Enforcement,”  HYPERLINK "http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/report/1997/Allen.htm" http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/report/1997/Allen.htm.[14] von der Lippe, Sonia R. and Bradley C. Schricker, “Training the Soldier for OOTW,” GameOn 2002, November 28-29, 2002, London, United Kingdom.