FORUM NAME: CIGI SGChairRonald G. MooreVice ChairWillard B PhelpsSecretaryMichael Butterworth1.  Objectives for this Workshop:The purpose of the Common Image Generator Interface (CIGI) Study Group (SG) meeting is to kick off an activity to evaluate industry and government interest in developing a standard image generator interface. 2.  Comments and Recommendations:- There has been earlier DIS/SIW interest in developing a standard image generator interface.  Earlier attempts include CLIP, OpenScene and VBI.  Many vendors have proprietary interfaces.  The question is: should SISO development/promote an industry image generator standard.- Some attendees wondered why now. Factors include the Navy interest in CIGI (making it a requirement for new programs), Boeing’s open source approach (CIGI source code available free), increasing number of IG vendors, market migration to commercial hardware, software only IGs, and government’s push to lower acquisition and maintenance costs.- Some attendees wonder if SISO is the correct organization for an interface standard internal to a simulator.  Other organizations like SIGGRAPH were suggested.- The study group will survey government and industry to assess interest in an image generator standard.- The survey will include questions regarding what kind of standard should be perused, if interested in a standard.- The study group will consider other organizations to sponsor CIGI.- The study group will identify the intended recipients for an image generator interface standard.- The study group will provide a recommendation to proceed to CIGI Product Develop Group (PDG) or terminate discussions due to lack of interest/value/need/…Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)12Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)15Peak attendance (including joint sessions) (IO-ISR)n/aTotal papers presented0“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions1Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations): N/A