SENSORS Forum (SENS)ChairRobert McDonaldVice ChairAnnette Janette (in absentia)Secretary(None)Objectives for this Workshop:1. Hear presentations pertaining to Sensors in the context of Space, Naval, Air, NBC, and Simulation Architecture Domains.2. Identify papers that are valuable in describing the environmental noise and losses that sensors experience.Comments and Recommendations:1.	NOAA has database of Space Environment data that will be valuable for M&S community to tap Database is accessible on the WebNOAA asking for feedback on the types of data being provided2.	Elements of the space M&S community are developing computationally efficient satellite position calculationsa)	M&S community should establish benchmarks for comparison of the algorithmsb)	There was interest in the algorithm developer making the code available to other US government agencies3.     	The paper: The Development of an Acoustic Transmission Loss Data Base for the Joint Warfare System (JWARS) using MIV described a medium fidelity database of transmission loss approximations. This is a valuable contribution to approximating undersea transmission loss associated with active acoustic sensors. Other DOD simulation projects should look into leveraging this work or establishing an interoperable interface to the data.4. 	The paper: A Software Environment for Compose-able Chemical Sensor Simulations described a clever approach to bounding the uncertainties associated with sensor performance in a multidimensional variable space.5.  Recommend establishing incentives for SISO paper presenters to follow through with their commitments.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)10Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)25Peak attendance (including joint sessions) (Train/C4I)60Total papers presented7“No-show” presentations2Other presentations and panel discussions0Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations): 03F-SIW-105, 03F-SIW-116, 03F-SIW-95