8/10/2003Simulation Interoperability Standards OrganizationTerms of Referencefor theOpen Run-Time Infrastructure ProtocolStudy GroupBackgroundThe Open Run-Time Infrastructure (RTI) Protocol is a proposed communication and implementation standard for the High Level Architecture (HLA) RTI.  Message formats and data handling algorithms for RTI services are encapsulated in an open, message-based protocol. The Study Group will investigate the applicability of the Open RTI Protocol, facilitating interoperability between RTI implementations and promoting Research and Development (R&D). The Study Group will solicit government, academia and industry for feasibility and prototyping efforts.The Open RTI Protocol Study Group builds upon the findings of the previous RTI Interoperability Study Group to investigate methods of improving RTI interoperability.99F-SIW-001 - RTI Interoperability Study Group Final Report“We must develop a means by which different RTIs can talk to each other – we need to be able to have heterogeneous RTIs. Heterogeneous interoperability is good; its good from a cost-effective standpoint, it's good from a competition standpoint, it's good from the standpoint of community growth.”Study Group ObjectivesThe Study Group will address the following questions:What are the problems caused by proprietary RTI communication protocols?What is the possible utility of an Open RTI Protocol in addressing these problems?Is the simulation community interested in supporting the Open RTI Protocol?How can the Open RTI Protocol be used to support HLA RTI Research and Development?How does the Open RTI Protocol impact simulation interoperability?Should the Open RTI Protocol investigation evolve into a SISO balloted product?TasksEnlist interested SISO members in the Open RTI Protocol study groupDraft the initial Open RTI ProtocolPerform feasibility studies and prototypingProductsPreliminary Report		Spring 2004 SIWFinal Report			Fall 2004 SIWOpen RTI Protocol Draft	Fall 2004 SIWPerformance PeriodFall 2003 SIW to Fall 2004 SIWParticipationLevel of effort for participation in the Study Group is estimated at 2 hours per month over the next year to support teleconferences, emails and document reviews.  The Study Group will meet face to face at the following events:Fall 2003 SIW		KickoffI/ITSEC 2003		???Spring 2004 SIW	Preliminary ReportFall 2004 SIW		Final Report & Open RTI Protocol DraftNameOrganizationKevin AlixScientific Solutions Inc.Dwight DragerScientific Research CorporationSteven DrakeBoeingJohn FaySverdrup Technology/TEAS GroupBrent GoodwinSPARTADon GordonBlue Sky Computer SystemsGary HallGeneral Dynamics Decision SystemsFrank HillSDS InternationalThomas HollandNSWC TEAMSTim JonesBoeingRajive JoshiReal-Time InnovationsReed LittleSoftware Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon UniversityThom McLeanGeorgia Institute of TechnologyKevin MullallyGeneral Dynamics Decision SystemsChuck PeabodyPEO STRIJohn WoodyardAFRL/IFSC