Medical Planning: Requirements vs. Capability-Based Decision MakingJoan M. BishopRay HaemeWalter “Chip” JansenBooz Allen Hamilton8283 Greensboro DriveMcLean VA, 22102703-902-5579, 703-902-3983, 703-902-4962bishop_joan@bah.com, haeme_ray@bah.com, jansen_walter@bah.com,Keywords:Medical Planning, Requirements, CapabilityABSTRACT: The current approach to medical planning and medical force structure decisions is based on traditional resource requirement calculations.  Often the services use a variety of approaches, based on casualty rates, to determine what their medical resource requirements will be for a given operation.  Yet, in this approach there exists uncertainty or inaccuracy in the underlying data, especially in the determination of casualty rates, which can severely impact the accuracy of the results.  As medical technology advances and METT (Mission, Enemy, Terrain, Tactics) factors change, military medical planners need the means by which to offset the uncertainty inherent in requirements-based planning to be able to accurately assess risks, given the medical assets employed in an operation.Capabilities-based planning allows the medical planner to describe the contribution of medical capabilities to the throughput of expected casualties.  By looking at the inter-relationships of medical assets and their ability to address multiple issues, medical planners can gain a better understanding for how medical assets can function within the operational framework.  Additionally, the planner can use the capability of each medical asset as a building block for achieving a level of patient throughput for the medical architecture when deployed in support of an operation.1. Introduction“Consequence management is defined as measures to protect public health and safety, restore essential government services and provide emergency relief to government, businesses and individuals affected by the consequences of [WMD] agents. The a priori objective of consequence management is to provide timely, appropriate, and effective support in order to save lives, relieve suffering and assist in the mitigation of the further harm to an affected population”Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 2001Medical planning is a form of consequence management in that it strives to minimize the impact of an event, conventional or otherwise, on a given population.Medical planning is also the process by which individuals can gauge what the medical response should be in terms of resources to treat patients, relieve human suffering and build sufficient collective assets to handle affected populations – both military and civilian.Historically, medical planning has been accomplished based on the perceived need or patient requirement.  Through varying analysis methods, a set of patients is determined and from that set of patients a level of required medical support is derived.  The problem though does not lie in the models used to generate these requirements, but rather in the data that is input into them.  Often times this data is fraught with uncertainty and can even be inaccurate for the scenario being examined.The issue of force health protection continues to be a driving factor in the way military operations are planned. In addition, greater emphasis is placed on responding to conventional and unconventional attacks on civilian populations.  Hence, the way medical planning is accomplished needs to evolve beyond the current paradigm. A shift is needed in order to minimize the inherent uncertainties within existing data and to provide a better means of determining the risks involved in supporting a given scenario or operation.The purpose of this paper is to address this paradigm shift by examining the current medical planning process and exploring a viable alternative to the current approach.2. Requirements-Based Planning – The Current Medical Planning Methodology2.1 Requirements Planning Process OverviewThe current approach to medical planning and medical force structure decisions is often based on resource requirements calculations, as depicted in Figure 1 below.  A population a risk (PAR) is determined or known for a given operation or scenario.  To this PAR a casualty rate is applied.  A casualty rate is a ratio of the number of persons in a given population that will become patients as a function of the total PAR.  Often times, this rate is expressed in terms of patients per thousand PAR per day. Planners look at two separate categories, a Wounded In Action rate (WIA) and a Disease/Non-Battle Injury rate (DNBI).  Through the application of these rates to the specific PAR a set of patients expected per day can be derived.  Next, sets of descriptive factors, which describe how patients will be treated and moved throughout the medical treatment network, are applied.  These factors describe how long a patient requires treatment at a given facility, what type of bed a patient needs, and what are the restrictions on evacuating a patient, among others.  Once these factors are applied to the patients, the medical planner can then determine the requirements, in terms of number beds, physicians and evacuation needs, for a given scenario or operation.  This process can then be repeated using a different set descriptive factors, rates or a different population at risk to look at the requirements for a different scenario or operation.2.2 What’s Wrong With This Process?The problem with the process outlined in Section 2.1 is not with the process itself, as it calculates requirements with precision given the data inputs, but rather in the data that is input into the process.Often times the data used in requirements-based planning comes with a high degree of uncertainty, especially determining the casualty rates to employ against a given PAR.  In addition, patients are often described in terms of patient categories (i.e., wounded in action, disease, battle fatigue, non-battle injuries) rather than a specific patient condition (e.g., fracture-spine, closed-without cord damage; unstable lesion) and thus the descriptive factors used are typically weighted averages. It is these uncertainties and averages that impair this process.For example, a medical planner must estimate the number of casualties (using a rate) that will result from a future engagement, either conventional or non-conventional.  Typically this is done by one of two methods.The first method involves running a computer simulation that simulates either a force-on-force engagement or something similar for those scenarios that are not a typical force-on-force engagement.   The second method involves looking at historical encounters and the casualty rates these encounters lend themselves to, as shown in Figure 2 below.In both cases, assumptions are made about how a particular scenario or operation will unfold.  For example, suppose a planner assumes that for a particular scenario patients will be generated in the same quantities that were experienced during WWII.  If a computer model is then used to generate the expected casualty rates, similar assumptions are made as inputs to the model.  Inputs such as which forces will be in place at that time, how well protected they will be, where they will be located, which weapons the enemy will use, etc.  Yet rarely does any operation or scenario play out as planned or intended.   Unexpected circumstances and the fog of war have major impacts on how an operation or scenario unfolds.  Thus, there is no way to precisely predict how many soldiers will be wounded – similar to the fact that there is no precise way to predict the lottery numbers that will be selected later tomorrow.  We’ll know tomorrow, but we do not know for sure today. Yet, both planners and operators rely heavily upon these models and calculated rates and in the process sacrifice accuracy for precision.Another example of this paradox is Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF). Prior to OIF, several assessments were made on the strength of the Iraqi forces versus the strength of the coalition forces. From these assessments it was determined that there would be stiff resistance and that, at least initially, casualty rates would be extremely high.  The threat was also very high that Saddam Hussein would use weapons of mass destruction (WMD).  This made the expected levels of casualties predicted higher.Given this assessment, medical planners planned for a large medical presence in theater, ready to treat the number of expected patients, based on the projected levels of casualties, as well as any WMD injuries.  Yet as the war unfolded, the stiff resistance to coalition forces never materialized.  Most coalition forces moved relatively un-opposed and those that did encounter resistance did not suffer near the expected casualty numbers.  In addition, there were no WMD casualties at all (as of publish date).  In the end, the casualty rate for the entire operation was far less then what was expected.  The result of this drastic difference was an over capacity of medical capability that was never fully utilized or required for the operation.  Now this is by no means the fault of the medical planners for the operation or the requirements generation model used to calculate the number of beds and resources needed.  The planners simply took the expected casualty rates for the operation and planned accordingly.  They followed the process faithfully and arrived at an accurate answer for the given conditions and input data.  The problem was, the operation didn’t go as planned.  The stiff resistance never materialized and the actual casualty rates were far less then what was expected.  Thus, the data employed was not an accurate representation of what really happened.  But the planners did not know that until after the operation had completed and the actual casualty figures were measured.This type of problem becomes even more exaggerated when medical planning moves away from military scenarios into civilian scenarios.  Unlike the military, there exists very little historical casualty data for civilians.  What’s more, the types of threats civilians face can be vastly different then those faced by military personnel, as does the health of the civilian population versus our military forces.  Our fighting forces are healthier and in better shape than the civilian population.To add an even further wrinkle to this dilemma is the threat of WMD.   Today, there exists some data to support determining civilian casualty rates for conventional weapons or disasters, yet there is no data available to determine casualty rates for a WMD event for either civilian or military populations.  This now reduces the whole process to nothing more than an educated guess.  What options did the medical planner have in planning for OIF?  He or she could have planned for the worst case (as they did) or they could have taken a risk that the casualties would not have been that high and planned for a lesser amount of health service support.  If they had been wrong, the consequences could have been severe and we all would have seen the results on CNN.Given the uncertainty of the casualty rates, and the risk of not having adequate health service support for a planned operation, what is a military medical planner to do to build a more accurate, less risky plan?3.  Capability-Based Planning – A Better Way to Plan3.1 Capability-Based Planning Process OverviewCapability-based planning (CBP) constitutes a transformation to the medical planning and force structure decision-making process by shifting the focus away from calculating accurate casualty rates for an operation or scenario.  Rather, the focus is placed on developing and analyzing various capabilities in order to understand the relationships between capabilities and how to maximize their potential patient throughput.  An additional focus is on analyzing the risk of having varying levels of capability and developing courses of action for how to augment capability when the initial planned levels are inadequate.CBP allows a medical planner to describe the contribution of medical capabilities to the throughput of casualties by using a building block approach to create a medical operational architecture with a given level of patient throughput, as illustrated in Figure 3.Finally, CBP takes the focus off defining a medical operational architecture for an expected, predicted demand and places it instead on the capabilities a particular medical architecture provides.  Where as in requirements- based planning the focus is squarely on the expected demand and defining it to as high of a degree as possible, CBP focuses on the capabilities of a medical operational architecture and allows a medial planner to consider those capabilities that are not demand driven and to capture their relationship to the other capabilities.  Service-specific capabilities can also be highlighted and utilized more effectively.3.2 Defining the DemandEven though the focus of capability-based planning is not specifically on the demand, it is still an important issue.  After all, what good is a medical operational architecture if it doesn’t meet the demand placed upon it?  However, we’ve already shown that simply trying to meet a perceived demand, based on a predicted casualty rate is a flawed process.  So how do we address the issue of defining a medical architecture using CBP without falling into the same data uncertainty trap that we find ourselves in with requirements-based planning?We begin by recognizing the fact that casualties, for a given scenario or operation, will vary daily due to METT (Mission, Enemy, Terrain, Tactics) factors.  So rather than try to pick a demand level and building an architecture around it, we instead model the casualty situation as a probability distribution.In Figure 4, we have a notional casualty distribution based upon a sample operation.  The x-axis is a measure of the demand, in terms of number of patient generates per day per 1000 PAR, and the y-axis is the likelihood of a specific casualty rate occurring.  Now while such a distribution is purely subjective, it is no more subjective than trying to pinpoint an exact casualty rate.  This approach provides us with a much better view of what may or may not occur for a given scenario or operation.From this probability distribution it is now possible to generate a cumulative probability distribution as shown in Figure 5 below (all values are notional). Once the cumlative probability distribution is generated, the medical planner can then begin to not only quantify the demand but also begin to associate that demand with a likelihood that it will occur.  Here, the medical planner must collaborate with operational planners and other sources to determine how the operation will be carried out.  This allows the medical planner to perform a risk assessment for the operation.3.3 Quantifying the RisksBy injecting the probability dimension into estimating the expected casualty workload, it is now possible to perform a risk trade off analysis against the medical architecture.Let’s assume that the given capability of medical resources for a planned operation is similar to the one displayed in Figure 6.It starts with a 200 patient throughput capacity for the first 6 days of a scenario and then increases to 400 for days 7 through 14 before finally reaching its maximum capability of 800 on day 15.If the cumulative probability distribution is now overlaid against the time in Figure 7, the planner can begin to understand what the risks are to the medical architecture.    Where the expected number/level of casualties exceeds the total capacity of the architecture on any given day or days, the medical planner must evaluate the risk to the patient, the medical treatment facility, the commander, and the operation itself.  The planner must also analyze ways to minimize these risks.  Figure 8, provides a different look at this comparison.The key is to identify what the most likely ranges of casualty outcomes will be and then compare these ranges against the expected capability for each day of the operation.  From there, the operational risks can be assessed by determining how much capability will be exceeded by day and at what points in the scenario or operation, as well as what can be done to remedy the deficiencies.   This is illustrated below in Figure 9.3.4 Assessing the Overall Operational ArchitectureFrom the previous two sections, it could be assumed that capability-based planning is just a means to simply quantify the risks associated with the uncertainty of casualty rates. Yet, such an assessment would be shortsighted. Medically supporting an operation or scenario is more then just an exercise in determining the number of people wounded or the maximum throughput capacity that exists.  A major goal is to take a multitude of services and functions and have them operating in a single unified architecture.Medical planning needs to take diverse elements such as patient treatment, patient movement, supply logistics, and personnel, and have them work in a harmony with one another throughout the entire scenario.  Such coordination and insight is only possible through capability-based planning. For example:  A single functional entity, such as a hospital bed, is not, by itself, a capability.  Rather, a capability is a collections of elements (e.g., people, processes, hardware/software, equipment, other medical supplies), assembled according to function, within a well defined, scalable architecture (e.g., A hospital).  Yet, requirements-based planning would have the planner focus on simply the number of beds, where as capability-based planning would have the planner focus not only on the beds, but on everything that is related to supporting a patient in a bed.Additionally, knowing that a specific capability exists to treat patients is not enough.  After all, it doesn’t define how patients are getting there, or what happens when the bandages run out or what to do if suddenly half of the staff becomes incapacitated due to illness. All of these possibilities affect the patient throughput of the medical capability.To answers these question, the planner must observe and analyze at a higher level; looking at how each medical capability interacts within the context of an overarching operational architecture. By doing so, the planner can begin to understand the larger picture in terms of supporting the operation medically. The planner can look at elements such as patient movement and see where the bottlenecks are.  The planner can make adjustments to the patient flow and move patients from an over-utilized facility to an under- utilized facility.  Adjustments can be made based on the actual number and types of evacuation assets available.  The planner can also plan out supply logistics support to ensure that each patient treatment facility is adequately supplied.  In short, the planner can begin to describe the over-arching medical capability of the operational architecture and the contribution of medical assets and entities to the desired level of capability.Such definitions are important as they allow the planner to tailor the medical capability of the operational architecture to the specific operation or scenario.  After all, treating patients from WMD attack in a major urban center is different then treating patients from a force-on- force engagement, even if the exact same capabilities and patients are present.In addition, by defining how these capabilities interact with one another, at varying degrees of fidelity, the medical planner can move away from looking at just one variable (e.g, casualty rates or beds) and begin analyzing multiple variables (e.g, functionality, interoperability, cost, schedule, performance, and other Measures of Effectiveness) within the structured architectural framework. This not only gives the medical planner a greater understanding of what is happening with the medical network, but also allows the planner to weigh the risks and impact to the architecture for a variety of throughput demands and to look for synergistic relationships amongst it components in order to make adjustments or improvements.Finally, each medical asset’s functionality is treated as a building block - helping to achieve a level of throughput for the medical operational architecture when deployed.  But a firm understanding of an asset’s contribution to the architectures’ capacity goals also serves as a tool for identifying critical gaps and overlaps in functionality.  Many times, multiple systems contribute the same capability.  By looking at the capability architecture of a medical network, it is possible to determine if this redundancy is needed or unnecessary overlap that could free up procurement dollars, free up critical space within the asset or free up resources during an operation.  In addition, this method of planning allows for the examination of capabilities that have no supporting assets and would allow medical planners to begin addressing those needs.While it is true that not every capability is demand driven, it is also true there will always be unique service requirements and mission specific demands.   Such items can readily be captured within a capability-based architecture and their relationship to other capabilities, both within and outside the architecture, studied.4. SummaryThe current process by which medical planning is done is sound, however it suffers from an inherent uncertainty.  A key set of data elements – casualty rates – is dependent upon medical technology advances and METT factors.  These uncertainties can lead to, at best, an over-statement of the required medical support and, at worst, an understatement. What’s more, requirements-based planning is narrowly focused on simply meeting the demands of a derived, predicted casualty rate and offers very little insight into the risks to the medical architecture or to what its capacity is.Capability-based planning, on the other hand, while acknowledging the importance of casualty rates, does not focus on these rates.  Rather, it focuses on the capability of the medical operational architecture to move patients through it. CBP looks not to a single defined casualty rate, but rather the probability that a given casualty rate will occur.  It then overlays this probability, using a cumulative demand profile, to determine what the probability is that a given amount of casualties will be generated that exceed the capacity of the medical architecture.This then leads to defining levels of risk associated with the given capability of a medical architecture.  These risks can then be quantified different ways by looking at the impact to not just a single functional entity (e.g., beds or staff), but rather multiple functional entities and their relationship with one another.  With quantified risks, the medical planner can then begin the process of mitigating them, either by attempting to increase the capability of the architecture or by producing other contingency plans.  Finally, the medical planner can perform what-if analyses against the risks, by tweaking the relationships between the functional entities in the architecture and observing how any modifications impact the architecture throughput capacity.In summary, the current approach to medical planning needs to evolve and transform to a new approach.  Medical planners are reluctant to shift away from the requirements-based approach.  By transforming the requirements-based approach into a capabilities-based approach will eliminate the risks of trying to predict casualty rates and then planning around the estimates that those casualty predictions.  Booz Allen Hamilton continues to study this new approach and present it to key members of the military medical community.5. References[1]	CDR Pietro D. Marghella: “Medical Planning Considerations in Consequence Management”, Frontiers of Health Services Management. [2]	Joan Bishop, Cynthia Lundstrom: “Transforming from Requirements-based vs Capabilities-based Medical Planning by Utilizing a Medical Operational Architecture”, Booz Allen Hamilton. [3]	Ray Haeme, Joan Bishop: “Medical Planning  Requirements vs Capability Planning”, Booz Allen Hamilton. 6. BiographiesJoan M. Bishop is a Senior Associate with Booz Allen Hamilton.  She has work for over 15 years in the medical planning community helping not only to develop medical planning tools such as the Medical Analysis Tool (MAT), but also to shape the processes and methodologies that are used today.  She is considered a subject matter expert (SME) in military medical planning and readiness.  Ms. Bishop leads a team of software engineers in developing IT tools for this market.Raymond Haeme is a Principle with Booz Allen Hamilton. Mr. Haeme has over thirty-five years professional experience in military operations and logistics and more than thirty years experience applying operations research to both military and commercial logistics operations.  Mr. Haeme leads a team offering solutions to problems in logistics operations. His efforts have provided analytical and integrated software solutions to improve logistics operations in both military and commercial settings, worldwide.Walter “Chip” Jansen is an Associate with Booz Allen Hamilton.  He has worked for over 5 years with the military medical planning community developing automated planning tools and planning methodologies.  He teaches the Medical Analysis Tool (MAT) portion of the Joint Medical Planners Course and routinely travels out to the various combatant commands to assist them in their operational planning.Figure 1Figure 2Figure 3SAMPLE DATAFigure 4SAMPLE DATAFigure 5Figure 6Figure 7Figure 8Figure 9