Medical Modeling and Simulation Interoperability Study GroupKick-Off Meeting at SISO Simulation Interoperability Workshop18 September 2003Orlando, FLSGMedical Modeling and Simulation Interoperability (MM&S Interoperability)DateThursday 18 September13:30 – 18:00VenueHoliday Inn Hotel, Largo RoomOrlando, FLOrganizerWilliam C BeavinVoice(781) 643-0651Cell(617) 921-3931 Fax(781) 643-0654Home(617) 945-1955Emailwilliam.c.beavin@boeing.comURLAttendeesOrganizationEmail/PhoneStudy Group PositionBill BeavinBoeing HYPERLINK "mailto:william.c.beavin@boeing.com" william.c.beavin@boeing.com ChairRick SeveringhausDynamic Animation Systems HYPERLINK "mailto:Rick.severinghaus@d-a-s.com" Rick.severinghaus@d-a-s.com (o) 757 412 4577(m) 757 348 4709Vice Chair/ MemberKen CurleyU.S. Army TATRC (MRMC-AT) HYPERLINK "mailto:curley@tatrc.org" curley@tatrc.org301-353-9240Vice Chair/ MemberSean MurphyJHU/APLsean.murphy@jhuapl.eduSecretaryHarvey MageeU.S. Army TATRC HYPERLINK "mailto:magee@tatrc.org" magee@tatrc.org301-619-4002TATRC repGerry Moses(not present)U.S. Army, TATRC HYPERLINK "mailto:moses@tatrc.org" moses@tatrc.org301-619-4000TATRC repJim CoolahanJHU/APL HYPERLINK "mailto:James.Coolahan@jhuapl.edu" James.Coolahan@jhuapl.eduSusann LuperfoyStottler Henke Associates HYPERLINK "mailto:luperfoy@stottlerhenke.com" luperfoy@stottlerhenke.comLiaison to Intelligent Training Systems (ITS)Rick Sharpsharpre@ameritech.netSandra FowlerU.S. Army RDECOMSandra_Fowler@peostri.army.milGene Wiehagen Gene_Wiehagen@peostri.army.milMeetingOverviewThe MED FOM Study Group had its inaugural meeting at the fall 2003 SIW.   Medical simulation systems have unique technical, operational, and regulatory requirements and serve a broad array of users and customers. Medical simulation increasingly needs interoperability standards that build upon already extensive medical interface standards.  The purpose of the Study Group is to identify by major category the full range of M&S applications needed by the healthcare community and to define, in the context of these applications, the relevant information exchange requirements.  The Study Group will recommend establishment of SISO Product Development Groups, to begin the formulation of new standards to fill identified gaps. Meeting ObjectivesThe major goals for this meeting were to:Overview state of Medical Modeling and Simulation from the perspective of TATRCCategorize MM&S into functional areas.Identify significant gaps in the existence of M&S interface standards, for which having such standards would improve the interoperability of live, virtual, and constructive medical models and simulations.Discuss desired study group objectives.Determine potential next steps and time frame for the study group.Elect officersComments,  Recommendations, and ResultsRick Sharp, as Track Manager, reviewed history of Medical Track and formation of the Fall SIW Planning and Review Panel (Bill Beavin and Gerry Moses co-chaired). Noted that Medical is important both as an industry (size of market) and as a SISO group (this is a “test case” of starting an entirely new track with new study groups, etc).  Introduced Gene Wiehagen as our Technical Area Director.  Rick Severinghaus offered to assist the group with his considerable experience.  A repeated theme was that this is all so new to people and there are so few people from the medical realm participating, that concentrating on a FOM/BOM at this point might be premature.  Instead, consider this as the start of a medical track and build from there.  One goal will be to increase participation of MM&S community over next couple SIW’s. Harvey Magee and Ken Curley provided an excellent historical perspective of MM&S from the experience of the Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center (TATRC).  It was suggested by several people at several points that TATRC should have the same kind of leadership role in medical M&S that DMSO has had in other areas of M&S within SISO.  The suggestion was basically TATRC should “drive the bus” regarding interactions with medical M&S industry and what could/should be standardized.  SISO could provide experience and framework within which standards can be developed.The group discussed the need to assess the MM&S community to determine what things have been standardized (e.g. HL-7 and SNOMED)by whomwhat groups are trying to standardizewhat are their underlying motivationswhat are the market drivers behind interoperabilitywhat people feel needs to be standardizedIt was reiterated that SISO isn’t an “HLA organization” but a standards organization, and thus if another high-level standard is needed within MED, then the SISO organization is capable of helping with that.  The fact that standardization can be immensely expensive in money and time was discussed, and in this context long time SISO members stated that two of the valuable benefits of SISO participation is it, as an organization, already has a considerable wealth of experience and work on M&S standards, and, as a group of practitioners, much of SISOs work is, and has been, done by volunteers. Dr. Coolahan suggested that because MM&S is so broad, that we, as a Study Group, first consider vectors and standards for simulation for training and education (vs. straying off into biomolecular modeling for discovery research, etc) and defining existing object models. (e.g. what Sean Murphy has done)MM&S was categorized into three broad, functionally-defined categories:Training/EducationResearchLogistics AnalysisIt was mentioned that although the initial focus of the MM&S Interoperability SG would be on MM&S for Medical and Surgical Training, the SG’s efforts would also attempt to take into account MM&S for research.  The increasing need for higher physiological fidelity in MM&S for training/education can potentially drive these two currently separate areas to overlap and merge (thus requiring interoperability).It was agreed to change the Study Group name to “Medical Modeling and Simulation Interoperability Study Group” or “MM&S Interoperability SG” to better capture the group’s focus.Some groups have already begun work on addressing open standards for MM&S such as the Open Med Sim group at CIMIT ( HYPERLINK "http://www.openmedsim.org/" http://www.openmedsim.org/).  This work could form the basis of more extensive and formalized standardization efforts or at least provide a starting point.The Terms of Reference were briefly addressed.  The group leadership agreed to complete this via email/reflector discussion after the meeting. Officers were elected.It was suggested that one of the potential next steps is to have TATRC gently request the research groups and corporations that it work with attend the Spring 2004 SIW to foster a more open, effective, and inclusive MM&S Interoperability standards dialog.  It was also mentioned that the only way this effort could be successful was with considerable input and participation by the relevant MM&S community.Next StepsGenerate MM&S Interoperability SG outbrief (Ken?).Generate MM&S Interoperability SG meeting minutes (Sean).Set up reflector on SISO website (Bill?).Near-term telcon to determine additional next steps and action items.Survey the existing MM&S for Medical and Surgical Training community to determine (TATRC?)Relevant industry, government, and academic leaders and playersFunding sourcesExisting productsMarket factors and other industry drivers and motivationsFuture directions for this industry and technologyExisting and proposed standardsGroups developing new standardsOVERALL NEED FOR INTEROPERABILITY STANDARDSSurvey the existing MM&S for Research community to determine:Relevant industry, government, and academic leaders and playersFunding sourcesExisting simulationsMarket factors and other industry drivers and motivationsFuture directions for this industry and technologyExisting and proposed standardsGroups developing new standardsOVERALL NEED FOR INTEROPERABILITY STANDARDSActions for All Meeting AttendeesReview outbriefReview meeting notes Review draft of TORVisit SISO website and subscribe to SG reflector (http://www.sisostds.org/)SG Meeting Minutes 9/18/03		MM&S Interoperability