Generalized Representation of Space-Based PlatformsMatthew L. GorevinScience Applications International Corporation4901 D Corporate DriveHuntsville, AL 35805256-864-8205gorevinm@saic.comPerry FeuersteinUS Army Space and Missile Defense Command106 Wynn DriveHuntsville, AL 35807-3801256-955-1673perry.feuerstein@smdc.army.milFrank L. GroseScience Applications International Corporation4901 D Corporate DriveHuntsville, AL 35805256-864-8393grosef@saic.comLTC Eric P. HendersonUS Army Space and Missile Defense Command2525 Aviation WayColorado Springs, CO 80916719-554-2117eric.henderson@arspace.army.milSammy L. (Sam) McNullyCG2, a Quantum3D Company1525 Perimeter Parkway, Suite 325Huntsville, AL 35806256-705-5737smcnully@cg2.comKeywords:Space, Algorithm, Satellite Access, Circular LEO, SimulationABSTRACT:  Information from space plays increasingly significant roles in the military operations.  The information may originate from space-based systems or be relayed by space-based systems, but reasonable representation of military operations over any extended period of time must include some representations of space for communications or intelligence process to withstand scrutiny.  Traditional approaches to space simulation tend to include explicit representation of each satellite with payload(s) and position in space using traditional orbital mechanics.  Since traditional “game boards” for simulation represent less than 0.1 percent of the surface area of the earth, computational resources are best used for simulations of processes that impact training or analysis goals rather than propagation of satellites when they most assuredly cannot influence military operations in the area of interest.  This paper presents a non-propagational approach and potential standard for predicting satellite over-flight “events” and assesses reasonableness of the approach by comparing results to industry standard orbital mechanics simulations.1.  The Need for Realistic Space Representation in SimulationAdvances in space operations have greatly enhanced military capabilities over the last 15 years.  For example, compare the capabilities of the US forces in the last two Iraqi conflicts.  During Operation Desert Storm, the Army deployed only one Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver for each 180 deployed soldiers, but during Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) more than ten percent of the soldiers had GPS technology at their disposal [1]. The proliferation of GPS satellites enabled this leap-ahead in position awareness for US forces.  Further, in the first Persian Gulf War, approximately ten percent of the munitions were precision-guided; in the latest conflict approximately 68 percent were precision-guided [2].  Again, the availability of space-based systems provided the means to this end—the proliferation of space systems and the military operator’s exploitation of these space systems were the factors.But as military operators have taken great advantage of the advances in space capabilities, what has the military modeling and simulation community accomplished in the same time frame?  Unfortunately, the answer is not as much.  Why?  Because space operations representations are not accorded the same importance as other functional or operational representations in simulations.  Not until space events are fully incorporated in training and simulation events will the tactics, techniques, and proce-dures for different space events be developed.1.1 Learning Opportunities LostWhile the need to include the effects of space events in the Battle Command Training Program (BCTP) and Warfighter Exercises (WFX) has been documented for several years, space events during these training events remain internal to the Army Space Support Teams (ARSSTs) and other space-related agencies.  When space Master Scenario Events List (MSEL) events are executed, the teams analyze and assess the impact of these space events on the supported unit, its equipment, and/or systems.  When this information is presented to the appropriate staff leads (G2, G3, G6), more times than not, the question posed to the ARSST Leader is, "“Will this space event impact the outcome of the game?”  When told that space effects (1) aren’t represented in the WFX models and simulations (M&S), (2) are therefore internal to the space community, and (3) will not "hurt" the unit in the WFX if ignored, the G2 or G6 pragmatically turns to more pressing issues that are “played” in the WFX M&S and can impact the unit’s “score” in the wargame.The adage that “a unit only does well what the commander checks” holds true here.  With no penalty for ignoring space events in the WFX, the unit pragmatically does so and concentrates on performing well those BCTP-evaluated WFX events.  Thus, the opportunity to learn the lessons that will result in tactics, techniques and procedures for different space events is being lost.  Space is “off-line.”Figure 1.1.  Soldiers operating in featureless terrain quickly learn to rely on GPS for positional accuracy, but most current M&S depict all soldiers and combat systems as perfect navigators who never get lost, always report accurate positions, and always cross phase lines on time.As adversarial use of space and space-based systems continues to grow, the cost of violating the “train as you fight” doctrine becomes clear.  A recent example of this phenomenon comes from OIF.Iraqi Forces placed GPS jammers throughout the Baghdad area during OIF.  After detecting these jammers, an ARSST Leader nominated them at the targeting meeting, where these jammers were “racked and stacked” below the target cut line because the unit failed to completely appreciate the significance of this space event.  Once the unit noted the degraded geo-location capabilities of UAV(s), the commander understood the need to include space events in this targeting process.  The jammers were then targeted and destroyed.  Had events similar to this (i.e., jammers impacting operations and ramifications for doing nothing) been simulated in the WFX and similar training events, the unit’s reaction to these jammers would have been instinctively given the criticality of UAVs and location accuracy to the ability to satisfy the Commander’s Critical Information Require-ments (CCIRs) [3].The ability to train in a WFX rests primarily on the simulation tools available to the trainer charged with achieving the commander’s training objectives, so the solution to this training deficiency rests in obtaining the algorithms, models, and/or data necessary to inject or attach space to the tools available to the trainer.  Given the proper tools, America’s defenders always choose to “train as they fight” and then “fight as they’ve trained.”1.2 Analysts Struggle to Represent Space Using Today’s ToolsThe challenge for military analysts today is the continual need to develop “work arounds” to incorporate the use of space based assets in the existing force-on-force models.  While several “work arounds” have been developed [4], they are at best time-consuming, and at worst, terribly difficult to incorporate.  What is needed to overcome this is a future unifying architecture, one that incorporates the capabilities of space with explicit connections between the sensor-decisionmaker-shooter.  Not until such an architecture exists will the military analyst be able to devote more of his time analyzing the effect of different variables on the simulations, and less time on making the “work arounds” work.1.3 A Proposed Solution: Generalized Space RepresentationGiven that the military modeling and simulation (M&S) community has struggled to represent space adequately, we present an algorithm to help fill that need by modeling satellite-earth station visibility without propagation.  The need for such an algorithm arises from an implied criticism of orbital propagators in simulations, specifically, that they cannot keep pace with the simulations that are faster than real time, and thus, perpetuate the inability to model space in such a way that it is readily adaptable with simulation architecture and operations.  The circular argument goes like this:Army M&S does not model space adequatelySatellite visibility data is necessary to model space adequatelyPropagators provide satellite visibility data, but are too slow for many Army simulationsBecause propagators are too slow, the Army does not use them in these simulations.Therefore, since propagators are not used, the Army does not have the necessary satellite visibility data, and thus, does not model space adequately.Thus, a different method of representing space-based systems is needed.  This paper presents one of those methods for a very particular subset of space-based systems, the circular Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellite.  This algorithm provides a necessary step toward the unifying architecture desired by the Army M&S community.  In Section 2, we show the ubiquity of space satellite propagators and the relative ease of determining satellite-earth station visibility with a propagator.  In Section 3, we comment on the inefficiency of using these propagation techniques to support Army M&S efforts.  In Section 4, we describe an algorithm to determine satellite-earth station visibility without the use of a commercial propagator.  In Section 5, we compare our algorithm results to industry standard results.  Finally, in Section 6, we recommend future areas for study.2.  Propagators Provide Explicit Representation Finding a method to determine satellite-earth station line- of-sight (LOS) visibility poses no great difficulty.  There are several different orbital propagators available.  (Orbital propagation is a means of predicting future satellite position and velocity data given some initial conditions and assumptions [5].)  In fact, many web sites allow the user to enter his/her location, and by means of a propagator transparent to the user, return the existing satellites that are visible over the next several days.In the M&S community, we are likely to be more concerned with multiple earth station-multiple satellite access(es), for satellites that may or may not currently exist.  The single site, web-based propagators above are not designed for multiple earth station-satellite-future time period calculations, and thus are not suitable for military use.  But, other orbital propagators exist that are suitable for this manner of analysis.  In fact, a web search for “orbit propagation” returned 1,340 sites and a search for “orbit propagation software” returned 49 sites [6]; therefore, finding a propagator is not difficult.Depending on the propagator chosen, the user enters initial conditions about the earth station of interest (latitude, longitude and altitude), the satellite (orbital parameters such as inclination angle, type of orbit, altitude, or Two Line Element (TLE) data), and a time period of interest.  The propagator package will return the visibility access times and duration.  The algorithm used by the propagator varies depending on user input and the level of complexity necessary for the particular application.  For example, the algorithm can vary from a very simple two-body algorithm (earth is a sphere, and gravity is the only force acting on the satellite) to much more complex algorithms, which account for the earth’s oblateness, secular and periodic variations, solar and gravitational effects [5].One typically expects output in the form of a report or chart showing when the satellite-earth station access occurs.  Different propagation software packages extend that access data to include sensor access data.  That is, for a given satellite sensor and its parameters, we get output in the form of sensor-earth station access.Clearly, to accurately predict satellite-earth station LOS times, the best means will be to select an orbital propagator software package, input the parameters of interest, and determine the appropriate output values.  This method would be extremely satisfactory if we were concerned with a limited number of earth stations, satellites, and periods of interest.  The problem we face, however, is more complicated—Army simulations can consist of hundreds of terrestrial and airborne systems, dozens of satellites, and the scenario time period can extend for several days to months.  What method should we apply as the number of entities increases and the time period increases?  Practically, as the number of entities increases, the traditional propagating methods start to diverge from the needs of the simulation community.  That is, while an external propagator could provide the LOS accesses and durations to fixed locations, the propagator is unable to provide these in the frame required.  We show in the next section that using propagators is computationally inefficient, and hypoth-esize that this inefficiency is a major reason why space systems have not been incorporated into space M&S adequately.3.  Propagation InefficiencyBefore discussing the challenges of using propagating techniques to determine satellite-earth station LOS accesses, we should emphasize that our purpose is to enable the impact of space events in an Army simulation.  Accordingly, the accesses must be determined in a manner timely enough for inclusion in the simulation.  We want an algorithm that determines the satellite-earth station LOS events that can be accessed within the simulation and trigger future events.  That is, we seek to provide an entry into any of the simulation types (time step, event, or hybrid) so that for each simulation step, there can be a look up to see if an access has occurred, and if so, key other events, e.g., a LOS access keys a target observation event, which in turn, might trigger a decision to engage the target.  While propagating techniques can produce the LOS accesses, as the number of entities increase, at some point using them becomes inefficient—the calculations and the ephemeris data generated overwhelms the simulation.For example, consider the problem of determining when a single earth station is visible from a single satellite (assume a circular, 500-km altitude, 60( inclination orbit).  With a period of approximately 94 minutes, the satellite orbits the earth over 15 times per day.  With an earth station located at 30( latitude, there will be five different satellite-earth station access times per day.  The durations will last from 400-720 seconds, with an average duration of around 10 minutes.  On the average, then, in one day, there is a total of 50 minutes when there is satellite-earth station access.  Out of 1,440 minutes in the day—satellite-earth station access occurs only three percent of the time.Now consider that traditional propagators rely on time-stepped differential equations to forecast satellite locations.  As the size of the time step increases, this technique tends to produce larger errors.  For this reason, the satellite propagation algorithms tend to use time steps of seconds, but the simulations used in WFX training events use time steps of 15-30 minutes creating a computational mismatch between the algorithms used for attrition and those used for satellite propagation.From a computational standpoint, computing access duration this way is inefficient.  If we compute LOS access every minute, 1,440 calculations are conducted, but only 50 are of interest.  (Of course, we have to perform the 1,440 calculations to determine which 50 are of interest.)  If we want higher fidelity, we can conduct an LOS calculation every second, and perform 86,400 calculations with only 3,000 of interest.  There are over 83,000 calculations that are of no interest to us, in a single day, for a single satellite, accessing a single earth station.  As the number of earth stations and satellites increases, and the time frame of interest increases, the number of calculations necessary, using ordinary propagation techniques, skyrockets.Similarly, the propagation method is inefficient from an operational analysis standpoint.  Consider that the largest continent represents only nine percent of the earth’s surface area.  In rough terms, the analyst is primarily concerned with what occurs over that portion of the earth’s surface.  Using normal propagation techniques, for this continent, around 90 percent of the calculations will result in a non-LOS status, and 10 percent will result in a possible LOS status—at least 90 percent extraneous calculations—if the area of interest is as large as Asia!This phenomenon is even more severe when you consider the sizes of traditional exercise boxes.  For example, a 200 km by 200 km box represents less than 1/100 of a percent of the earth’s surface area.  Since the “box” size typically represents only a small fraction of the earth’s surface area, whenever the satellite is not in position to influence the “box,” the propagator is performing unnecessary satellite-earth station LOS access calcula-tions.From either a time standpoint, or an area standpoint, because the “box” is so small relative to the earth’s area, ordinary propagators are by nature inefficient for determining accesses in an Army simulation environ-ment.  When the simulation increases the number of earth stations, satellites, and extends the time period, the ordinary propagator cannot keep pace.4.  Propagationless Explicit RepresentationIn this section, we present a technique for determining LOS access times and durations for points of interest without using propagator software.  As shown above, there is a need within the M&S community to portray the effects of space, but with the speed necessary to be relevant to the underlying simulation.  A benefit of our approach is that we can determine the access and duration times with sufficient accuracy, without performing the thousands of calculations that can bog down a simulation.A single algorithm that can determine access times and durations for all satellite orbit types is probably not available, as orbits have different behaviors and must be modeled differently.  Accordingly, we have broken down our effort into different orbit types.  The geo-stationary orbit access case is nearly trivial.  LOS calculations from points of interest on the earth’s surface to a nearly stationary point overhead are straightforward and are omitted from further consideration.We have chosen to focus on the circular LEO satellite, expanding the excellent work accomplished by Ali [7].  The areas in which we have expanded Ali’s work are using a different method to determine the maximum elevation angle from the earth station to the satellite, and accounting for some conditions not specified in his original work.  The remainder of this section will discuss the algorithm used, and compare results we obtained with results from Satellite Tool Kit (STK) ®.Ali’s algorithm used spherical geometry to compute the time and location of the satellite at its nearest point to the earth station, and then used his previous work [8] to determine the duration of the access.The basic premise of Ali’s algorithm is this:  for a very small time interval, a circular arc is a reasonable approximation of the satellite ground trace.  Using spherical geometry and trigonometry, the algorithm returns the times and durations of the access for each pass.  In the following paragraph, we summarize Ali’s algorithm. The algorithm begins with satellite and earth station initialization, and the number of passes for which access will be determined.  Two vectors from the center of the earth to this circular arc form a basis for a plane containing the arc.  The cross product of these two vectors produces a normal to the plane, and this normal is used to determine the minimum distance from the earth station to this plane.  Using distance and the normal’s direction, the point on the circular arc plane closest to the earth station is determined.  Using angular velocity, the time to reach that point is determined, and two additional vectors from the center of the earth are determined to create a new circular arc approximation, this time much closer to the actual closest point.  As before, the normal is determined, and direction and distance to the approxi-mation of the nearest point on the ground trace is determined.  The central angle formed by this refined point and the earth station is the minimum central angle between these two points, and corresponds to the maximum elevation angle between the earth station and the satellite [Figure 4.1].This refined estimate on the ground trace corresponds to the position of the satellite when it is closest to the earth station.  The maximum elevation angle corresponds to the midpoint of the access and Doppler characteristics are used to determine the LOS access [8].  Finally, the algorithm iterates the pass count, and begins a new sequence of calculations.  We refer the reader to Ali’s original material [7 and 8] for more detailed information regarding the algorithm.  The flow chart below depicts the basic algorithm we use:We have modified Ali’s work to account for some conditions he did not specify, namely instances in which the earth station latitude is equal or greater to the inclination angle.  In addition, we use a different approach to find the maximum elevation angle, first transforming the coordinate system to the earth station, and then using linear algebra transformations to determine the projections onto and orthogonal to the plane tangent to the earth station. [Figure 4.2]4.1 ResultsWe ran our algorithm three times using three test cases varying the target latitude relationship to the inclination angle.  The following table depicts the three cases.Orbit TypeAltitudeInclinationAngleEarth StationSample PeriodCircular500 Km60(30(N, 90(E10 daysCircular500 Km30(30(N, 90(E10 daysCircular500 Km30(45(N, 90(E10 daysFor each case, the algorithm returned midpoint epoch time and access durations matched closely with the STK data.  In the figures 4.3-4.5 below, mid point epoch error (algorithm value minus STK value), and normalized duration error are shown.  Epoch error is expressed in seconds.  Normalized error used is defined as: EMBED Equation.3  The average, minimum and maximum errors for mid point epoch and duration are shown in the table below.  Error data is Algorithm value minus STK data.  Epoch error and duration error are shown in seconds.CASE 1-Sat 500/60-ES 30/90-(45 accesses)CASE 2-Sat 500/30-ES 30/90-(64 accesses)CASE 3-Sat 500/30-ES 45/90-(42 accesses)Error (seconds)EpochDur-ationEpochDur-ationEpochDur-ationAverage 032-11-3Minimum -2-12-1-5-11-11Maximum 3104915-1Epoch error.  In case one, epoch error fluctuates about zero.  In case two, epoch error remains near zero, but is positively skewed.  In case three, epoch error tends to grow somewhat over time for a particular set of passes, while in the other cases, it too fluctuates about zero.  The algorithm appears to provide data with accuracy sufficient for large scale, force-on-force modeling.Duration error.  Duration error appears differently in the cases.  In case one, the normalized error remains within +/-2 percent, with the exception of one particular set of passes.  The error for this pass increases over time.  In case two, the normalized error remains within +/-2 percent, with the exception of one outlier.  In case three, the normalized error remains below 4 percent, but is skewed positively.  In addition, there is one particular set of passes for which the normalized error grows over time.  The magnitude of these errors appears in the noise level for a simulation that extends for days.Figure 4.3 Case 1.  Earth Station Latitude Less Than Inclination AngleFigure 4.4 Case 2.  Earth Station Latitude EqualTo Inclination AngleFigure 4.5 Case 3.  Earth Station Latitude GreaterThan Inclination Angle5.  Reasonableness of the AlgorithmAs shown in Figures 4.3-4.5, the results achieved with this method are close compared to results achieved with industry standard propagators.  Not only do the results compare well with STK data, but also the number of calculations is greatly reduced.  Computationally, the algorithm is efficient in that required accuracy is achieved using a fraction of the computing power.  In summary, this algorithm appears sound for the different satellite-earth station combinations we have examined.The algorithm would be quite suitable during simulation preprocessing, generating access and duration for all points during the simulation setup.  During the course of the simulation, this data could be retrieved as necessary.  Additionally, the game box could be divided into regions for bulk filtering access data and times in setup, and as units move into these regions during the simulation, the algorithm could be called to determine access if the unit moved to a bulk filter region with access.5.1 AssumptionsThe following assumptions are made concerning the use of this algorithm: Initialization data for existing satellites stems directly from two line elements available from military or civil sourcesInitialization data for future satellites can be calculated using public domain propagation toolsNo satellite orbit corrections made during time period of interestConstant satellite angular velocity.6.  Additional ResearchAs stated above, we set out to develop an algorithm for one particular type of satellite, the circular orbit LEO satellite.  The algorithm described in this paper is producing the results we expect, but it has been run for only a few of the several cases we might expect to encounter.  For example, we have not investigated suitability when the earth station is at the extreme limit of the coverage latitude. HYPERLINK  \l "_7.__References"   Additionally, research in the area of adding a process step to this algorithm to incorporate a satellite sensor would be worthwhile.  Finally, more effort is needed to identify why and how to limit the errors that grow over the length of the time period.Also, additional work is required to develop similar algorithms for the other satellite orbital types.  Work currently being conducted at SAIC is leading us to believe that we have the capability of producing these algorithms for the Army modeling and simulation community that provide the accuracy and timeliness desired.7.  References[1]	Cordesman, Anthony H.: “The ‘Instant Lessons’ of the Iraq War:  Main Report, Seventh Working Draft” Center for Strategic and International Studies, 28 April 2003.[2]	Rolfsen, Bruce: “Air Power Unleashed Lessons From Iraq” Armed Forces Journal, pp. 30-33, June 2003.[3]	Henderson, Eric P:  Henderson was assigned as Army Space Cell OIC, 4th Infantry Division during Operation Iraqi Freedom.[4]	Tomlinson, William M., Paul Fall, and Paul Page: “Incorporating Space in Force-on-Force Models in Order to Examine Military Utility to the Future Tactical Ground Commander,” (draft).  Paper No. 03F-SIW-094.[5]	Satellite Tool Kit (STK) ®, “Predicting Orbits”.   HYPERLINK "http://www.stk.com/resources/help/help/stk43/primer/propagators.htm" http://www.stk.com/resources/help/help/stk43/primer/propagators.htm, accessed Jun 16, 2003.[6]	Google Search Engine,  HYPERLINK "http://www.google.com" http://www.google.com, accessed Jun 16, 2003.[7]	Ali, I., N. Al-Dhahir, and J. Hershey: “Predicting the Visibility of LEO Satellites” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, Vol. 35, pp. 1183-1189, October 1999.[8]	Ali, I., N. Al-Dhahir, and J. Hershey: “Doppler Characterization for LEO Satellites” IEEE Transactions on Communications, Vol. 46, pp. 309-313, March 1998. The J2 propagator models the earth’s oblateness; the MSGP-4 propagator, “one of the most widely-used propagators in the industry” models secular and periodic variations of the orbital elements due to Earth oblateness, solar and gravitational effects. Simulations can be time step driven, event driven, or a hybrid of the two.  In the first case, for each time step, events are determined based on what has happened in the previous time step.  An example of this is a truck moving from point A to point B.  As the time clock moves, the truck moves along its route using some variation of the distance-rate-time relationship.  In the second case, the simulation operates under an if A, then B, else C pattern.  For example, if a call for fire is received, then the artillery processes that call for fire, else the artillery unit is idle.  In the hybrid case, we might expect that the artillery unit will move every six hours, unless it is firing missions. Results from STK v4.3.0 using a circular orbit, altitude of 500 km, inclination angle 60(, and an earth station at 30( N, 90( E.  Access durations for passes 19-33 were 671, 400, 720, 511, and 656 seconds. This is perhaps a controversial statement, but conversations with several people involved in Army simulations support this contention. The Aerospace Corporation performed an independent verification and validation of Satellite Tool Kit version 4.1.0 (dated 15 February 2000) and concluded “that the access and visibility calculations in STK v4.1.0 are accurate and can be used with a high degree of confidence in the results.”  We used STK v4.3.0. SatelliteTool Kit ® which is a registered trademark of Analytic Graphics, Inc. The raw value for the error is 9, but the duration of the pass is only 120 seconds.  The average duration for all other passes was 674 seconds, with a minimum of 475 and a maximum of 738 seconds.7 For example, in case 3, the satellite has coverage to 52(.Author BiographiesMATTHEW GOREVIN is an operations research analyst employed by Science Applications International Corporation.  Mr. Gorevin works with SAIC’s Applied Technology Group, in Huntsville, Alabama.  In addition to space representation, his research areas of interest include transportation/intermodal analysis and military deployment analysis.FRANK GROSE is a space systems analyst employed by Science Applications International Corporation. Mr. Grose works with SAIC’s Applied Technology Group, in Huntsville, Alabama, where in addition to space representation, he conducts research into strategic visualization, models missile defense test scenarios, analyzes space threat vulnerability and mitigation tech-niques. He is STK-Certified, and teaches introductory and advanced space simulation courses using Satellite Tool Kit (STK)®.SAM McNULLY supports the Army’s efforts to remedy the void of space M&S first acknowledged by the Vice Chief of Staff of the Army in September 2001 in a variety of venues.  In addition to facilitating the Army’s Space Focus Area Collaborative Team (FACT) and the Space FACT M&S Roadmap, Mr. McNully develops algo-rithms, heuristics, and software to enable point solutions to space M&S issues.  As Executive Vice President of CG2, Mr. McNully supervises numerous simulation technology projects and Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) contracts.Figure 4.1 Angular RelationshipsFigure 4.2 Algorithm Flowchart