Metadata StandardsA Report from the Open Forum on Metadata RegistriesKenn Atkinson, P.E.Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC)1901 N. Beauregard St., Suite 500Alexandria, VA 22311703-824-3414 HYPERLINK "mailto:katkinson@dmso.mil" katkinson@dmso.milMs. Philomena ZimmermanDefense Modeling and Simulation Office1901 N. Beauregard St, Suite 500Alexandria, VA 22311703-998-0660 HYPERLINK "mailto:pzimmerm@dmso.mil" pzimmerm@dmso.milAbstract : Increasing reuse, improving interoperability and the improving the ability to compose simulations rapidly, flexibly and efficiently are key goals of DMSO’s Composable Mission Space Environments (CMSE) initiative.  The CMSE task is to identify issues related to "composability" and then target DMSO initiatives (and related research from other organizations) that the DMSO can influence that will lay the groundwork for meeting these goals.  Metadata has been identified as a key enabler for semantic interoperability.  The goal is to make model and data semantics explicit, documented and accessible as metadata.  The semantic problems can then be converted into syntactic problems, allowing automated detection and resolution.  Current metadata standards make it practical for many different people to consistently specify the content of metadata elements for tens of thousands of different Web pages, and also make it possible for users to search for and find information effectively.  Metadata standards also makes it possible for electronic information resources to communicate their existence and their characteristics to other electronic applications or search tools and to permit information to migrate from one application or search system to another.This paper reports on the sixth annual Open Forum on Metadata Registries held 20-24 January 2003 in Santa Fe, New Mexico which explored the role of metadata registries and reported on new developments and applications. The Open Forum focused on registries, and evaluated various methods and options for representing metadata. We examine the existing metadata standards for making semantics explicit in metadata, and describe technologies that are now being used to extract or manipulate the resulting metadata to support semantic interoperability and examine their application to the Modeling and Simulation community.Keywords :MetadataIntroductionIncreasing reuse, improving interoperability and the improving the ability to compose simulations rapidly, flexibly and efficiently are key goals of DMSO’s Composable Mission Space Environments (CMSE) initiative, sometimes referred to as "composability."  The CMSE task is to identify the issues related to "composability" and then target DMSO initiatives (and related research from other organizations) that the DMSO can influence that will lay the groundwork for meeting these goals.Reuse of simulation models and the data needed by the models is the key to composing simulations rapidly, flexibly and efficiently.  The ability to reuse models and data has been made practical by the syntactic interoperability provided by the High Level Architecture (HLA). But, what if our simulation systems were connected and able to communicate, but could not understand each other? Or, worse, would produce misunderstandings? This is, of course, semantic non-interoperability.  The goal of semantic interoperability is to allow the (seamless) cooperation of simulation systems that were not initially developed for this purpose.  HLA Federates must not only access the same data, but interpret it in a consistent manner taking into account the context of the simulation purpose (training, evaluation etc.), semantics, model limitations and behaviors to name a few factors. It is also not simply a matter of using the same models but achieving an understanding of the interactions between models. [2]We believe that the basis for semantic interoperability is to make model and data semantics explicit, documented and accessible as metadata.  This would allow semantic problems to be converted into syntactic problems and, thus, made amenable to automated detection (and, possibly, resolution). In the rest of this paper, we examine the existing standards available for making semantics explicit in metadata, and describe technologies that are available now to extract or manipulate the resulting metadata to support semantic interoperability. [3]Data, Information and KnowledgeThe shift in emphasis caused by the application of metadata to both simulation models and simulation data can be understood as a shift from data manipulation and processing (syntactic interoperability) to the creation, interpretation and assessment of information or knowledge about the meaning of the simulation models and data (semantic interoperability).Data, information and knowledge are often conceived of as forming a hierarchy, where each successive layer is differentiated from the last through a process of interpretation and mediation.  Merriam-Webster defines data as "information in numerical form that can be digitally transmitted or processed" (2001) --in other words, as pure, un-interpreted fact, perception, signal or message.  Information, as characterized by management guru Peter Drucker, is data that is "endowed with relevance or purpose" (1988; p. 4).  Information, in other words, can be said to form the contents of the data signal or message.  Knowledge, finally, is defined in terms that associate it even more closely with human understanding, intention and purpose:  As 1) "the fact or condition of knowing something with familiarity gained through experience or association," 2) "acquaintance with or understanding of a science, art, or technique," or 3) "the fact or condition of being aware of something" (Merriam-Webster, 2001). [5]Current metadata standards make it possible for many different people to consistently specify the content of metadata elements for tens of thousands of different Web pages. It also makes it possible for users to search for and find information without needing to know which government department or program produced it. Metadata standards also makes it possible for electronic information resources to communicate their existence and their characteristics to other electronic applications or search tools and to permit information to migrate from one application or search system to another.One of the primary techniques of the CMSE initiative is to identify successful techniques and standards currently in use and bring those identified as “Best Practices” into the M&S community.Metadata OverviewMetadata describes a conceptual model composed of data element concepts and data modeling Objects.  The data element concepts describe the data independently of the representations.  Data Modeling defines object classes and properties where the class describes the set of objects for which we want to collect data and the properties record characteristics that describe or distinguish objects.  The conceptual domain relates the data element concepts in a form which represents the mind’s perceived view of the meaning of the data element, while the value domain records specific values for each data element and provides the presentation view of the data.  The term “registry” is used loosely to bring these together. Some are well recognized as registries, while others commonly go by names such as encyclopedias, catalogs, etc. Using the term loosely, there are several types of registries in the area of web services, and data management and interchange. The registries have some common, overlapping content, which is extended and utilized in different ways. The registries vary according to the intended purpose, granularity of contents, the level of semantics management, and other ways. Users may have to work with several of these registries simultaneously, since the registries perform different functions. There is a need for the registries to cooperate/ interoperate, since they contain related and sometimes overlapping information. The data must be kept updated and synchronized with a minimum of effort.There is a great range in the level of standardization for the various registries. ISO/IEC 11179 is an international standard describing metadata registries. For terminology registration, there is an ISO standard for Thesauri, but standards for Ontologies are slim to none. Most of the other registries have some related standards in various stages of development by a range of organizations from ISO to industry consortia.  [8]The following sections provide an overview of the various metadata standards and registries presented during the Open Forum.Metadata RegistriesTo share data successfully, companies and individuals need to start somewhere, and for many parties looking to exchange data that "somewhere" is a registry. Registries provide an index or description of the information held or maintained by an organization or community of interest, and the data used for indexing or description are called metadata, literally defined as data about data. The role of registries in Web services and related technologies attracted a good deal of attention at a recent industry meeting devoted to the subject. Registries provide a good starting point for data sharing because they offer an authoritative place to find resources for exchanging or reusing data, including the rules for data sharing and descriptions of the kinds of data shared. The objects referenced in a registry can include entire standards or specifications, components of the standards or specifications, XML schemas or schema components, software components, data elements, database structures, or related documentation, such as guidelines or best practices, depending on the task at hand.Registries have great potential value because they offer a common method for representing the characteristics about the registered objects - e.g., simulations, models, data, organizations, specifications, schemas, and components, elements represented by common metadata. By adopting standards for registries and their metadata, especially those accessible over the Web, designers can build registries into an overall architecture for exchanging data within or among organizations. Standards also enable registries to interact with each other, thus encouraging a distributed environment, which in turn encourages individual registries to become smaller, easier to develop, and easier to maintain. [6]Open Forum GoalsThe sixth annual Open Forum on Metadata Registries held 20-24 January 2003 in Santa Fe, New Mexico (http://metadata-stds.org/OpenForum2003/) explored the role of registries and reported on new developments and applications. With about 120 participants, the forum offered a venue where participants could focus on registries, and evaluate various methods and options for representing metadata. The central goal of the Open Forum was to share knowledge and experience about metadata, standards, registries, and implementation experiences. Understanding the operation and features of the various registries was an important part of the conference and a foundation on which to discuss consolidation and co-operation.  A related goal was to develop collaborative efforts to share metadata between registries. It is highly desirable to share the cost and effort of developing and maintaining standard metadata.  The need for various registries to work together was a continuing and critical topic heard at the event. [7]The first two days of the event featured introductions to and tutorials on different registry methods and standards:Metadata registries defined by ISO standard 11179 Registries for software components and developments Universal Description, Discovery and Integration (UDDI) registries Electronic Business XML (ebXML) registries SQL database catalogs Dublin Core registries of information resourcesThe remaining three days featured Practitioner tracks with reports on implementation experiences:Defense Tracke-Business, e-Commerce, and e-Government TrackEnvironment TrackHealthcare and Bioinformatics TrackLearning Technologies and Knowledge Management TrackStatistics TrackTerminology and Ontology Track Transportation, Aviation and Aerospace Track ISO 11179ISO/IEC 11179, Specification and Standardization of Data Elements is a metadata standard with 10 years of experience and an extensive paper trail.  ISO 11179 specifies basic aspects of data element composition, including metadata. The standard applies to the formulation of data element representations and meaning as shared among people and machines; it does not apply to the physical representation of data as bits and bytes at the machine level. The standard covers the composition, classification, naming, identification, and registration of data elements.An ISO 11179 data element is composed of three parts:an object class is a set of ideas, abstractions, or things in the real world that can be identified with explicit boundaries and meaning, and whose properties and behavior follow the same rules; a property is a peculiarity common to all members of an object class; a representation describes how the data are represented, i.e. the combination of a value domain, datatype, and, if necessary, a unit of measure or a character set.The combination of an object class and a property is called a data element concept (DEC). A value domain is a set of permissible (or valid) values for a data element. [9]The emphasis of the 11179 is on semantic information, definitions of data elements and value meanings, and stewardship responsibilities.  ISO 11179 is divided into six major sections:Framework  Labels all the parts of the standard, which helps accurately understand metadata and their use in a registry  Classification  Helps derive and formulate abstract and application data elements. This section reduces ambiguity by recognizing the relationships among data element concepts and data elements themselves.  Basic attributes  Offers a basic set of attributes to describe a data element. It also specifies a metamodel for the registration of metadata. This part encourages comparison across systems and facilitates information exchange, two key features of interoperability.Definitions  Provides rules and guidelines for defining terms.  Naming, identification  Offers naming conventions, which like the definitions section, provide a consistent method for identifying and assembling data elements.  Registration  Outlines steps in the registration data elements, and describes the role and responsibilities of a registration authority.   Dublin Core RegistriesThe Dublin Core Metadata Initiative (DCMI) is an organization dedicated to promoting the widespread adoption of interoperable metadata standards and developing specialized metadata vocabularies for describing resources that enable more intelligent information discovery systems. [10]The mission of the DCMI is to make it easier to find resources using the Internet through the following activities:Developing metadata standards for discovery across domains, Defining frameworks for the interoperation of metadata sets, and, Facilitating the development of community- or disciplinary-specific metadata sets that are consistent with items 1 and 2 The range of activities of DCMI includes:Standards development and maintenance, such as organizing international workshops and working group meetings directed toward developing and maintaining DCMI recommendations. Tools, services, and infrastructure, including the DCMI metadata registry to support the management and maintenance of DCMI metadata in multiple languages. Educational outreach and community liaison, including developing and distributing educational and training resources, consulting, and coordinating activities within and between other metadata communities.One of the primary benefits of the Dublin Core is its usefulness as a cross-domain discovery tool.  The general applicability of DCMI metadata makes a strong candidate to bridge disciplines and sectors to provide users with a common discovery model that will work throughout the Internet Commons.  Active development of domain specific application profiles of Dublin Core metadata are ongoing in the library, museum, government, environmental science, publishing, agriculture, and corporate knowledge management domains.The characteristics of the Dublin Core that distinguish it as a prominent candidate for resource discovery systems fall into several categories:Simplicity: The Dublin Core is intended to be usable by non-catalogers as well as resource description specialists. Most of the elements have a commonly understood semantics of roughly the complexity of a library catalog card. Semantic Interoperability: In the Internet Commons, disparate description models interfere with the ability to search across discipline boundaries. Promoting a commonly understood set of descriptors that helps to unify other data content standards increases the possibility of semantic interoperability across disciplines. International Consensus Recognition of the international scope of resource discovery on the Web is critical to the development of effective discovery infrastructure. The Dublin Core benefits from active participation and promotion in some 20 countries in North America, Europe, Australia, and Asia. Extensibility The Dublin Core provides an economical alternative to more elaborate description models such as the full MARC cataloging of the library world. Additionally, it includes sufficient flexibility and extensibility to encode the structure and more elaborate semantics inherent in richer description standards. The Dublin Core Metadata Element Set represents a simple resource description record. It is intended to provide a foundation for electronic bibliographic descriptions to improve structured access to information on the Internet. It aims to facilitate the description, organization, discovery, and access of network information resources. Internet RFC 2413, which was published in September 1998, provides a formal specification for this work.  The fifteen elements are listed in table 1.TITLECREATORSUBJECTDESCRIPTIONPUBLISHERCONTRIBUTORDATETYPEFORMATIDENTIFIERSOURCELANGUAGERELATIONCOVERAGE and RIGHTS. [11]OASIS/ebXMLEbXML uses the library catalogue as an analogue to describe the role of a registry, in that it indexes and describes information stored elsewhere. In ebXML, registries offer organizations a way of publishing the standards, specifications, industry best practices, common vocabularies, official code lists, and other information, objects, and artifacts needed to conduct electronic business. Registries in ebXML are accessed through the Internet, where searchers locate the desired information, for subsequent retrieval.The architecture and basic features of ebXML registries use a model that allows for the indexing of objects stored in multiple locations. Registries in ebXML also manage the complete lifecycle of metadata assigned to the objects, from first submission through obsolescence and removal.Users can access ebXML registries through SOAP and ebXML message services, and the next version of the registry specifications (3.0) will support HTTP/URI messaging, similar to REST.  ebXML designed security features, such as access control and message encryption into the specifications, with enhancements to security promised in the upcoming version 3.0. EbXML registries also support internationalization and native language representations.EbXML registries can list objects such as specific services, service bindings, and specification links. An associated repository can store these objects as Web Services Description Language (WSDL) files, business process, or collaboration protocol profiles (CPPs) defined in another part of the ebXML specifications. Version 3.0 of the specifications includes optional content management functions, including validation of XML objects and the cataloging of metadata upon submission.EbXML divides the registry functions into two basic sets: lifecycle and queries. The lifecycle manager supports the registry's capture and cataloging, as well as change and version management. The lifecycle manager also allows registries to index, classify, and describe any kind of object. The registry can support any kind of taxonomy, such as industry codes, and can also associate objects in the registry to each other.Objects in ebXML registries are listed in a hierarchical structure. EbXML registries can group objects together into packages, as well as link to external objects. Breininger said version 3.0 of the registry specifications will support cross-registration of objects that enable the federation of ebXML registries. Version 3.0 will also support alert services which allow subscribers to monitor changes in objects of interest in a registry.UDDI RegistriesUniversal Description, Discovery, and Integration (UDDI) repositories are used to catalog information about Web Services. There are a number of public UDDI repositories available. Once your organization has decided to use a Web Service, the requesting application makes a call to the UDDI repository to obtain the XML schema. The service requester application parses the XML schema, and formats an XML message to initiate the service transaction.[12]UDDI effort defines a set of specifications making business accelerate use of B2B and commerce over the Internet easier. UDDI provides direct application-to-application integration which is a core building block of the digital economy and will help reduce many of the configuration and compatibility problems.UDDI addresses the issue of Web services discovery, the act of finding specifications and choosing among alternatives. UDDI registries act as reference points for Web services that allow for common descriptions and discovery of those services, based on XML standards and independent of platform. UDDI registries ease the management of large numbers of trading partners and open up market opportunities, which would otherwise go unnoticed. They also encourage the aggregation of data from multiple sources, and provide a common profile for electronic services, Web and others.Businesses can provide three types of information about themselves and their services, using the telephone directory as an analog, with white, yellow, and green pages. The white pages in a UDDI registry contain straight descriptive data about the business such as the company name, contact information, brief descriptions, and business identifiers (e.g. DUNs number). UDDI yellow pages provide classifications of the company's services using U.S. government and UN industrial codes (NAICS, UNSPSC respectively), and geographic location based on ISO 3166 codes. UDDI allows for the use of other taxonomies as well. The green pages specify the technical data, in terms of the bindings to a service provider and a technical fingerprint, with references to other Web services specifications.UDDI provides for five core data types:tModel that names and describes specifications, and links those specifications to classifications (taxonomies such as NAICS and UNSPSC listed above), and identifiers businessEntity that identifies, names, and describes a business businessService, a child of businessEntity that identifies, names, and describes the services provided by the business bindingTemplate, a child of businessService that links tModels with a service, and describes where and how to invoke the service publisherAssertion that identifies businesses having a relationship and defines that relationship Companies can configure UDDI registries to run privately, to serve strictly internal functions or with selected high-volume business partners, in semi-private mode where some functions are opened to the public while others are restricted for internal or invited parties, or as a completely public resource if so required by business needs. Ontological RegistriesOntology represents a common, shareable view of the application domain. This is used to give meaning to the information structures that are to be exchanged between applications.  Ontologies have an increasing role in enterprise knowledge management. They can contribute to difficult information system problems, including: management of metadata semantics; heterogeneous database access; conceptual information retrieval; machine translation; knowledge management for expert systems; definition of common business objects; and technology independent data models.ISO 1087  provides a compilation of vocabulary in provided a forum for analyzing, discussing and coordinating key concepts found in ISO/TC 37 standards.  This standard is addressed not only to standardizers and terminologists, but also to anyone involved in terminology management, as well as to the users of terminologies. The principles outlined here are valid, however, also for the definition of data element concepts and the classification of concepts treated in ontologies and taxonomies. [13]Terminology management is multidisciplinary and draws support from a number of fields (e.g., logic, epistemology, philosophy of science, linguistics, information science and cognitive sciences) in its study of concepts and their representations in special languages. It combines elements from many theoretical approaches that deal with the description, ordering and transfer of knowledge.  En example is the ISO 704 Terminology work - Principles and Methods and is intended to standardize the essential elements for quality work in terminology management. The general purpose of the standard is to provide a common framework for documenting terminologies, i.e., the sets of terms used in special subject fields. It provides guidance for establishing consistent approaches within an organization or among individuals involved in creating terminological resources. This presentation will include references to case studies involving the application of the principles articulated in ISO 704.There are well-developed standards for terminologies and some ongoing standards work to support ontologies, both in ISO and IEEE. Emerging ontology standards efforts need to pay attention to established high quality, related standards for terminologies, thesauri, and logic. The ontology registries bring together mature standards work on terminology, thesauri, and logic with emerging work in ontology design, production, applications and maintenance. These will be discussed in the context of the systematic and institutionalized management of metadata that registries provide for an enterprise.Database CatalogsMetadata for Database Catalogs are described in the ISO/IEC 9075-11 ISO/IEC 9075-11 Information technology -- Database languages -- SQL -- Part 11: Information and definition schemas (SQL/schemata)  [14]  This standard provides a definition for recording schema, integrity & operational information and includes all elements of database schemas:  data elements, relations, and integrity constraints.  The emphasis is on information required to make database systems work for queries, etc., not on semantic management .SQL has the concept of a catalog which:Has info that database needs to operate.Is not necessarily sharable.Includes the SQL concept of Schema.Provides Metadata access by SQL.Relational systems may have a “dictionary,” but not specified by a standard.An example implementation is “The Metadata-Driven SQL Persistence subsystem” which  provides application developers with the ability to: Define object types and their associated table schemas in PDL files, and have the system generate all SQL to create, retrieve, update, and delete objects of that type. The Persistence layer will also allow the application developer to specify associations for the pre-defined object types. At run time, create new object types that are subtypes of existing object types and allow the application code to interact with these objects in a manner similar to predefined object types.Create associations between dynamically created object types and other object types (both dynamically created and predefined). The system must allow for "0..1", "0..n", and "1..n" associations. In this example, the Metadata-Driven SQL Persistence subsystem adds additional functionality  and extends the functionality of both the Operational Persistence layer and the Metadata Persistence layer. The public interface for dynamic sub typing can be found in the Operational Persistence while the code for dynamically generating create, retrieve, update, and delete statements for statically defined object types can be found in the Metadata Persistence. [15]Software Component RegistriesSoftware component registries leverage reuse by providing components that have been approved for usage, along with the client stubs that are necessary to access the service. Ideally, the reuse repository will pull information from the UDDI repository, and allow the organization to supplement existing documentation with information specific to that organization's use of the service. This might include things like the negotiated service fee, service level agreements, installation instructions for the client stubs, and service test scripts.An organization that leverages its reuse repository will reap the benefits: developers save time in finding both applicable services and the stubs necessary for their implementation, and the organization saves money and time during the purchasing cycle. The benefits reveal themselves where it counts — on the bottom line.A number of actual commercial base software component registries are available in the market.  Examples include Flashline.com, ComponentAA, ComponentSquar.com.  Names and descriptions vary, component are sometimes called Business Objects.  Software components are developed and reused among specific vendor platforms, such as EJB, COM, and CORBA with their own manner.  No common framework is available so far, to share components among registries.Case Tool RepositoriesThere are several proprietary encyclopedia/repository products.  While it has proven difficult to specify common model,   SC 7/WG 11 and Crystal Data Identification File (CDIF), a CASE Tool Interchange Format committee have established a common core of content and an interchange specification.  The Object Management Group (OMG) has developed the Unified Modeling Language (UML) meta-model that describes UML Objects.  The Meta Object Facility (MOF) provides a container and XMI for metadata transfer.XMIXMI is designed to enable easy interchange of metadata between modeling tools based on the OMG Unified Modeling Language (UML) and metadata repositories based on the OMG Meta Object Facility (MOF) proposal in distributed heterogeneous environments. Key aspects of the architecture include:A four layered metamodel architecture for general purpose manipulation of metadata in distributed object repositories The use of MOF to define and manipulate metamodels programmatically using fine-grained CORBA interfaces. The use of UML notation for representing models and metamodels The use of standard information models (UML) to describe the semantics of object analysis and design models The use of an interchange format such as XMI for stream based interchange of metadata.The specification consists of a set of XML Document Type Definition (DTD) production rules for transforming MOF-based metamodels into XML DTDs, a set of XML document production rules for encoding and decoding MOF-based metadata, and design principles for XMI-based DTDs and XML Streams. [16]Example DoD RegistriesThe goal of the DoD Registry is to have the: Info Consumers  . . . easily discover, retrieve, and manage . . . information based upon its characteristics as advertised by Producers . . . Info Producers shall advertise information availability and accessibility using standard metadata, data schema, and profiling mechanisms.Info awareness, access and delivery shall be facilitated by . . . common mechanisms such as . . . registries.Authoritative repositories shall be established, and organizations shall be identified and authorized to create, compile, distribute, and dispose of data and metadata in these repositories . . .[17]The registry includes sections for:Resource Discovery (White Pages)  Info Resource Names, “Owners,” LocationsHigh Level Generic Content (Yellow Pages)Key words, NCES Broad Categorizations, Community NamesGranular Content – Community level (Brown Pages)  Ontologies, taxonomic vocabularies, specialized data modelsProduct or Service Access Methods (Green Pages) Specific data access technology requirements [18]ASD C3I Transformation Guidance,  “Doing Data” for Net-Centric WarfarePublish Data as early and as widely as possibleEmpower Users to pull whatever Data they wantClearly identify Data maintenance authoritiesDecompose Data Management Communities of Interest (COIs)*Build-Time and  Run-TimeExploit Information Market ForcesVisibility (Allows data producers and consumers to find each other)Supply and Demand (“Incentivizes” timely, high quality production) Market Metrics (Allows adjustments for investment to follow value)The purpose is to provide visibility and re-use, not standardization through mandate.  It is intended to be a “One Stop” Publish & Subscribe for:Build Time Metadata Registration Pulling Re-usable Data ComponentsInformation Community ManagementThis registry can be accessed at:   HYPERLINK "http://xml.dod.mil" http://xml.dod.milFuture DirectionsCan registries just get along?An overriding theme of the forum was the need for registries to interact, both with their own kind and with others. Bruce Bargmeyer, the forum chair and organizer, offered a scenario for cooperation, in the form of a division of labor among registries:ISO 11179 registries would manage semantic content and provide registration procedures UDDI registries would provide discovery mechanisms XML registries, such as ebXML, would register schemas Bargmeyer described the desired state of affairs in terms of service to users and convenience to registry operations, and said, "It's time for the users to push developers and standards bodies to come up with a way to enter an idea once, and have it propagate among registries."The pressure from the developer and user communities seems to be working. Perhaps the most hopeful sign from the forum, particularly in these economic times, was the presentation by Nobuhiro Matsutake reporting on Fujitsu's software component registry/repository. Fujitsu found a way to use a registry that meets vital customer needs and thus generates significant income. The experiences of companies like Fujitsu making money with registries will probably get more executive level attention and priority focused on the value of registries than any other development.References[1] [http://metadata-stds.org/OpenForum2003/Presentations/][2] “Meaningful Interoperability and the Synthetic Natural Environment”, 01E-SIW—080, Douglas L. Clark, Susan K. Numrich, Robert J.. Howard, Guy Purser, 2001 EURO SIW[4][5] Common Look & Feel Metadata Implementation Guides , Council of Federal Libraries, National Library of Canada  [http://www.nlc-bnc.ca/6/37/s37-4016.001-e.html#metadata3][6] 'Metadata Rules' - a report from the Open Forum on Metadata Registries, Alan Kotok , WebServices.org [http://www.webservices.org/index.php/article/articleview/922/1/12][7] [http://www.webservices.org/index.php/article/articleview/780/1/23/][8]  [http://metadata-stds.org/OpenForum2003/][9] “ISO 11179”, Metadata Interchange Standards, Diffuse Project, European Commission’s Information Society Technologies (IST)  [http://www.diffuse.org/meta.html#ISO11179][10]  “An Overview of the Dublin Core Metadata Initiative”,  [http://dublincore.org/about/overview/][11]  “Dublin Core”, Metadata Interchange Standards, Diffuse Project, European Commission’s Information Society Technologies (IST)  [http://www.diffuse.org/meta.html#DC][12]  “Storing Web Services in an Enterprise Repository”, Sharon Fay, From the Trenches , Reuse for Real Newsletter, ,   HYPERLINK "http://www.flashline.com/Content/sdpc/sdpc.jsp?sid=1053095758022-3323623253-102" Software Development Productivity Council (SDPC)[13 “Standards for Content Creation and Globalization”, The Institute for Applied Linguistics,  Kent State University,    HYPERLINK "http://appling.kent.edu/ResourcePages/LTStandards/Chart/standards.chart.htm#Locale" http://appling.kent.edu/ResourcePages/LTStandards/Chart/standards.chart.htm#Locale[14]  ISO/IEC 9075-11 ISO/IEC 9075-11 Information technology -- Database languages -- SQL -- Part 11: Information and definition schemas (SQL/schemata)  [15]  “Metadata-Driven SQL Design Document”, Red Hat Enterprise Applications [http://ccm.redhat.com/doc/core-platform/5.0/infrastructure/persistence/doc/persistence-metadata-sql-design.html][16]  “XMI”, Metadata Interchange Standards, Diffuse Project, European Commission’s Information Society Technologies (IST) [Metadata Interchange Standards  HYPERLINK "http://www.diffuse.org/meta.html#XMI" http://www.diffuse.org/meta.html#XMI][17]  [DoD DIR 8170 Global Information Grid (GIG) Information Management (IM)][18]  [NCES Meta-Data Registries, Open Forum 2003 Paper]Authors:Kenn Atkinson is a Scientist for Science Applications International Corporation, assigned to the Support Staff for the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office. He has 23 years experience in software development and RF measurement systems.  Mr. Atkinson is a Registered Professional Engineer, received a Masters in Engineering Administration from the University of Utah and a Bachelors in Physics from the Brigham Young University.Philomena (Phil) Zimmerman has worked 18 years in development and testing for the DoD.  For the last nine years, she has worked in the development of simulation software, and the creation and management of distributed simulation systems, largely for the Test and Evaluation community.  She is currently on a rotational assignment, from the Naval Research Laboratory, to the Defense Modeling and Simulation office, working as the Associate Director, Joint Programs and Transformation Initiatives.     Ms. Zimmerman received a BS in Mathematics from St. John Fisher College.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1 Metadata Standards