APLET Course of Action Analysis and C4I-Simulation InteroperabilityLionel KhimecheDélégation Générale pour l’Armement (DGA)SPOTI18, rue du Docteur ZamenhofFort d’Issy les Moulineaux92131 Issy les Moulineaux cedex, FranceTel : +33 (0)141463631, Fax : +33 (0)141463314lionel.khimeche@dga.defense.gouv.frPatrick de ChampsEADS Systems & Defence Electronics6, rue DewoitineBP1478142 Velizy Villacoublay CEDEX FranceTel : +33 (0)134637592, Fax : +33 (0)134637157patrick.de-champs@sysde.eads.netKey Words :M&S and C4I Interoperability, Data Models, COA Analysis, Decision Aid, SICFABSTRACT: APLET (acronym for "Aide à la PLanification d’Engagement Tactique ") is a French MoD R&T program which aims to investigate the capabilities offered by simulation that could be integrated into a Brigade / Division-level C4I. The study is dedicated to exploring the technical issues of C4I - simulation coupling and to clarifying the concept of use of simulation for COA (Course of Action) analysis. A demonstrator will be implemented to prove the feasibility of the technical approaches studied and recommended for future use.This paper presents the works led to define interoperability between simulation for COA analysis and SICF, the French Army C4I. First, the French Military Decision Making Process used at tactical level and called MEDO (Méthode d’Elaboration d’une Décision Opérationnelle) will be introduced. Then, the main operational requirements concerning simulation for COA analysis will be presented. The second part of the paper will be focused on the definition of the simulation data model, which has to be consistent with SICF data representation. The third part will present the analysis of various C4I-simulation interoperability methods: use of a specific XML bridge, use of the French Army messaging repository SICAT, use of the messaging mechanism or the data replication mechanisms of MIP (Multilateral Interoperability Program) and the consequences in terms of data models alignment. Finally, the recommendations stemming from this study will be developed.This program is a part of different works on C4I-simulation interoperability led by the French MoD. A short-term objective is to obtain an operational interoperability between C4I and simulations that meets first class military requirements. A mid-term objective is to reach the alignment of C4I and simulations data models. The long-term objective is to define a common repository (or the architecture alignment) to reach the « natural » interoperability allowing embedding simulation into C4I.IntroductionAPLET is a French MoD R&T program which aims to analyze simulation CONOPS (Concepts of Operations) in order to facilitate and improve Course of Action Analysis performed within Brigade or Division Headquarters fitted with the C4I system named SICF. In addition, APLET addresses the technical issues of C4I – simulation coupling.APLET’s main objectives are the following:to automate the Military Decision Making Process for Course of Action Analysis;to foresee capabilities and added value given by simulation in case of close integration with C4I systems and as an example with SICF;to explore, solve C4I and simulation interoperability issues and propose recommendations to bridge the gap between those systems;to define the suitable simulation granularity allowing Courses of Action Analysis, COAA, in a tied period and experiment new algorithms like RDE (Reaction Diffusion Equation);to propose mechanisms to automatically produce Operation Orders from a selected Course of Action.The APLET program is divided into three phases. The first one called preliminary study aims to address the gathering of operational requirements and the analysis of different technology for C4I and simulation coupling. This phase ends with a mock-up illustrating the military requirements collected during interviews. The second phase goal is the development of a demonstrator for Brigade COAA that highlights the usability and the effectiveness of the technical recommendations raised during the preliminary study phase. This demonstrator will be tested in real situation during a Brigade exercise in June 2004. The third and final phase objective is the realization of a second demonstrator addressing the COAA at Division level. The latter demonstrator will of course take into account the lessons learned during the second phase experimentation. Finally, the overall program ends in 2006 with the specifications for an operational system.The present paper is focused on the work performed during the APLET preliminary study phase. First, the French Military Decision Making Process and the main operational requirements will be introduced. Then, the process led to choose a simulation data model and a mechanism for C4I-simulation interoperability will be presented and detailed. Finally, the recommendations for the first APLET demonstrator will conclude the paper.Operational process & requirements for Course of Action (CoA) AnalysisThe French Army Military Decision Making ProcessThe French Army Military Decision Making Process is named MEDO, which stands for “Méthode d’Elaboration d’une Décision Opérationnelle”. MEDO aims at presenting to the Force Commander the main analysis and synthesis elements that will allow an engagement decision and the drafting of an operation order for subordinates.MEDO is implemented at the tactical level, from LCC-level to Squadron-level. It allows the HQ Staff to study and to research solutions for tactical problems in a rational way. The decision-making cycle is triggered by an operation order received from the superior level or by an evolution of the ongoing situation.MEDO is made of four main phases:The first phase is the analysis of the tactical situation that is divided in essential elements such as: own forces, opposite forces, terrain, population, etc. The data collected during the analysis are synthesized for choosing “centers of gravity”, “decisive points” and finally the “major effect”;The second phase is dedicated to the elaboration of possible maneuvers;The third phase is the decision phase:  the comparison of friendly and opposite Courses of Action takes place and finally ends with the selection of a preferred Course of Action;The operation order is drafted during the fourth and final phase.At Brigade level, officers involved in the MEDO process are: the General or his deputy, the chief of Staff, the HQ cell leaders (intelligence, planning, logistics, C4I) and the specialized arms liaison officers (Artillery, Engineer, Signals, etc).Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1: the MEDO processThe Figure 1 previous diagram depicts for the different MEDO phases the tasks that must be performed within a time-constrained period.The Brigade drafts approximately one OPO (Operation Order) every 24 hours and one WINGO (Warning Order) every 12 hours. The following sections detail for the Brigade level the MEDO activities.Phase 1, Brigade: H to H + 1 hourAfter reception of an OPO from Division, the G3/G5 cells of the Brigade HQ analyze the main paragraphs of this order:Forces situation,Mission,Operation objectives.Each HQ cell makes so in order to prepare the first meeting with the Brigade commander. The purpose of this meeting is to align the common understanding of the order, to collect the initial assessment of the Brigade General as well as his first guidance.After this meeting, a WINGO (Warning Order) is generally sent to the subordinate Units to alert them on forecast operations. The WINGO purpose is to inform as soon as possible the subordinate Units that an order is on preparation. Thus, they can already anticipate any preparatory actions needed, and make so with their own subordinates.Phase 2, Brigade: H+1 hour to H+4 hoursThis phase is dedicated to analysis: HQ cells study with details the time and space frames and friendly and opposite forces. Each cell balances constraints, imperatives and tasks to be realized.All these elements allow to determine enemy “gravity centers” as well as the “balance of forces”, and finally to choose a “major effect”. At the end of this reflection, several types of requests can be sent to Division level concerning:Reinforcement of the Brigade (units, material),Supports,Intelligence,Modification of the operations area limits,Timing modifications.Phase 3, Brigade: H+4 hours to H+6 hoursThis phase is dedicated to Course of Action elaboration, as well for the friendly side as for opposite forces. CoA, Courses of action, are independently elaborated by two distinct cells of headquarters:The G3/G5 cell elaborates tentative friendly CoA,The intelligence cell (G2) elaborates possible enemy CoA.Each CoA must be rather general and characterized by a particular style, according to the type of effort: space, time, etc.After CoA elaboration, the comparison takes place: for each friendly / opposite CoAs couple. The balance of advantages, drawbacks and risks is determined. The choice of the preferred CoA is made from those elements. The analysis is based on selection parameters determined by the Brigade commander, as he wishes for example to privilege speed, surprise, or security of maneuver. These criteria are related to operations as well as to the commander’s personality.Finally, the CoAs and the comparison results are presented to the General who selects one. Most of the time, he requires refinements and improvements before officially committing the right CoA. Guidance is given too to the OPO editorial staff.Phase 4, Brigade: H+6 hours to H+12 hoursThis stage deals with the OPO drafting and broadcasting. To apply the previously approved CoA, all HQ cells draft the OPO paragraphs related to them. The G3/G5 cells draft the following paragraphs:Own forces situation,Mission,Situation assessment,Main elements of the maneuver,Distribution of missions,Coordination instructions.The G5 ensures coordination between the other involved cells during drafting, and thereby the consistency of the OPO. At the end of this phase, the order is sent to the subordinates by G2.Operational Requirements concerning simulation for CoA AnalysisThe MEDO process, detailed in the previous section, is an intellectual process, not yet supported by any tool. During the first months of the APLET project, French Army officers’ requirements for a simulation supporting MEDO were collected. This section summarizes their main requirements:Process:Within a national context, the simulation shall support the MEDO process. For operations in a multinational context, the simulation shall support the NATO process, named OPP (Operations Planning Process). OPP is quite similar to the MEDO.Scope of Operations:The simulation will be used for “high intensity” operations, at Division or Brigade level.Subordinate Units:Simulated Subordinates Units shall be armor and infantry units for CoA definition, and supporting units for CoA refinement.Main constraints:SICF connection with the APLET simulation is a key requirement: interoperability is necessary to avoid delays due to manual data replication in both systems.The timing constraints are the following:At Brigade level, the simulation will be used every 8 to 12 hours, during no more than 2 hours at a time.At Division level, the simulation will be used every 24 to 48 hours, no more than 3 hours at a time.Symbologie:Units and activities cartographic representation shall be NATO APP-6A.Main services:The main services expected from the simulation system to support the MEDO process are:For the analysis phase:Transfer SICF data to simulation: mission, order of battle (OOB), situations,OOB edition capabilities.For the CoA definition phase:Use of templates for units deployment,Missions definition,Cartographic display and schedule display.For the confrontation phase:Capability to simulate combats dynamically,Cartographic display of a confrontation (optional mode, with lower priority than simulation in automatic mode),CoA modification during confrontation (step-by-step definition, wargaming).For the CoAs comparison phase:Use of qualitative and quantitative criteria,Comparison of confrontations results,Synthesis matrix (COA advantages, drawbacks, risks).For OPO drafting:Use of sentence templates to generate a pattern of OPO for the selected CoA (this pattern of OPO being coherent with the simulated scenario from time and geographic points of view),Export towards SICF.From an operational point of view, APLET main requirements are the following:APLET is mainly focused on phase 2, 3 & 4 of MEDO (CoA elaboration, confrontation and comparison).Interoperability with SICF is a key point.Simulations have to run in compressed time. Thus, special effort must be made on APLET MMI (Man Machine Interface) and simulation algorithms capabilities. In addition, the use of user-defined templates will help to reduce the time needed for CoA configuration.C4I & simulation data modelsThe second part of the paper is focused on the definition of the simulation data model, which has to be consistent with SICF data representation.APLET data model definition:The process was first to define a “coarse grain” APLET data model, to analyze exchange requirements with SICF and to identify objects impacted by these exchanges. The figure hereafter illustrates APLET and SICF exchange requirements:Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2: APLET-SICF Exchange RequirementsMore generally, the following data must be managed within APLET:Technical data for APLET software application.Operational data from SICF: terrain, order of battle (OOB), situations, operation order (OPO).Operational data for simulation models needs: formation template, decision-making and physical behaviors.Operational data for CoA selection: CoA criteria, results, and indicators.C4I data models analysis:The second step was the identification of a C4I data model that could be re-used and improved to build the APLET data model. This analysis led to the conclusion that the ATCCIS GH6 data model was the most suitable to APLET requirements, for the following reasons:GH6 is a recent and very complete model (good coverage of the land forces requirements);Most of APLET data can be represented with the GH6 data model;GH6 is the current convergence point of the C4I international community works and is supported from an operational point of view;In addition, of course, it is of no use to reinvent everything!This data model is mainly used as an “exchange data model”. The future trend, for new systems like APLET, is to use it as an internal data model. This avoids problems for interoperability and data exchanges with other “GH6 compliant” systems.GH6 description:GH6 is an object model, structured in two main parts. The first part of the model deals with “physical objects”, and is the biggest part (about 70% of the data model). The second part deals with military actions, military capabilities and other notions like objectives for targeting.Many of those data are operational as depicted in the figure below (“physical” objects are defined with attributes such as: type, identity, status, location…):Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3: GH6 ObjectsAPLET data model:Finally, the last part of this study was the refinement of the APLET data model: each APLET object is derived from a GH6 object, with necessary modifications or adaptations when it is required.Recommendations:The APLET data model derived from the GH6 will be enriched with specific objects needed for simulation, document management and software needs.C4I – Simulation interoperability analysisThe third part of the paper gives an overview about the three different C4I-simulation interoperability mechanisms studied, in a systematic approach, to perform the connection between APLET and SICF.Those mechanisms are:An XML bridge,The French Army messaging repository, SICAT,The multinational messaging system: MIP.XML bridgeThe SICF XML bridge is a mean to import and export data from and to SICF. It allows exchanging data in SICF format by means of files in XML language.A prototype has been tested with SICF V1 and this XML bridge will be integrated into the next SICF software release, SICF V2.The XML bridge provides a powerful interoperability mechanism with SICF V2, whose data model is derived from GH6.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 4: SICF V2 – APLET XML exchangesInteroperability between SICF V1 and APLET would be less efficient, because of SICF V1 data model derived from ADatP-3. Thus, the data model “alignment” between SICF V1 and APLET is complex due to “semantic distance” between SICF V1 and APLET. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 5: SICF V1 – APLET XML exchangesA typical example of “semantic distance” is depicted in figure 6 below: the right side of the diagram enumerates the GH6 list for units “hostility codes”. Eleven different values are available. The values for the same attribute in SICF V1 are listed on the left side of the figure. Three values only are available. This example demonstrates that information will be lost in exchanging such attributes between APLET and SICF V1.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 6: SICF V1 – APLET Examples of « semantic distance »Recommendations:The XML bridge is an efficient mean for the connection between SICF and APLET. However, its use depends on the SICF releases (SICF V1 and AICF V2) which data models are different. For SICF V2, the XML mean is quite simple to operate because APLET and SICF V2 share the same data model. For SICF V1, it is more tricky because the conversion of data types (units, installations, limits, etc…) is complex and must be studied on a case-by-case basis. The issue could be easier if the XML bridge is only used for the common object. Moreover, the XML bridge is a fully SICF oriented solution.SICAT messaging repositorySICAT is the repository for interoperability between French Army C4I systems (SICF, SIR, ATLAS, MARTHA, SGEA, CECORE). SICAT is originally derived from NATO ADatP-3, with specifically French improvements.SICAT is made of exchange models, describing information to be exchanged between systems. These exchange models follow the usual operational procedures based upon messages: Operation order (OPO), Situation report (SITREP)…The complexity of exchanges between SICF and APLET by using SICAT is the same compared with the SICF V1 – APLET XML exchanges:Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 7: SICF – APLET SICAT exchangesThe data model “alignment” complexity is illustrated above and depicted in the figures below, with several examples of “semantic distance” between SICF V1 and APLET. On the diagram upper left side, the list of SICAT characteristics for units is given. SICAT manages a “level of confidence” for each attribute. Those informations cannot be found in GH6, which manages confidence only at the highest level of an object and not at the attribute level.The second example addresses the comparison of “hostility-codes” in SICAT (the list is given on the diagram bottom left side) and GH6 (the list is given on the diagram bottom right side). GH6 codes marked with a parenthesis have no equivalence in SICAT, and cannot be exchanged from APLET (GH6 based object model) to SICF using SICAT repository. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 8: SICF– APLET SICAT exchangesExamples of « semantic distance »Another limitation is the non-bijectivity of the exchanges. The “task group” in SICAT has no equivalence in GH6, and must be replaced by “OTHER” in a SICF ( APLET exchange. The reversed exchange (from APLET to SICF) for the same unit does not allow getting back the original value.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 9: non-bijectivityRecommendations:The SICAT mechanisms are complex to use with APLET due to the issue of data conversion and non-bijectivity. In fact, SICAT was built upon ADatP-3 and thus the alignment with APLET data model is tricky. Moreover, SICAT does not provide a mean to exchange OOB. In the future, since SICF efforts will be oriented towards MIP and since no major improvements will be made on SICAT, this way to perform the exchange between SICF and APLET is doomed.MIPMIP is a multinational effort to promote C4I interoperability for ground operations at multinational and combined levels. Several NATO Centers and many nations, including France, are involved in the MIP program.The MIP standard includes:The definition of the GH6 data model,The definition of 2 exchange mechanisms:Message Exchange Mechanism (MEM) using ADatP-3 syntax or a more compact format called PDU (Protocol Data Unit).Data Exchange Mechanism (DEM) based on database replication: Filtering of data to be replicated and automatic sending to the addressee (push mode).The complexity of MIP exchanges between SICF and APLET is reduced due to the choice of the GH6 data model for APLET.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 10: MIP exchangesHowever, the current limitations of MIP exchanges are the lack of explicit notions of SITUATION (this object doesn’t belong to the data model; there is a CONTEXT object, that can be used to provide a collection of objects like units to implement a SITUATION). Moreover, the OOB cannot be exchanged and free text is not used even for comments. In addition, they are limitations for graphic representation of activities as depicted in the figure below where the “action” is connected to two “OBJECT-ITEM”. The location of the first one is the starting point of the action. The location of the second OBJECT-ITEM, which is the ACTION-OBJECTIVE, is the final point of the action. The intermediate points to proceed the action cannot be easily transmitted using the MIP exchange mechanism.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 11: limitations for graphic representationLimitations exist also concerning the exchange mechanisms. For MEM mechanism, messages are technically oriented (transfer of data tables) and have no operational meaning. The DEM mechanism is a technical approach, and no concept of use is defined at that time. However, the MIP model is still evolving. France participates in these tasks and will submit change proposals according to the APLET lessons learned.Recommendations:Despite those limitations, the MIP interface is a rather simple mean because the data models of SICF V2 and APLET are close to the “pivot” model (GH6). Moreover, SICF V1 and V2 provide a gateway for MIP interoperability.The exchange mechanism (MEM or DEM) is not yet chosen at the current stage. Conceptually and operationally, the MEM mechanism seems better suited to the APLET-SICF dynamic exchanges than the databases replication for the following reasons:exchanges are occasional and immediate;it is forbidden to modify the data of each system in real time. During the COAA stage, SICF would not provide inputs to APLET. Otherwise, the CoA comparison will not be based on the same assumptions. In addition, SICF current operational information must only be modified under strict user control.MIP mechanisms are international standards and seem more relevant in order to promote the use of COAA systems with other national C4I.Conclusions & recommendationsAPLET preliminary study issued the following recommendations for current SICF connection to APLET COAA demonstrator:SICAT derived from the legacy standard AdatP3 is complex and thus requires an expensive formatting technology. This option has no future within APLET;MIP interconnection provides a suitable way with a reasonable implementation cost. The choice of the MEM or DEM mechanism can be differed;SICF XML bridge is the best option to reach the interoperability with APLET. Nevertheless, some limitations occur with SICF V1 due to SICF V1 data model, which is really different from the APLET one.In conclusion, APLET V1 and V2 demonstrators will use the SICF XML bridge. This native SICF mechanism is the easiest way to provide the fullest spectrum of capabilities to reach the interoperability with the APLET COAA demonstrator. The MIP mechanisms, MEM or DEM will only be experimented for APLET V2. Thus, France will probably submit Change Proposals to the MIP community according to the lessons learned.AcknowledgmentsSpecial thanks to the French officers who have committed to support the APLET preliminary study in providing operational requirements advice and guideline:EMF 3: LCL Mercury, CBA Bonnaire, Capt. CostantiniCEPC: LCL Leitner, LCL BottetCFAT: CBA ClementCROSAT: LCL de VathaireAuthor BiographiesLionel Khimeche is a R&T program manager in the field of M&S for forces readiness (ESTHER), support to operation (APLET) and C4I-Simulation Interoperability (CALIPSO) at the French MoD (DGA/SPOTI Délégation Générale de l’Armement / Service des Programmes d’Information, de Télécommunications et d’Observation). Within NATO, he is the MSG-002 “M&S Support from PATHFINDER Programs to bi-SC Staff Training and Exercises Capabilities”, Co-Chairman. In addition, he has international responsibilities as French Technical Project Officer for the DEA1188 dealing with Training Devices and Simulation Technology and French chairman for the simulation group of the French-German Electronic CommissionPatrick de Champs is APLET project manager for EADS S&DE. He has been involved in projects in the simulation area and in the intelligence area for French Army and French MoD. PAGE 7/ NUMPAGES 7