Training ForumChairChris WertmanVice ChairScott JohnstonSecretaryVacantObjectives for this Workshop:Provide an interface between user requirements and standards development.Provide a forum for Users to describe M&S shortfalls.Provide linkage for the Users to the Technical Community.Provide a forum for the Technical Community to present potential solutions to Users.Comments and Recommendations:The new format for the workshops with all forums compressed into two days does not allow the Training Forum the best opportunity to meet their objectives.  Meeting the objectives assumes that members of the Technical Community, in particular the C4I forum was meeting at a different time than the Training Forum.  The new format, while it allows significantly greater opportunity for PDGs & SGs may significantly impact on Training’s ability to effectively interact with associated Technical Forums. We are not suggesting that the workshop return to the old format, however, we would ask that methods and processes be considered to facilitate this dialog and interactions which we believe could be lost.Several areas/presentations generated a great deal of interest and discussion which will be worth pursuing in future workshops.  These includeHuman Behavior Representation, particularly in OOTW & MOUT.Multi-Resolution representations within a single federation.Distributed & distance training capabilities demonstrated within the California National Guard.Performance Measurements in Simulations.We need to consider a method for previewing or pre-screening presentations prior to “final” acceptance for the workshop.  We realize this will impact on paper submittals and associated timelines, but we continue to find too many presentations which fail to focus on the audience, fail to present the key information until late in a presentation, then only minimally, and presenters who are unable to adequately present the material they have written.  This final area probably could not be addressed through previews, but we believe the first two could.  While this may reduce the total number of papers presented during the workshop, we would help to insure a certain minimal level of professionalism and academic integrity in the papers, which we believe is more important that absolute numbers of papers.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)50Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)61Peak attendance (including joint sessions)63Total papers presentednn“No-show” presentationsnOther presentations and panel discussionsnRecommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):03F-SIW-02203F-SIW-058