System Acquisition and Product Development (SAPD) Forum2003 Fall OutbriefChairJim CoolahanVice ChairTim JahrenSecretary(none)Objectives for this Workshop:Sharing actual experiences from both industry and government regarding M&S standards, information sharing, reuse, collaboration, business cases, policy and process, as applied to system acquisition and product development (SAPD).Identifying approaches to key M&S issues in SAPD.Identifying lessons learned in M&S application to SAPD.Comments and Recommendations:Metadata is a significant issue for the discovery and reuse of data.  “Pedigree” metadata such as use constraints, including applicable operational context, is needed to describe the origin and applicability of data elements for many military analyses.  This type of metadata does not seem to be addressed in existing metadata standards.The model-drive architecture (MDA), the simulation conceptual model, and the DoD Architecture Framework have significant commonalities and overlaps.  The relationships among these concepts warrant examination.Continued SISO focus on this topic is recommended, perhaps leading to a study group.Continued dialog to explore commonalities is warranted.There is a need to investigate how the High Level Architecture (HLA) relates to the MDA, and the process for incorporating the HLA into the MDA suite of standards.SISO should begin a liaison with the Object Management Group (OMG) on this topic.  (Note: SAPD PRP member Judith Dahmann has volunteered to lead this liaison effort, and Jim Hollenbach has volunteered to assist.)Planning for simulation support to system acquisition and product development is an important issue.  Some applicability has been demonstrated in the U.S. Army; it would be useful to broaden this across U.S. Service lines and internationally.A Product Development Group is recommended to formulate recommended practices for planning of simulation support to system acquisition and product development.  (Note: SAPD incoming vice-chair Jean Graffagnini, and outgoing SAPD vice-chair / current VWS chair Tim Jahren have volunteered to help in the establishment of this PDG.)Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)44Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)56Peak attendance (including joint sessions)56Total papers presented12“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions1Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):03F-SIW-09703F-SIW-04403F-SIW-054-  PAGE 1 -