Environmental Data Coding Specification PDGChairBob RichbourgVice ChairDale MillerObjectives for this Workshop:Review status of PDG products to date, discuss planned productsDiscuss status of ISO EDCS and review issue from last PDG meetingDiscuss PDG actions prior to acceptance at ISOComments and Recommendations:Products to data include 2 SISO Reference Products (SIW papers). Next planned activity is for the Drafting Group to produce one more SIW paper (reviewing EDCS content and use) after EDCS reaches status as Final Draft International Standard and documents are made available to the PDG).  Ultimately, the PDG intends to produce a SISO Guidance Product that references the ISO EDCS standard as best practice.The EDCS FDIS should be released to the PDG later this month.  At the last PDG meeting, the group discussed the characteristic of the EDCS that it allows different codes to be used to denote the same concept (e.g., classification LIGHTHOUSE or classification BUILDING with attribute BUILDING_FUNCTION and attribute value LIGHTHOUSE).The PDG affirmed that this characteristic of the EDCS poses a problem for both data producers and data consumers.   Several courses of action that can alleviate the associated problems were discussed.  These included documenting EDCS-to-EDCS mappings, development and imposition of a syntax for EDCS concept definitions, and creating a logical decomposition of EDCS concepts.  The group agreed that EDCS-to-EDCS mappings are desirable and achievable.  A syntax is desirable, but examples are requested prior to assessing achievability.  There was less support for logical decomposition.  The PDG members agreed to post on-hand mappings to the reflector for group review.  The PDG also agreed to review mappings, syntax, and decomposition documents when posted to the reflector.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)15Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)20Peak attendance (including joint sessions)N/ATotal papers presented0“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions0Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):N/A