Should there be Verification Validation & Accreditation (VV&A) of COTS Products used in M&S SystemJohn ChristakosOcean Systems Engineering Corporation703 413 4578jchristakos@osec.comABSTRACT: The Department of Navy Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Verification, Validation and Accreditation (VV&A) Policy, SECNAVINST 5200.40A, states that all M&S will be verified and validated, including (Commercial Off the Shelf) COTS products [].   Although this policy statement is consistent with other Department of Defense (DOD) mandates, the incorporation of COTS has raised numerous debates of its benefits and effectiveness at various forums.  These debates and issues are very relevant to the M&S forum as the DOD increases it use of M&S that infiltrates all levels of decision-making process.  The primary difference between M&S and COTS is their objectives and focuses of the development and intended use.  COTS products are developed for general consumption by the public and for wide dissemination; where as, M&S products are developed for specific ‘intended use’ with assumptions and limitations.  The disparity and contradiction of their objectives raise the question should there be verification, validation, and accreditation of COTS product when these products are used are a part of M&S system. Background: As Department of Defense (DoD) rely more heavily on Modeling and Simulation (M&S) to provide information on which to base their decisions, the credibility of the simulations take on a greater role.  This is gained by using VV&A to ensure the models of a well-defined procedure and standards. Similarly, in the past few years, COTS based tools have become prevalent in the evaluating and testing of systems.  Tools have been designed to evaluate networks, devices, protocols, and applications to mirror the actual network to ensure it maps to the model.  The advent of these tools has reduced the acquisition time to develop and deliver systems.  The authors of this paper determined that after an intensive review of papers and documents discussing the issues of using Commercial off-the-shelf (COTS), it was determined there is a need to discuss the VV&A issues facing program mangers and engineers with the introduction of COTS. This paper will address VV&A issues from the management and users application needs. In other words, it will identify issues for both program managers (PMs) and engineers alike in utilizing of COTs.   1.  IntroductionThe use of M&S has been steadily increasing since its policy inception in early 90’s.  It is predicted that M&S usage will increase even more in light of shrinking defense budget, improved computing power, and readily available technology in the market place.  These models represent all aspects of military, and we heavily relied on them “to training our personnel, plan and conduct operations, develop and procure weapon systems, and analyze force employment alternatives” [].  Bottom line is that M&S has the capability to change the way the Navy looks, feels, and operates.If M&S can impact the Navy, the COTS product is already beating the game by being there, fully integrated in the military systems.  Many contribute the COTS proliferation to the Acquisition Reform Act of 1995 [], and these COTS products have become an integral part of M&S which is much overlooked and underestimated.  These M&S COTS products are used to design military systems, provide data structure, conducts analysis and assessment, and develop the processes in which to conduct our business. 1.1    Issues with COTSThe rush to deploy more integrated and system products, M&S is assuming an ever-larger role in design, development, and acquisition of military systems.  The underscoring theme is investments in M&S are justified when M&S is credible by obtaining a certain level of trustworthiness through implementation control and confidenceAlthough "the COTS solution" appears straightforward and compelling, projects that apply COTS find its use less than straightforward. The relative ease of bringing these pre-built systems into the equation is appealing however; it has not been as ideal as intended.  Applying COTS products is not merely a technical matter for system integrators.  There is a lack of guidelines and policies in place to effectively implement COTs.  It has a profound impact on business, acquisition, and management practices, and organizational structures. Compounding the problem is the limited experience and policy guidance currently available on how to effectively approach system development with commercial components. As government technical teams increase demand for more complex systems with the introduction of COTS this fundamental shift requires new procedures and structures for the program. Far from the expected results, the use of COTS components introduces issues and trade-offs that need to be addressed.  As stated “using a COTS product implies a certain trust of its vendor” [].  Some COTS product has become so much a part of our daily activity that we don’t think twice about the validity of their application.  As an example, word-processing software emulates the information typed on the keyboard.  As the old quote goes ‘a picture is worth a thousand words’, the words typed on the keyboard is displayed on the screen as it was intended to be.  This repeated process validates the results of the word-processing application to represent the reality impose by the user.  Therefore the result of the word-processing correctly models the intention of the user and is valid in the users mind.  This is very simplistic view in which user validation is based on their experience and judgment that is re-enforced through repetition.What happens when situation is more complex and unclear?  What happens when COTS product is embedded in the M&S systems or it acts as peripheral to M&S system in which decision is based upon.  Should we take it for granted that trust is there, and the rigor of validity has been provided by the vendors?   Some considers COTS product as “black box”, meaning what is inside is unknown to the user [].  Only the input and the output of the “black box” are considered.  1.2 COTS for M&SAt the outset, we need to first look at the advantages of commercial, low cost, or COTS packages for the user or developer? Clearly, cost is a significant issue since they allow for the convenience of maintaining and staying within the budget of any developer. While COTS packages may appear expensive, but are really low cost when compared to the cost of developing by the M&S user.  Other advantages to using COTS, includes the schedule aspect which can alleviate the time needed to develop from scratch, however if the package does not fit perfectly with the rest of your system, then the time to integrate it may cut into the schedule savings. Risk should be reduced with COTS packages because, at least in theory, they have been proven effective ("verified and validated") by tens, hundreds, and even thousands of other users. But there can be integration risks as well as risks introduced by potential program modifications. Since one of the great advantages of modeling and simulation is to be able to train and predict the performance of systems in hostile or denied environments, the commercial package must support these if they are needed for your application. This usually means that the package should have the flexibility to accept, as inputs, specific environmental features or environmental data tables, often provided by yet other commercial packages. If the commercial package doesn't quite meet your needs either in features, capability, or speed of execution, then you must trade off the performance shortfall vs. cost, risk, and schedule. Otherwise, you can decide to modify the package. Some COTS packages are completely closed to the user and can be modified only by the initial developer who may decide that is isn't cost effective to make a single modification.  However, there can be significant cost and schedule issues involved in these modifications, and risk, too, since the modified system has no longer been tested by other users.  Support can also be an issue with commercial packages. In M&S the trust is earned through VV&A process that instills the confidence and credibility, and this includes COTS product that are integral part of M&S.  There are numerous literatures relating to COTS product that are published in various magazines, conferences, and forums.  Furthermore, the Software Engineering Institute (SEI) has a special COTS based initiative group just to address the COTS related issues []To satisfy the Navy policy requirement and knowing that COTS can not be ignored in the M&S, the Navy needs to examine its applications and implications.  It is important to understand the divergent objectives of COTS and M&S; what are the impacts on decision making process; how best these to entities can be merged; and what critical elements should COTS satisfy in terms of verification, validation, and accreditation (VV&A).COTS based products offer a wide range of pros such as functionality is usually a fraction of the cost to develop in-house, and maintenance is made by the vendor, again at a fraction of what it would cost to do it in house.  However, issues in the past few years have surfaced that have become apparent to the community of users.  The primary issues have been no access to source code to include no modifying, no control over the requirements of the product, unknown control on the quality, inconsistent documentation, life of the product, no control over source code, etc.   Learning and experience is key to understanding the proper use of COTS that can be worsened with the introduction of COTS.   The role of COTS can be traced back to two US government efforts: Acquisition Reform Act of 1995 and the introduction of Synthetic Based Acquisition. 1.2 Acquisition Reform The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition Reform, in coordination with the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), Joint staffs, military departments, and defense agencies, continues DoD's efforts to fulfill the Defense Acquisition Reform vision -- That DoD will become the world's Smartest (use of best practices), Most Responsive Buyer (timely and flexible) of Best Value Goods and Services that meet our Warfighters' needs." The efforts outlined here are summaries of the major initiatives ongoing at the DoD level. There are numerous other efforts in the military departments and defense agencies, all the way down to individual program offices, purchasing activities, and contract administration and auditing offices. 1.2.1 Commercial Items The FY 1996 Defense Authorization Act further simplified commercial item acquisition by authorizing, for a three year period, commercial item buys up to $5 million in contract value to be purchased using greatly simplified procedures. In addition, the Act lifts burdensome cost or pricing data requirement from all competitive commercial item procurements. The government will be able to buy most commercial items just like any other customer, without imposing virtually all government-unique procurement requirements. This emphasis on performance created a culture in which cost and schedule were thought of as dependent variables in the acquisition process; that is, DoD would specify the performance level that a system must meet and then relax cost and schedule constraints to achieve that outcome. Today, threats are not increasing in capability at as fast a rate as in the past, and the DoD acquisition budget is decreasing in response to this changed national security environment. Therefore cost is a stronger driver in system design. Such an approach is also more consistent with commercial practices in new systems development, where market forces drive the price at which a new system can be offered. In 1995 the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Technology specified that for each new acquisition system, identify opportunities to achieve cost savings through careful evaluation of a wide range of cost-performance tradeoffs. This included a broader policy that incorporates cost-performance tradeoffs, incentives programs for both government and industry, and metrics for implementing cost as an independent variable. Cost as an independent variable means picking the right, affordable cost objective and sticking to it. If warfighter needs cannot be met after exhausting the range of cost-performance tradeoffs available to the warfighter, the milestone decision authority will determine if cost targets should be raised or if the program should be canceled as unaffordable. Cost as an independent variable will work in DoD because it is built on a number of acquisition reform streamlining thrusts such as stating requirements in terms of performance, rather than in detailed, design-specific military specifications; the adoption of commercial practices and the use of commercial products; the shift to an integrated product team management approach; and the adoption of common processes in a facility. The Department expects this will provide quality products that fully meet the warfighter's needs while allowing for substantial reductions in the cost of defense products; more stability for each program; shorter program cycle times; and clearer, innovative design, manufacturing, support, and contracting approaches into the M&S arena. 1.3 Synthetic Based Acquisition Synthetic Based Acquisitions (SBA) is defined as an iterative, integrated product and process approach, which capitalizes on the collaborative use of a robust suite of M&S tools by industry to ensure that the operator’s materiel needs, are satisfied. It is an acquisition methodology that can be applied to both "off-the-shelf" or "to-be-developed" equipment and systems. It involves the application of M&S across all functions and program phases, including identifying the required capability; preparing requests for proposal and evaluating bids; designing, developing, or modifying models or equipment; testing and evaluating the proposed solution; training operators; and ultimately, disposing of the system. The overall objective is to reduce acquisition time, resources, and risk. COTS play a significant role in DOD Acquisition and development.   The use of COTS products as elements of larger systems is becoming increasingly commonplace. Shrinking budgets, accelerating rates of COTS enhancements, and expanding system requirements are all driving this process.   The shift from custom development to COTS-based systems is occurring in both new development and maintenance activities.   Although on the surface "the COTS solution" appears straightforward and compelling, projects that apply COTS find its use less than straightforward. The relative ease of bringing these prebuilt systems into the equation is appealing however; it has not been an ideal as thought.  Applying COTS products is not merely a technical matter for system integrators. It has a profound impact on business, acquisition, and management practices, and organizational structures. Compounding the problem is the limited experience and guidance currently available on how to effectively approach system development with commercial components. As government technical teams increase demand for more complex systems with the introduction of COTS this fundamental shift requires new procedures and structures for the program. Far from the expected results, the use of COTS components introduces issues and trade-offs that need to be addressed.  2. M&S VV&A and Objectives:The synthetic environment brought about by M&S reduces the reliance on costly physical prototypes as a platform for conducting tests. Some physical tests will still be necessary, but their primary purpose will be to validate models and generate confidence in the use of these models within a given envelope. Program managers use VV&A as a risk mitigation tool for M&S.  VV&A is implemented to determine the credibility and usability of the M&S so that it can be used with an acceptable level of confidence.  Similarly, VV&A helps establish the quality of the M&S as it pertains to the specific intended use and supports reuse and policy requirements. VV&A refer to a set of related processes used to ensure that the application of M&S results is appropriate for a specific purpose.  The primary purpose of a V&V effort is to establish the credibility of a model or simulation as a source of data.  Each process is tailored to effectively determine whether the M&S is adequate for a specific use.  V&V are confidence-building activities performed during the M&S development process.  The accreditation authority determines how much V&V is required to establish a high level of confidence that the model, simulation, or distributed test environment as a whole is adequate for the user’s intended application.  Accreditation is a decision to apply M&S and its results for a particular use.  The accreditation process ensures that the M&S produces realistic and credible measurements of performance, or specifically ids the limitations on the use of data and analyses produced.  The accreditation decision is reached following an assessment of the documentation that is provided in the accreditation package and by observation of V&V tests.Planning the V&V effort to applying the process to COTS is the responsibility of all participants who are supporting, developing and using the results of the M&S.   The V&V is a collection and integration of all applicable factors into a document that delineates the V&V program in support of the accreditation plan and objectives.  The initial effort will focus on the needs and objectives that can be derived from the operational requirements.    This allows for the verification and completeness of the system requirements.   When documentation is completed and reviewed for accuracy that support the objectives and requirements and agree with the intended use and application of the M&S. Configuration Management COTsAs discussed above, the V&V process begins with the verification of the objectives. As such this includes review of all historical documentation, as this will identify the understanding and efforts required for the M&S. The foremost area is the category of Configuration Management.   As a major aspect of V&V, CM is an integral part of the process supports the proponents and agents performing the V&V.  From a COTS perspective, the CM activities include managing the disposition of component versions at each location, by tracking the versions, installations and interoperability with other different components. Research revealed a significant issue facing V&V from the CM perspective.  Other areas that revealed issues in the CM arena were the lack of mechanisms of tracking different versions of COTS components being used.   This allows for the tracking of versions available and actual versions being used.  Similarly, COTS utilization has shown that in all cases, internal documentation may be non-existent or not accessible.  Is the documentation adequate?  The research revealed normally installation documentation is limited and are the manuals accurate and well written?   This can significantly add to the cost of the program by not understanding the kernel information to allow for a smooth integration and alternatively adding significant expense not budgeted. [7] Other area of concern is the impact COTS has on behavioral patterns.  There is a need to understand how the components were developed and if not available, the user will have an incomplete understanding of the properties.  This leads to the incompatibility with other selected components in the architecture.  Furthermore, future releases of the software are unscheduled and many times difficult to integrate.  Other CM issues beyond documentation that arise are in the area of logistics and support.  Maintenance and upgrade activities of a COTS based system require further examination and documentation. Will the vendor support the product or as we have seen or heard that a vendor who was the sole proprietor has discontinued use or terminated the line.  Similarly, maintenance and upgrade activities can affect a system in a significant way.  Systems with several commercial components have an extremely heavy dependency on the release cycles of products that need to be well documented and understood.  Different pieces of a system being upgraded at intervals can result in numerous unforeseen problems, such as naming conventions and incompatibility with other components. These are just a number of scenarios that, without a strong CM, can have a detrimental affect on the cost and impact of the product2.1.1 RequirementsAs with all programs, requirements analysis is mandatory.  An initial requirements analysis clarifies the type of COTS that could be more suitable for the project.  More in-depth analysis of COTS excludes some of them and proposes others.  Selecting a COTS impacts the set of requirements gathered, some of them become easily satisfied, and some could be identified as a consequence of the COTS selected. [8] System requirements describe the desired system behavior and capability with a set of specified conditions.  For a COTS based-system, the specified requirements must be sufficiently flexible to accommodate a variety of available commercial products and their associated fluctuations over time.  To write such requirements, the author must know enough about the commercial marketplace to describe functional features for which commercial products exists.There is a critical relationship among technology and product selection, requirement specification, and architecture definition.  If you define your architecture to fulfill your requirements and then select your COTS products, you may have only a few or no available products that fit within the chosen architecture.  Pragmatically, three essential elements (requirements, architecture, and product selection) must be worked in parallel which constant trade-offs among them. [9]Similarly, studies have discussed the efforts [10] that required them to change the requirements much more frequently until they became more knowledgeable about a particular component.  This included adding functionality and modification to the initial design.  The conclusion reached suggested the introduction of a more generalized set of requirements as a tool in COTS based development and utilization. This approach/philosophy however leads to difficulty in the DoD arena.  Current acquisition processes and procedures require system requirements up front to allow the program manager to decide on what approach to embark.  If the requirements are ambiguous, uncertainty will impact the program.  In order to ensure success a successful program, the VV&A process is an important step in achieving this goal by clarifying a more predictable and accurate model that will reduce program risk.  3 Conceptual ModelsEvery simulation is developed for a particular purpose.   As discussed above, the purpose for the M&S is specific and in accordance with the objectives and requirements.  In the perfect world, all requirements are delineated and accurately spelled out.  However based on the empirical data, this is normally not the case.  The conceptual model describes in detail how the simulation translates the objectives and requirements into specifications that contain the detail from a successful implementation.[11]  Furthermore the model is a description of all to ensure that it carries all the requirements.  It reflects the complete set of all requirements that satisfy users and system needs.  Similarly conceptual models offer the additional luxury of offering the ability for reuse or in combination with other simulations.   During the development of the conceptual model, the developer needs to be fully aware of what is expected from the requirements.  Here the domain experts and developers must maintain communication.  The introduction of COTS offers an additional layer of concern/ issue.  If the development of the conceptual model dictates that documentation is necessary for successful implementation, the COTS segment of the M&S must be available and complete.  If not, this leads to the issue that lacking the proper and complete documentation can lead to a simulation with errors and more specifically the unknown if the simulation can be used in again in a distribute environment.  This reflects the need by all to ensure all the proper information is available.  If not, a risk assessment must be ascertained to determine the consequences for using this particular COTS product.  Unknown performance specs and black box information is a serious determinant in the decision making process. 3.1 Intended Use:  "The selection of a model which provides the highest level of accuracy and fidelity by identifying critical parameters that provide results for levied program requirements that are representative of the state and behavior of a real world object".As similar to the conceptual model, a model and simulation (M&S) application is built for a specific purpose to represent a system and its acceptability is established with respect to that purpose.  The acceptability is expressed in terms of intended use.  The quality of the intended use significantly affects the quality of the acceptability decision.   This representation of the relationship between the model and the system with respect to the intended uses establishes the model fidelity for which it is assessed to perform.  The model fidelity is selecting the critical parameters that will give the results for which the model represents. The credibility of an M&S application can be identified only for the prescribed conditions for which the M&S application is specified.  Furthermore, the accuracy is based on the characteristics of the input-output conditions.  The resulting output of an M&S application is affected by the input.  Needless to say, the results for one set of inputs can produce an erroneous output when conducted under another set of input conditions.  The introduction of COTS to the M&S can further present a difficult situation.  If the developer does not understand the product that is embedded into the M&S, the results can be erroneous as compared to the input-output conditions.Intended use includes the description of the input data under which the M&S application is to perform.   The input data should reflect the significant aspects of the requirements for which the simulation is to perform. This translates to the accuracy of the input-output data conditions.  Similarly, the V&V of the design is significant aspect of the determination of intended use.  The M&S application can be created to be acceptable, but its results can be erroneous or useless due to a poor design. For a simulation to be useful it obviously has to accurately reflect its intended use within the system and satisfy the explicit requirements of its targeted users. If such relevancy requirements are not met the utility of the simulation (at least for its intended users) will be greatly diminished. Although lengthy and cumbersome to develop at times, user requirements are necessary to ensure the model and/or simulation does exactly what the user wants it to do. The system user, with the assistance of the model/simulation developer, is responsible for developing these requirements. The type of requirements developed depends upon the type of system being defined; i.e., analytical system, training system, educational system, etc. In summary, the first step in developing simulation requirements is the development of the user requirements. The user requirements will define the purpose of the model or simulation. They describe what the user wants the model/simulation to accomplish. The ‘‘what's,’’ ‘‘how's,’’ and ‘‘ why's,’’ concerning the objectives of the simulation will drive its explicit user requirement.These requirements provide the foundation for the User Requirements. They break the user requirement down into manageable pieces that system experts use to define requirements within their areas of expertise. They provide more descriptive listings of the essential elements that a model must accomplish. The Joint Warfare Simulation (JWARS) program office performed intense review of the program’s Operational Requirements Document (ORD) to ensure the program’s intended use was performed.  As a result of an intense decomposition of the requirements and accompanying essential elements that has made the JWARS program achieve the necessary levels of validation and accreditation. 3.1.1 Testing and Associated Validity Once the V&V is performed, these validated models can be reused to perform numerous "virtual" tests within this proven operational envelope at a fraction of the time and cost associated with multiple physical tests. The primary benefit includes the elimination of risks. Simulations can also help focus the test effort on the critical evaluation areas, thereby avoiding unnecessary physical testing. As well, testing in a virtual environment permits parallel, rather than sequential testing. All these possible benefits in the realm of T&E permit the fielding of materiel at a faster and potentially cheaper rate.	The introduction of COTS proffers the enormous potential to save time and money in testing of and using COTS products to test.  Current approaches for simulations often require “bridged” or glueing together applications to accommodate different portions of a design that result in complex interfaces with the high chance of erroneous results. However, the user is faced with the problem of voracity with the COTS product performing as advertised.   This concern expands to the COTS not adversely affecting the system and that it does not create errors that permeates through the entire system. [12]. Similarly,  issues and questions concerning the reliability of COTS when there is no data from the vendor; and further questions the reliability of COTS when embedded in a larger system.Other techniques discussed the use of performing the black box testing approach vice the white box approach.  The white box approach is to draw from the internals and is concerned with testing the logic/structure used to achieve the results. Black box techniques only require the requirements the component needs to satisfy, something the COTS components user could supply.  However discussion previously raised the concerns of uncertainty with the testing.  Combined with the approach of glueing or bridging software as a top layer further compound the testing problem. What happens if the bridging software is separate COTS, how does that effect the overall product and is it accurate?4.  Management of COTSNumerous issues have been raised that have ripple effects across layers of the entire system.  Although difficult to prioritize which issue will have the greatest impact we will just delineate the issues facing managers today.  Licensing is a serious issue because the buyer and vendor in most cases face difficulty because of the terms and conditions under which the buyer may use, now own, the software and the extent of the vendor’s support.  Similarly, the escalating costs if future versions of components and licenses need to be addressed. Difficulty lies in negotiating a license that facilities, not hinders, the development and maintainability of today’s military systems. Reliability of a COTS packages is a significant factor that can best be assessed by understanding the range of other client applications and installations, and the vendor’s track record in building reliable COTS products.  Moreover, the project reliability requirements need to be assessed with respect to the cost incurred to provide certain levels of reliability.  The openness of a COTS product is crucial in applications where many COTS products are being integrated. Also understanding the reliability and stability of vendors can aversely affect your time schedule and budget.  This includes what support you can receive from the supplier and does the vendor understand what you intend to do with the product. Recommended practices include reviewing the products available on both the products and vendors. Similarly reviews of products require the effort to provide additional information in making selections.  Documented experience with the product in a demanding application that requires integration and performance is seldom available in popular reviews.  Evaluating and assessing COTs products are obviously tailored to accommodate the need. In fact, cost and features often drive the decisions to purchase a particular product, while other factors are given ample consideration such as functionality, performance, security, usability, etc to include obsolescence during the system lifespan. Characteristics of COTS is the product is designed to be sold to multiple customers with minimal changes with a shorten delivery schedule and ongoing support provided by the vendor.   To reinforce the definition of COTs, no single customer has control over specification, schedule, or evolution. [13] COTs are developed for larger commercial markets and provide the variety of useful and desirable features for a targeted market.  Therefore development for specific systems needs is not cost effective or desired by the vendor.[14]5.0 Conclusion  The research performed for this paper has raised other interesting challenges that warrant future studies.  However the realization that COTS is here to stay, the issue is how do we apply the traditional methods of VV&A to a commercial product where in some cases with limited reference material.  The use of COTS enables the government and developers to focus on providing the defense-unique needs. Implementing the VV&A process is a recognized and accepted process for all M&S.  COTS utilization in M&S is now a resident element for DoD. Accomplishing VV&A with COTS is a relatively difficult concept or approach.    The introduction of COTS into the equation presents challenges to both the developer and user.  How is this product that was purchased from a vendor going to fit in to a simulation, with an intended use that was not intended.  How do we compensate for the lack of documentation, or source code (in most cases).    Although policy has been promulgated and there are strong products on the market, the intent of integrating into a simulation was never thought out.  What is known, is COTS integration into M&S, requires appropriate planning and contracting for COTS acquisition to handle the issues described above. In particular, it should be noted that defense COTS are almost never commercial items in themselves, but are large, complex, software-intensive systems, some of whose components contain COTS software. What is desired is a balanced solution among COTS, reuse, and newly developed software to meet the COTS cost, schedule, and performance objectives. [15]To support defense programs in acquiring COTS, there must be an initiative to establish engineering initiatives.  First, promulgation of some guidance document for COTS VV&A to include cost and schedule estimation needs to be developed.  Second, a repository for actual development and sustainment experiences with COTS including V&V experiences needs to be developed and promulgated to COTS acquirers, developers, and sustainers. Finally, from a COTS acquisition perspective, guidance for dealing with COTS should be incorporated into language for incorporation into contracts, and acquisition guidance.  [16]The M&S community should be focusing on an effort that accommodates the preparation of analysis that includes inherent cost, schedule, and performance risks beyond current government or developer control.  While this focus is based on DoD systems, the authors believe COTS applicability lessons learned are applicable to the use of COTS in all large, M&S software-intensive system. [] SECNAVINST 5200.40A (draft)[] Navy Modeling and Simulation Management Office, Navy Baseline Assessment (Draft), 13 Jan 2003[] Acquisition Reform Act 1995[] SEI Joint Program Office, Quotation from Chairman David, A little Red Book of Truth to Enlighten and Guide on the Long March Toward the COTS Revolution, 1998, Pg 5.[] Empirical software simulation for COTS glue code development and integration Baik, J.; Eickelmann, N.; Abts, C.;  Computer Software and Applications Conference, 2001. COMPSAC 2001. 25th Annual International , 2001, Page(s): 297 -302[] http://www.sei.cmu.edu/cbs/[7] The Opportunities and Complexities for Applying Commercial-Off-the shelf Components”, Brownsword, Lisa,  Carney, David, Oberndorf, Tricia, Crosstalk, Apr 1998 [8]Accrediting Complex M&S for an Analysis of Alternatives, Linda Liptak and Peter Delinski, Oct 02[9] VV&A Process Overlay of the FEDEP, Darby and Lewis[10] Evaluating Large COTS Software Packages, N.A.M Maiden and James[11] The Value of Quality Simulation Conceptual Model, Dale Pace[12] V&V of COTs Dormant Code:  Challenges and Issues  Kohl[13] Evaluating Large COTS Software Packages, N.A.M Maiden and James[14] Common Risks and Risk Mitigation Actions for Management of COTS-Based System”, Engert, Pamela and Clapp, Judith,[15] Expanding our Horizons in VV&A Research and Practice, Yucesan, Chen, Snowdon and Charnes[16] Issues and Methods for Assessing COTS Reliability, Maintainability, and Availability, Norman Schneidewind and Allen Nikora