C4I ForumChairDr. Andreas TolkVice ChairJohn Daly SecretaryTom MullinsDon TimianAdin BurroughsObjectives for this Workshop:Evaluate Applicability of M&S in the context of Net-Centric Warfare (Future Combat System, Global Information Grid, M&S Web-Services)Migration Standards for Legacy Solutions, Interoperability of Legacy Solutions (Interfaces and Federations)International OutreachComments, Keypoints and Recommendations:The Joint Technical Architecture (JTA) moved M&S up to be a domain of its own (beside Weapon Systems, Command and Control, and Combat Support).  The M&S domain has no sub-domains so far and only few standards are included.  SISO should submit its products to the JTA to fill this gap.SISO must establish a liaison with the JTA office and submit current and future results to the JTA to actively shape the M&S domain.  M&S Web Services are operationally required (Joint Command and Control, Net Centric Warfare) and become technically feasible.SISO must become the partner for standardizing M&S Web Services.We need improved Coordination of PDG/SG. The development of M&S Web Services must be coordinated with the GIG requirements and vice versa, as M&S will induce a new set of requirements.  The vehicle of SISO to do so is the suite of Study Groups and Product Development Tools.  Examples are the C4ISR/Sim TRM, the BOM, SRML, and increasingly important the XMSF Profile.  Consequently, the Extensible Battle Management Language (X-BML) will be used to establish an XMSF-Profile.  The C4ISR/Sim TRM will be used to define XMSF-Profiles as well.SISO SAC must establish a coordination and collaboration committee to align the requirements of the various SG/PDG and align the results.  SG/PDG are overlapping and not independent. We need either mandatory liaisons within the SG/PDG or support by SAC. As a minimum suggest resuming the practice of sending a posse between inter-related groups to ensure communication.The use of the Model Driven Architecture (MDA) is becoming reality.  The use within the Air Force was presented in the C4I Forum.  Other presentations were given with this topic during Fall 03 SIW as well.SISO must track the use and consider the alignment of Platform Independent Models and should consider the standardization of the profiles (including but not limited to XMSF profiles) promising candidates.Although M&S starts to show up in GIG presentations, the Role of M&S in the new Joint JC2 and GIG Enterprise Services is underrepresented.SISO must participate in the process of defining requirements effecting M&S for the next generation of C4. A Study Group or some other standardization activity should be initiated at the Spring 04 SISO. The DoD is initiating Reference Model Development supporting Net Centric C4 development. Several presentations were concerned with C4 and M&S Reference Model Development.SISO should participate in harmonization between M&S and C4 community Reference Models, possibly by a common MDA approach.The M&S Development Kit for the Common Operating Environment (COE) is now available and can be distributed.  Although it was designed by NRL, it is not only applicable in the GCCS/GCCS-M context but also in the DISA COE, i.e., other services than Navy as well as joint (and combined) COE based simulation becomes possible.SISO – in particular the C4I forum – must observe the development and as soon as it is mature enough should recommend the MSDK for COE as a general SISO standard.Lack of  interoperability can be defined as a failure to integrate. The M&S and C4I communities are both at an historic nexus – both are now switching to web-services to facilitate their interoperability and in near time-synch. Such an opportunity may not happen again this century. Outreach is required in order to meet the minds and form joint requirements.The C4I forum and the planned C4I-Simulation product development group should take advantage of the upcoming Spring SIW in Washington, DC to invite members of the C4I development community to join with us.Since the DIS days, the subjects of communications effects and datalink simulation have been largely ignored. Needs exist for either dedicated conferences for these subjects, or a major focus in SISO. What the community probably does not need is two more simulation conferences.Consider focusing a future call for papers for the C4I forum in each of these subject areas for papers leading to SG/PDG activities, or consider startup-forums within the C4ISR Track addressing these specialty areas.C4I Forum Fall 2003 SIW StatisticsAverage attendance (excluding joint sessions)50Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)69Peak attendance (including joint sessions)65Total papers presented21Other presentations and panel discussions(P) Use of XMSF within the GIG(P) The Extensible Battle Management Language XBML(D) Future of the C4ISR/Sim TRM3