Intelligent Tutoring System InteroperabilityStudy GroupChairTBD by emailVice ChairTBD by emailSecretaryTBD by email EditorTBD by email (thought to be unnecessary for this SG)OrganizerSusann LuperfoyObjectives for this Workshop:Formally launch ITSI Study GroupCollect feedback/suggestions on draft documents and planRefine our framework for interoperability documentationDefine schedule of milestones, roles, and deliverablesComments and Recommendations:Since several of the interested contributors to the SG and stakeholders in our conclusions were not able to attend the workshop, we decided to elect SG officers by email after the workshop.  It was suggested that all officers of the SG be people who will attend SISO workshops.  Two nominations were madeA number of legitimate procedural issues were raisedShould this SG even exist; is there too much overlap with related work done at SAIC, DMSO, and for other customers?  In the interest of progress on the SG topic we had to table that discussion referring requestor to the Executive Committee and the SISO approval process. Concern was expressed that we cite sources of any definitions that appear in the glossary of constructs to be used by this SG.  In the case where we believe our definitions are the product of combined decades of experience in relevant fields and are not traceable to a single source, then it is recommended that we include a bibliography of references.Concern was expressed that the DARWARS vision was too narrow to cover the interests of the entire SISO community.  Our TAD, Mark McCall referred the group to the original TOR and the long-term vision that is articulated there. We believe that the DARWARS vision as we stated it—for multiple users with individual, team, and organization-wide training objectives, logging in and logging out of a persistent simulation-based training systems—subsumes the interests of the contingent of SISO who are interested in intelligent training applications that are software simulation-based.Concern was expressed that we had not included key members of both DARWARS architecture teams.  This concern was dispelled with a review of minutes from our organizational meeting involving members of both teams, and several subsequent meetings involving technical and business leadership from both architecture teams.  We were able to make progress on three of our four agenda items for the workshop including group review of four items:Review of the minutes from our organizational meeting 4/2/03Review of the final approved TOR document as a formal statement of the charter for this Study GroupReview of the general structure for the glossary currently in draft formReport on a series of meetings held at technical conferences to announce the SG to the broadest possible community of stakeholdersAnnouncement of the ITS_resource website as a potential site for hosting bloggs, wikis, and threaded discussions to support subtasks of this SGAnnouncement of the ITSI-SG reflector hosted by SISOReview of the proposed framework for discussion and documentation of ITS interoperability to serve the term of this Study Group.  We agreed to a tentative plan for populating that framework but, running short of time decided to aggregate modifications by email and then define schedule of milestones, roles, and deliverables for the group and for individual members.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)12Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)15Peak attendance (including joint sessions)0Total papers presentedn/a“No-show” presentationsn/aOther presentations and panel discussions0Recommended Reading List nominations would include documentation of related standards efforts such as:JSIMS and JNTCLTSA IEEE 1484SCORM 1.3 standard specsHLA-SCORM architecture (unavailable, expected to appear Spring SIW ’04)John Tyler’s follow-on to LTSA and IEEE 1484 W3C standards for XML, semantic web, etc.	