C4ISR/Sim Technical Reference ModelSourcebookFrank CarrThe MITRE Corporation7515 Colshire Dr.McLean, VA 22102 HYPERLINK "mailto:carr@mitre.org" carr@mitre.org Jim Caylor, P.E. CAE USA / Military Simulation & Training 4908 Tampa West Boulevard Tampa, FL 33684  HYPERLINK "mailto:jim.caylor@cae.com" jim.caylor@cae.comJoseph LaceteraMSTI328 South Main StreetBel Air, MD  21014 HYPERLINK "mailto:lacetera@msti-md.com" lacetera@msti-md.com Andreas Tolk, Ph.D.Virginia Modeling, Analysis & Simulation CenterOld Dominion UniversityNorfolk, VA 23529  HYPERLINK "mailto:atolk@odu.edu" atolk@odu.edu KeywordsC4ISR/Sim Technical Reference Model (TRM), C4ISR-M&S Interoperability, Information Systems Interoperability, Simulation InfrastructureAbstractThis report provides required source material for understanding and using the C4ISR/Sim Technical Reference Model.  It includes the rationale for having such a TRM, a lexicon, and a complete summary of relevant work, with both a specific reference list and a categorical bibliography.  It is intended to be a SISO reference product.PREFACEThe purpose of this document is to provide, in one place, the rationale for having a SISO C4ISR/Sim Technical Reference Model, along with sufficient material to provide the reader with a full understanding of the TRM itself.  It is not a user guide, which would provide a nuts and bolts approach to using the TRM as a guide to interfacing systems and simulations, but rather a general presentation of the TRM, including synopses of previously reported material, a lexicon, and a bibliography.  It should be used by C4ISR/simulation interface developers to fully understand the requirements for true C4ISR/simulation interoperability.  The TRM is furthermore embedded into the broader domain of C4ISR to Simulation System Interoperability issues, such as using standardized components and common infrastructure proposals.A SISO C4ISR/Sim Technical Reference Model user guide is being published separately as a SISO reference product.Table of Contents TOC \o "1-3" \h \z  HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195812" 1	Introduction	 PAGEREF _Toc46195812 \h 3 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195813" 1.1	Historical Background	 PAGEREF _Toc46195813 \h 3 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195814" 1.2	Definitions Related to the TRM	 PAGEREF _Toc46195814 \h 3 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195815" 1.2.1	General Definition of a Technical Reference Model	 PAGEREF _Toc46195815 \h 3 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195816" 1.2.2	Definition of Interoperability	 PAGEREF _Toc46195816 \h 3 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195817" 1.2.3	Definition of the Functional Interface	 PAGEREF _Toc46195817 \h 4 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195818" 1.3	Goals of the TRM	 PAGEREF _Toc46195818 \h 4 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195819" 1.4	Rationale of the C4ISR/Sim TRM	 PAGEREF _Toc46195819 \h 5 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195820" 1.5	Need for Physical Realism	 PAGEREF _Toc46195820 \h 5 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195821" 1.6	TRM Sourcebook Nutshell	 PAGEREF _Toc46195821 \h 6 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195822" 2	The C4ISR/Sim Technical Reference Model	 PAGEREF _Toc46195822 \h 6 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195823" 2.1	The role of the C4ISR/Sim TRM for future IT Architectures	 PAGEREF _Toc46195823 \h 6 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195824" 2.2	The C4ISR/Sim TRM within the context of actual IT Architectures	 PAGEREF _Toc46195824 \h 7 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195825" 2.3	The TRM Functional Interface Graphic	 PAGEREF _Toc46195825 \h 10 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195826" 2.3.1	Information Exchange Categories	 PAGEREF _Toc46195826 \h 10 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195827" 2.3.2	Simulation System Components	 PAGEREF _Toc46195827 \h 13 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195828" 2.3.3	TRM FIG Evolution and Use	 PAGEREF _Toc46195828 \h 14 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195829" 3	Summary of Past and Present Work	 PAGEREF _Toc46195829 \h 14 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195830" 4	Use-Case Analysis	 PAGEREF _Toc46195830 \h 14 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195831" 4.1	Use-Case Studies to Date	 PAGEREF _Toc46195831 \h 14 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195832" 4.2	The Interoperability Analysis Process	 PAGEREF _Toc46195832 \h 15 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195833" 4.3	Relationship of the TRM FIG to the C4I FOM	 PAGEREF _Toc46195833 \h 15 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195834" 4.4	Interface Data Transfer Tables	 PAGEREF _Toc46195834 \h 15 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195835" 5	C4ISR/Sim Analysis in the Context of the TRM	 PAGEREF _Toc46195835 \h 15 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195836" 5.1	Process Evolution	 PAGEREF _Toc46195836 \h 15 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195837" 5.2	Introduction to the Interoperability Analysis Process	 PAGEREF _Toc46195837 \h 15 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195838" 5.3	Section Summary	 PAGEREF _Toc46195838 \h 16 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195839" 6	Summary	 PAGEREF _Toc46195839 \h 16 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195840" 7	Recommendations	 PAGEREF _Toc46195840 \h 16 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195841" 8	Lexicon	 PAGEREF _Toc46195841 \h 17 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195842" 9	References	 PAGEREF _Toc46195842 \h 17 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195843" 10	Categorical Bibliography	 PAGEREF _Toc46195843 \h 18 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195844" 11	Author Biographies	 PAGEREF _Toc46195844 \h 18 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc46195845" 12	Acknowledgments	 PAGEREF _Toc46195845 \h 19IntroductionHistorical BackgroundA key issue for both the Modeling and Simulation (M&S) and the Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) communities is interoperability between C4ISR systems and simulations.  To address this issue, the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) [1] initially chartered a Study Group (SG) for M&S-to-Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I) Interoperability (SG-C4I), which began work at the 1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW) and submitted a final report [2] to SISO at the Fall 2000 SIW.  This report analyzed and discussed the status quo, and recommended a course to follow with respect to C4ISR/simulation (C4ISR/Sim) interoperability.  Specifically, the report recommended the formation of a follow-on C4ISR/Sim SG to begin work on a broad-based Technical Reference Model (TRM) that would provide a standard frame of reference describing and categorizing interoperability among, and supporting the interfacing of C4ISR systems and simulations.  The C4ISR/Sim TRM SG I began work at the 2001 Spring SIW and submitted a Final Report [3] that outlined the basis for a C4ISR/Sim TRM and recommended that a follow-on study group be chartered by SISO to continue the development of the C4ISR/Sim TRM.  The immediate goals of this C4ISR/Sim TRM SG II were to include:Analysis of proposed theories of interoperabilityA C4ISR/Sim TRM Use-Case studyInitial development of a TRM User GuideInitial development of a TRM sourcebookThe ultimate goal is the establishment of the TRM as a useful frame of reference for C4ISR system/simulation interface efforts.The purpose of this report is to provide, in one place, the rationale for having a SISO C4ISR/Sim Technical Reference Model, along with sufficient material to provide the reader with a full understanding of the TRM itself.  It is not a user guide, which would provide a nuts and bolts approach to using the TRM as a guide to interfacing systems and simulations, but rather a general presentation of the TRM, including synopses of previously reported material, a lexicon, and a bibliography.  It should be used by C4ISR/simulation interface developers to fully understand the requirements for true C4ISR/simulation interoperability.Definitions Related to the TRM	General Definition of a Technical Reference ModelA Technical Reference Model (TRM) is defined in the SISO C4ISR Systems-to-Simulations Data and Interface Lexicon [4] as a conceptual framework that provides the following:  A consistent set of service and interface categories and relationships used to address interoperability and open-system issues; conceptual entities that establish a common vocabulary to better describe, compare, and contrast systems and components; a basis (an aid) for the identification, comparison, and selection of existing and emerging standards and their relationships.Definition of InteroperabilityInteroperability is defined in the C4ISR Systems-to-Simulations Data and Interface Lexicon as “the ability of a set of models or simulations to provide services to and accept services from other models or simulations and to use the services so exchanged to enable them to operate effectively together.”  However, this simple definition of interoperability does not define the levels of interoperability that may be required for various systems and simulations to interoperate effectively.Full interoperability may be defined as:(1) a level of fidelity in the simulations that fully represents the real world being simulated;(2) interfaces among simulations and systems that do not allow the "players" to distinguish between real and simulated events.  This ideal is rarely, if ever, achieved. Simulations will be conducted at various levels of fidelity, and interoperability will mean different things depending on the goals of the simulations.  However, understanding how full interoperability could be achieved may be the first step toward understanding what is necessary for meeting the interoperability goals of simulations at any level.An important function of the TRM will be to classify levels of interoperability, and to define an approach that will support an appropriate and necessary level of interoperability between systems and simulations.Definition of the Functional InterfaceAn important function of the TRM is to categorize the types of data that must flow between a C4ISR system and a simulation to support interoperability.  Here, in Figure 1, we look at a high level, generic view of such an interface.  On the left, we have a C4ISR system whose structure will depend on various influences including the constraints placed upon it by its operating environment.  For example, U.S. DoD systems may be constrained by the DII COE, while other NATO systems will have other constraints.  On the simulation side there will be attributes of the models defined by the requirements of the simulation.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1: 	Generic View of a C4ISR/Simulation InterfaceA detailed view of the interface between a C4ISR system and a simulation is given in Section 2.3, which presents the TRM, from the M&S point of view, for connection or migration to C4ISR systems.  However, there is no intent, in general, to present the TRM as M&S centric.Goals of the TRMThe goal of the TRM is to assist programs in achieving more effective levels of portability and interoperability in the following ways:By providing a consistent and common lexicon for description of interoperability requirements between diverse systemsBy providing a means for consistent specification and comparison of system/service architectureBy providing support for commonality across systemsBy promoting the consistent use of standardsBy aiding in the comprehensive identification of information exchange and interface requirementsAlthough the TRM is based on current and past project experiences, it is intended to be evolutionary and flexible enough to support future needs, regardless of range of requirements or architecture configuration.  Users are encouraged to use the TRM for guidance, and extract only those elements that support their specific project needs. Without the presence of a Technical Reference Model, interfaces are based on ad-hoc efforts, leading to rigid information infrastructures, duplicate efforts, the continual reinvention of the wheel, and as many systems with interfaces as potential partners.  To remedy this unsatisfactory situation, alternative approaches have been proposed at several recent SIWs.  These approaches can be divided into three broad categories: The first group is primarily focused on the coupling of command and control systems with simulation systems based on the idea of standardized interfaces, or at least common reference models to be used for the development of these interfaces.The second group tries to reuse more or less already established and/or standardized components and solutions to enhance C4I-to-M&S Interoperability.  These components are primarily found in the C4I domain, such as Common Message Providers, or data models used for automatic database replication mechanisms.The third group is interested in setting up a common infrastructure for military IT to be used by the C4I community as well as the military M&S community.  In particular the use of common commercial solutions, open standards, or even open sources could facilitate this objective, which needs to comprise a migration concepts for legacy applications in order to become a viable option. SISO deals with all three aspects, and in the Study Group reports and among the additional SIW papers, candidates of all three categories can be found.  To decide which is the most promising solution would be premature.  To reach the long-term goal of meaningful interoperability of C4I and M&S applications, working interface solutions will be necessary to prove feasibility and demonstrate the operational usefulness, while the work being done in this category may be reused for migration solutions later.  The use of C4I components is also just a step to a common infrastructure, as it only makes sense to use C4I components if they are efficient enough to use them in the M&S context, i.e., if it makes sense to reuse them.Rationale of the C4ISR/Sim TRMThe C4ISR/Sim TRM focuses on the domain of interfaces that establish interoperability between C4ISR systems and Simulations.  As described in a recent SIW paper [5], there are potentially many common elements between these two types of systems and the possibility exists for substantial re-use of components.  In fact, many current interfaces used for Military training, Computer Aided Exercises (CAX), and test and evaluation of C4ISR systems incorporate C4ISR components to aid interoperability.  Further, adaptation of existing, or development of new simulations for use as operational decision support aids hopes to bring the power of simulation capabilities to the military requirements for Course of Action Analysis, Mission Rehearsal, and Execution Monitoring tasks.  It is hoped that as work continues on development of the TRM, supporting documentation and case studies, that the TRM will become usable and valuable tool for engineers working on projects to interface or integrate these two system types. Drawing on the collective experience of those currently working in this interface domain, the TRM presents an abstract representation of the diverse interactions possible between C4ISR and simulations components, regardless of purpose.  The intent is to provide a full spectrum of possibilities for consideration, subject to the specific requirements of the project.  In addition, generic components are represented within the Simulation system to provide the possibility for architectural design of distributed systems during consideration of interface requirements.  For a detailed description of generic components that may be found in C4ISR systems, the reader is directed to the DoD Technical Reference Model [6, 7].  In keeping with the general definition stated in section 1.2.1, the TRM is intended to represent a “conceptual framework” used to address interoperability issues, as well as a “common vocabulary” to better describe, compare, and contrast actual interfaces or potential interface requirements. Conversely, it is NOT intended to provide a detailed enumeration of interaction requirements/capabilities for ALL current interfaces, future potential interfaces, C4ISR systems, or simulation systems.  This task is seen to be infeasible, due to the following reasons:Each military service describes its information exchange requirements differently, based on its own operational lexicon.Both C4ISR and simulation systems continue to evolve, reflecting advances in technology, changes in doctrine, and evolving DoD requirements.Each interface project reflects a certain set of sponsor requirements, based on the intended use of the interface, as well as funding trade-off analysis.The intent was to develop a TRM of a generalized interface between two defined classes of systems, and to abstractly capture and categorize the common interactions between various components or whole systems.  Further, the desire was to provide terms of reference for the Information Exchange transactions that would allow potential users (of the TRM) to see their service specific lexicon as a comfortable subset. Need for Physical RealismThe need for physical realism is motivated by at least three domains, namely the physical domain (connectivity, physical layer, and protocols), the communications domain, and the conceptual model domain (simulated effects).  It goes beyond the scope of this report to deal with this topic in detail, however, for the general understanding a framework seems to be appropriate.When dealing with the Level of Information System Interoperability (LISI) model [8] in the first study groups on C4I/Sim Interoperability [2,3], one of the identified shortcomings was the missing of the physical layer in the reference framework.  It is essential for efficient interfaces that the are able to create the necessary information, however, it is also necessary to deliver this information in the needed format, deliver it via the supported protocol, and use the appropriate physical carriers.  This is often an issue when using binary data-links to bring in the information (e.g., when using Link 16 messages to exchange the information).The first domain is tightly related to the communications domain.  It is often assumed that communication is established and works without difficulty.  Only very seldom, explicit communication models are used, and even more seldom are these high fidelity and high-resolution models necessary to support meaningful analyses within this sub-domain of C4ISR.  However, for analyses of benefits of C4ISR/Sim support as well as for feasibility studies on coupling proposals, these communication models are needed on the C4ISR side as well as on the M&S side.  Fortunately, the number of publications and papers on this topics raised within the C4I forum over the recent workshops, however, the relation between the C4ISR/Sim TRM proposed in this report and the respective communication models can definitely be improved.The last domain is located on a higher abstraction level.  It deals with the necessity that the simulation system being used must be able to generate the necessary information on the appropriate aggregation level.  This is of particular interest when the simulation system is used for decision support or other forms of support of operations.  While in the CAX domain it is always possible to “calibrate” the model to reach desired effects by the white cells, this approach can be fatal when the simulation is used to support the analyses of various courses of action, see [9].In summary, it is necessary to connect the participating systems physically correct, use the adequate communication model, and model the right things in the necessary resolution and with the necessary fidelity.  The development of metrics, which are standardizable and will be accepted by a wide range of the community, is one of the most challenging tasks derived from these observations.TRM Sourcebook Nutshell	The previous sections of this introduction provided the background, goals, and rationale for the C4ISR/Sim TRM.  Sections 2-5 of this document comprise the essence of the TRM sourcebook.  Sections 2.1 and 2.2, present the TRM in the context of various IT architectures, and Section 2.3 presents a detailed view of the TRM Functional Interface.  Section 3 provides a summary of past and present work to provide a sense of the state of the art, and concomitantly, Section 4 provides a summary of use-case studies related to the TRM.  Finally, Section 5 attempts to define an interoperability analysis process for users of the TRM.We have attempted to present sufficient material to provide the reader with a full understanding of the SISO C4ISR/Sim TRM.  However, the TRM is at an early stage of development, and as more use-cases take place and are reported we will have a better understanding of its maturity, and/or its need to evolve to support its users.  The TRM will evolve, and as it does, this document will evolve with it.The C4ISR/Sim Technical Reference ModelThe role of the C4ISR/Sim TRM for future IT ArchitecturesAs stated before, the purpose of this document is to provide the rationale for having a C4ISR/Sim TRM, along with sufficient material to provide the reader with a full understanding of the TRM itself.  Furthermore, the focus is on actual problems, that means on how to enable legacy systems of the C4ISR and the Simulation domain to exchange information and call available services in a meaningful way.  Due to the nature of these legacy systems, such approaches are somehow limited to interface development solution.  The C4ISR/Sim TRM will help to standardize at least the way of evaluating the data to be exchanged between the various systems.  However, the potential of the C4ISR/Sim TRM is higher than being a reference model for interchanged data.  The long-term goal is to contribute to the common understanding of heterogeneous IT support for the Warfighter, i.e., establishing a common view of the domain space enabling that functionality delivered encapsulated in modules or components can be made available whenever and wherever needed without having to care about the origin.  The new concept of the Global Information Grid (GIG) [10] is supporting this view.  One of the most envisioning views of command and control taking advantage of these concepts is given in the recent publication “Power to the Edge – Command and Control in the Information Age” [11].  However, the view of using functionality in data in whatever form it is presented on the GIG for your own purpose stresses the necessity for a common view of the problem, therefore, the C4ISR/Sim TRM will be needed more than ever to support the necessary data management as envisioned in the first version of the Net-Centric Data Strategy [12] and the related U.S. DoD Data Management processes [13].  The C4ISR/Sim TRM therefore serves as an initial starting point (enabling the interfacing of legacy systems based on a common understanding of information exchanged) as well as a management facility for the envisioned end state of heterogeneous functionality support within the global information sphere.The C4ISR/Sim TRM within the context of actual IT ArchitecturesTo ensure the correct use of the C4ISR/Sim TRM in the given legacy context as well as to enable the applicability of the C4ISR/Sim TRM in the role envisioned above, the role of the TRM as described in this document within the broader context has to be defined to be able to understand its potential and constraints respectively.  A general view on the problems of shared solutions in heterogeneous IT environments usable for C4ISR as well as Simulation Systems is given in the House Diagram [3], which blueprints the complexity of interfacing simulation systems and C4ISR applications.  This holistic view emphasizes the interdependency of five major factors involved in the effort to secure shared solutions for C4ISR/M&S interoperability: Architectures Alignment, Common Data/Object Models, Common Standards, Alignment Processes, and Reusable Component Interfaces.Architecture Alignment recognizes the fundamental necessity to align the framework architectures for both M&S and C4ISR domains. As already pointed out earlier, the US DOD C4ISR community has developed the Defence Information Infrastructure Common Operating Environment. NATO is using the NATO Technical Architecture Model. The Modelling and Simulation (M&S) community has established the High Level Architecture. These constructs establish the foundations that set the requirements for fundamental interoperability between components of these two domains. The architecture alignment needs to be able to resolve differences in viewpoints or fundamental representation of the “problem space”.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2:	The “House Diagram” for Interoperable Shared SystemsWithin the M&S domain, the HLA Federation Object Model (FOM) methodology is used to align Data Models and Object Models among M&S federates. While this methodology works, it places a heavy burden on developers. When extending beyond the M&S domain into the C4ISR domain, temporary (situational) alignment presents additional challenges: synchronizing development cycles, aligning domain ontology, and coordinating data standards. These constraints normally resolve into the need for a data translation layer between C4ISR and simulation domains. However, this gateway strategy can exact a major performance penalty. If systems are aligned to the same or similar object model or data model representations, performance increases as translation penalties and FOM alignment burdens decrease. The next subsection on data management, data administration and data alignment will deal especially with this important topic.Common Standards are most effective when they are part of the system design. Integration of standards begins with the framework architecture for each domain and extends through the support for common objects and data models. To this end, C4ISR and M&S systems should be designed initially for interoperability.Reusable Component Interfaces sit on top, and therefore rest upon, the building blocks below. However, when compared to architectures, models, or standards, interfaces have been a hotbed of activity. This apparent paradox stems from our ability to partition the problem space at the interface and thus provide short-term solutions for quick success. However, in general these solutions are too shallow, one has to pay and pay again for these unique interfaces in terms of costs, time, and flexibility. If realignment of the underlying structures eliminates basic incompatibilities between the systems and a wealth of benefits ensues.Finally, the roof of the house diagram envisions Shared Solutions between C4ISR and Simulations. This aspiration must be supported by all of the underlying blocks. In addition, it requires that the systems align or translate inherent processes. For example, terrain alignment and object placement must be consistent between components in both domains.It should be pointed out that the technical solutions being already available are doomed to failure if not accompanied by respective organizational and procedural alignments. New evolving standards within the IT world – such as the Extensible Mark-up Language (XML) – are often perceived to deliver long searched solutions, but in general they only affect one factor. Without the emphasized holistic view the vision of one common command and control systems based on heterogeneous information technology implementing the required functionality of command and control as well as Operations Research – including modelling and simulation – will remain a pure wish.In this sense, the C4ISR/Sim TRM is dealing with one aspect of the challenge to reach interoperable, shared solutions.  In addition to the view given in the TRM, more views and models are needed to support “the big picture.”  The C4I TRM development group dealt with this issue in Spring 2002 and recommended as a long-term goal to establish a framework comprising various complementary C4ISR/SIM TRM views, following the example of the U.S. DoD C4ISR Architecture Framework [14] and/or the NATO C3 System Architecture Framework [15], both of which using operational, system, and technical views to describe the command and control architecture in total.  The following picture shows the proposed structure without claiming completeness:Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3: A possible C4ISR/Sim TRM FrameworkPotential contributions are already listed in [3], therefore, the various Technical Reference Models and there sources will only be listed in the table 1, without going into detail concerning the TRM that are needed to complement the view given by the C4ISR/Sim TRM dealt with in this document.  This table is a living document and is in its actual state neither complete nor exclusive.To summarize it, the purpose of this section is to set the broader context for the C4ISR/Sim TRM.  It is envisioned by the team that the C4ISR/SIM TRM and its elements will be developed by the M&S as well as the C4ISR community, using this document as an example of the necessary degree of detail to establish an applicable and usable solution framework for the SISO community.Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 1 - Overview of Technical Reference ModelsTechnical Reference ModelAuthorsSourceFramework CategoryImproved C4ISR/Simulation TRMFrank CarrCarr: “Examining the C4I - M&S Technical Reference Model”, 03S-SIW-014Functions and Data ViewInformation Exchange Activity ModelR. ResslerMichael R. HiebWilliam SudnikovichRessler, Hieb, Sudnikovich: “M&S/C4ISR Conceptual Reference Model”, 99F-SIW-060Functions and Data ViewInitial C4ISR/Simulation TRMFrank CarrMichael R. HiebCarr, Hieb: “Issues and Requirements for Future C4ISR and M&S Interoperability”, 7th CGF Conference, 1998Functions and Data ViewData FederationsAndreas TolkTolk: “Bridging the Data Gap”, 01S-SIW-011, Spring SIW 2001Functions and Data ViewNATO C3 Technical ArchitectureNATONATO Allied Data Publication 34 (ADatP-34): “NATO C3 Technical Architecture (NC3TA), Version 4.0,” March 2003; obtainable via the NATO standard website:  HYPERLINK "http://www.nato.int/docu/standard.htm" http://www.nato.int/docu/standard.htm  IT System ViewU.S. DoD and Federal Technical Reference ModelU.S. DoDDoD Technical Reference Model Website: http://www-trm.itsi.disa.milIT System ViewLevel of Information System Interoperability (LISI)U.S. DoDMITRELevels of Information Systems Interoperability, C4ISR Architectures Working Group, 30 March 1998, available at:  US DoD, OSD (C3I), CIO, Director for Architecture and Interoperability Website:  HYPERLINK http://www.c3i.osd.mil/org/cio/i3/ http://www.c3i.osd.mil/org/cio/i3/Level of InteroperabilityGeneral Unified ModelZach FurnessFrank CarrMichael R. HiebFurness, Carr, Hieb: “A General Unified Model (GUM) for C4ISR/Simulation Interoperability”, 01F-SIW-007Software Component ViewThe TRM Functional Interface GraphicThe TRM Functional Interface Graphic (FIG), Figure 4, is a useful tool for broadly categorizing interfaces between C4ISR and simulation systems.  Use-cases have demonstrated its utility [16].  Its history, content, and applicability are described here.  To differentiate it from other reference models discussed in the Sourcebook, it is referred to as the TRM FIG.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 4: TRM Functional Interface GraphicThe TRM FIG was first introduced in 1998 by Francis Carr and Michael Hieb [17].  It has evolved since then, culminating in the version presented by Carr at the Spring 2003 SIW [18].  This is the version described here.The TRM FIG depicts the types of data that must be exchanged between C4ISR and simulation systems in order to conduct effective events.  As used here, “effective” means satisfying the user requirements for an event (e.g. fair fight, level playing field, real-time, data capture and replay).  “Event” means any interaction between C4ISR and simulation systems, irrespective of the purpose (e.g. training, testing, planning, analysis).This section describes the TRM FIG by providing definitions, examples, and commentary.  Definitions were taken from the Lexicon where possible [4].  Further information on applying the TRM FIG can be found in sections 4.0 and 5.0, the User Guide [19], and referenced papers.Information Exchange CategoriesThe TRM FIG describes four categories of information exchanged between C4ISR and simulation systems.  They are described in this section.  Examples provided are representative and not intended to be all-inclusive.Simulation Service InteractionsSimulation Service Interactions are exchanges of information that primarily support the simulation systems requirements.  This category includes information about the simulation, and information necessary to control or coordinate its execution with C4ISR resident activities [18]. The TRM FIG identifies five subcategories of Simulation Service Interactions.Simulation MetadataDefinition:  Information describing the characteristics of data; data or information about the meaning of the data; descriptive information about an organization’s data, data activities, systems, and holdings [4].Examples:  Interactions from the simulation to the C4ISR system might include simulation version, level of aggregation, or date/time/sequence for multiple runs.  Interactions from the C4ISR system to the simulation might include detailed simulation execution parameters, and schedule (for possible delayed execution) [18].Execution ControlDefinition:  Information that is passed to control the conduct of an event [4].Examples:  The controls would allow, for example, ‘checkpointing’ of both simulations and C4ISR systems, as well as allowing pausing of the C4ISR system at appropriate points in the exercise.  Initialization and After Action Review (AAR) protocols would also fall in this category [4].  Pause, restart, playback/forward, time acceleration and deceleration, and exercise clock are further examples [18].Commentary:  Exercise Control Interactions would be interfaced to the Simulation Control Module of a simulation [4].VisualizationDefinition:  Information used to represent what’s going on within the simulation [18].Examples:  In the context of a remote simulation service used for Course of Action Analysis (COAA), while the simulation was ‘thinking’ about the COA, it might be transmitting ‘Visualizations’ or intermediate results, or data sufficient to create them on the C4I system [18].Data CollectionDefinition:  Class of instructions that control the storage of data for in-depth event analysis and performance reviews.  Also includes exchanges of periodic internal state information useful to data collectors and controllers [20].Examples:  Recording a flight path for replay.  Collection and parsing of United States Message Text Format (USMTF) and Joint Variable Message Format (JVMF) messages. Simulation EffectsDefinition:  Any simulation generated data that is transferred between the simulation and the C4ISR system as a result of a simulation execution.  Any effects calculated by a model, including physical phenomena simulated by a model to provide realism, or any other results of a simulation, such as outcomes resulting from an engagement.Examples:   a) communications degradation due to terrain losses, atmospheric absorption, orinterference, b) radar beam absorption due to natural atmospheric effects or man-made disturbance, and c) a block transfer of the situation profile after an encounter, including modified databases.Non-Persistent DataNon-Persistent Data is data that will likely change during the course of an event.  The interface mechanism selected for Non-Persistent Data must support dynamic updates.  Periodic and/or event driven updates may be required.  For example, a simulated entities’ position may be sent to a C4ISR system at 30 Hertz, or only when triggered by a dead reckoning algorithm.  Even though the position of an entity may not change during a particular event, it is still viewed as Non-Persistent Data because it is subject to change.Non-Persistent Data refers to the class of information that is transient, corresponding to interactions between entities or objects in the simulation or C4ISR database, or updates to an entity’s state [4].The TRM FIG identifies five subcategories of Non-Persistent Data.OrdersDefinition:  A type of interaction that conveys Command and Control (C2) information [4].Examples: These transactions express textual, graphical, oral, and/or electronic elements of task orders: operations orders (OPORD), fragmentary orders (FRAGO), tasking orders (e.g., the Air Tasking Order or ATO), control orders (e.g., Airspace Control Order or ACO), and collaborative action plans [20].Commentary:  Presently, C4ISR systems do not support the generation and maintenance of C2 information in a uniform manner.  Translation of this class of information has been extremely difficult to achieve with current interfaces [4].  Most M&S systems have difficulty automatically interpreting task orders generated on C4ISR systems.  Difficulties extend beyond the simple adoption of standard formats or textual keywords; they expose disparate cognitive automation [20].ReportsDefinition:  C2 information about the state of an entity [4].  Examples:  Typical report information includes location and status, and may be sent to the C4ISR system as either tactical messages or data updates [4].Commentary:  The majority of current interfaces deal with this class of situation awareness information.  Both Orders and Reports would interface to Behavior Models of a simulation, affecting the decision making of simulated units.  If the simulation offers a high degree of fidelity in C2, it may associate these interactions with Communication Effects [4].ImageryDefinition:  Operational imagery transmitted across the battlefield [18].  A type of unprocessed visual C2 information from a sensor.  This data is characterized by high bandwidth requirements and the need to be processed or analyzed prior to use [4].Examples:  Video from an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV), or a Moving Target Indicator (MTI) radar image from a JSTARS [4].  Pictures and images for specific items of interest.  This format may also include real or composite video and screen graphics [20].Commentary:  This class would be used for ‘stimulating’ imagery on the C4ISR box (such as a simulated UAV) where the images are simulated, rather than actual [18].  Imagery would also interface to Behavior Models of a simulation, affecting the decision making of simulated units [4].  These files tend to be large and may require special handling [20].Tracks  Definition:  Track Data is information regarding the physical state of entities (or objects).  This class of information also includes physical interactions between objects (such as weapon effects) [4].  Track Data captures location and physical state of entities [20].Examples:  A simulation may need to know the location of a live unit, even if it is not sending out report messages (Reports).  Alternatively, air tracks of a simulated aircraft may need to be generated for a radar screen.  If the data passed to the interface is ground truth, then the data should have effects applied to turn the data into perceived truth [4].Commentary:  Track Data would be processed by the Physical Models Module of a simulation [4].Unit DataDefinition:  Information about units (any aggregation of entities).Examples:  This subcategory usually includes Order-of-Battle (OB) information as well as specification of the terrain to be used [4].  Table of Organization and Equipment (TOE).  Symbology.  Commentary:  Unit Data was moved from the Persistent to the Non-Persistent Data category in the latest version of the TRM FIG.  This “…reflects the fact that some services (and C4I systems) are more regularly updating, sharing, and potentially changing organizational data during operations” [18].Persistent DataPersistent Data is data that is reasonably static and generally set during system initialization [3].  The ability to provide direct transfer of C4ISR data from the sources to simulation equivalents for scenario initialization purposes can provide substantial cost savings, set-up time reductions, and increased flexibility for simulation use [18].  The TRM FIG identifies four subcategories of Persistent Data.Mission & Plan InformationDefinition:  Information generated to support the execution or rehearsal of a mission or plan.Examples:  Mission planning system outputs.  Initialization files for computer generated forces, combat simulation systems, and tactical C2 systems.  Routes, objectives, friendly, and opposing force dispositions.  Force XXI Battle Command Brigade and Below (FBCB2) Order-of-Battle (OB).Communications PlanDefinition:  Information related to the communications schema for a mission or plan.Examples:  Digital and FM allocations, frequency assignments, and identification rules.  Report distribution plans. Weather DataDefinition:  Information related to the forecasted weather in the area of interest.Examples:  Wind direction and speed, temperatures, precipitation, cloud levels, and visibility.Terrain SpecificationDefinition:  Information that describes the terrain in the area of interest.Examples:  Terrain elevation, type, and resolution. C4ISR System Service InteractionsC4ISR System Service Interactions are exchanges of information that may be mandated by use of particular C4ISR components, or merely by virtue of being connected to a C4ISR system.  The interactions may not include ‘data’ to be exchanged between the two domains, but information required in order to connect to the C4ISR system, sustain the connection, or to use a particular C4ISR component [18].The TRM FIG identifies two subcategories of C4ISR System Service Interactions.System Health/Heartbeat/StatusDefinition:  Information necessary to initiate and sustain a connection to a C4ISR system.Examples:  “Ping” message to enable a system to transmit data.  Heartbeat message to indicate the presence of a system.  Keep Alive signals.  Health and functional status messages.Component Service ProtocolsDefinition:  Rules and procedures associated with exchanging data with C4ISR systems.    Examples:  Client/Server interactions. Simulation System ComponentsThe TRM FIG depicts five Simulation System Components (Modules).Simulation Control ModuleDefinition:  The Simulation Control Module provides the ability to exert control over the simulation activities [18].Examples:  Start, Stop, Pause, Reposition, Slew, Replay.Visualization ModuleDefinition:  The Visualization Module would potentially contain all individual components used for display or modification of simulation data [18].Examples:  Graphical User Interface (GUI) to plan-view displays, simulation data editors, tools, and utilities.Simulation & Models ModuleDefinition:  The Simulation & Models Module represents all the processing components of a simulation system.  Since the TRM FIG covers all possible Virtual and Constructive simulations, the actual number and types of components will depend on the simulation functionality.  Five of the most common components are shown in the diagram.Examples:Behavior Models:  Models that replicate the way in which a system or entity responds to stimuli over time [4], for example, computer generated forces and combat simulations.  Physical Models:  Models that replicate the physical characteristics of a system or entity, for example, range & bearing calculations, aerodynamics, and aircraft systems simulations.  Communication Models:  Models that replicate communication systems and communications effects. 	Environmental Models:  Models that replicate environmental characteristics, for example, atmospherics, and weather effects. 	Simulation Engine:  Models that control the execution of the simulation.Commentary:  The TRM FIG shows the representative models grouped within a single Simulation & Models Module.  Note, however, that a specific application may distribute individual modules and/or models across a Federation [18].Run-Time FrameworkDefinition:  Software components used to convey interactions and data represented by the other modules within a simulation system [18]. Examples:  High Level Architecture (HLA) Run-Time Infrastructure (RTI), hardware interface controllers, execution call lists.DatabasesDefinition:  A collection of interrelated data, often with controlled redundancy, organized according to a schema to serve one or more applications; the data are stored so that they can be used by different programs without concern for the data structure or organization.  A common approach is used to add new data and to modify and retrieve existing data [4].Examples:  Simulation DB:  Represents the active data used by various components within the Simulation & Models Module for the on-going calculation of results from the models [18].  Terrain databases.  Databases representing the current physical state of the battlefield and its entities.Scenario DB:  Includes all the data required to start a simulation and execute a predefined scenario.  Initial condition data sets.TRM FIG Evolution and UseThis section of the Sourcebook was intended to provide an introduction and overview of the TRM FIG.  For guidance in applying the TRM FIG to C4ISR/Sim interoperability applications, refer to sections 4.0 and 5.0, the User Guide, and referenced papers.  The TRM FIG is expected to evolve as further use-cases are developed.  Readers and users are encouraged to report perceived deficiencies or suggested enhancements.Summary of Past and Present WorkThere are multiple ways to couple C4ISR and M&S systems.  Most work, so far, has been done on the basis of C4I messages.  This group of work is using the C4I messages normally used for information exchange between C4ISR systems to integrate M&S systems into this information loop.  To this end, a translation layer between the data structures used by the simulation systems and the messages is needed.  This is true for text-based messages, such as U.S. MTF and NATO ADatP-3, as well as for binary messages, such as TADIL and LINK.  The main advantage is that the C4ISR systems don’t have to be changed.  The disadvantage is the limited content that can be delivered by C4I messages, in particular with regard to simulation specific needs.  A very good overview is already given in [2], so that we don’t have to duplicate the description here.The second group of M&S/C4ISR applications is using HLA FOMs enhancing interoperability.  The main advantage is that HLA compliant systems using these FOMs automatically will be able to exchange information with C4ISR systems that have an interface to this FOM.  The disadvantage is that the C4ISR world has to have an interface to this HLA driven standard, and this is not always easy.  Examples for such FOMs are also given in [2].  The references to this article comprise actual works in this domain as well.Finally, the use of C4ISR architecture compliant components within the integration is another way.  The best examples are the integration of the Common Message Processor (CMP) of the U.S. Common Operating Environment (COE) [27] and the definition of the C3 Driver federation [28].  The C4ISR community accepts these approaches, however, they require that the M&S community will work with these C4ISR driven standards.  However, a motivation for this approach is given in Tolk and Hieb [29]. The final report of the first Study Group on C4ISR/TRM [3] mentions in section 4.1.5 in addition the great variety of activities in data management, data alignment, and metadata issues.  The connection to ongoing efforts in the C4ISR community, in particular the definition of the Net-Centric Data Strategy [12], is directly connected with these efforts.  How this will affect C4ISR to M&S interoperability, is tentatively given in the Level of Conceptual Interoperability Model (LCIM), which is introduced in [30].Finally, it is expected that the advent of web-services will influence the domain of C4ISR to M&S interoperability, as a total new way to look at integrated systems is enabled by overarching approaches like the Model Driven Architecture, which allows to merge related activities, including SISO activities like Base Object Models (BOM) or the Extensible Modeling and Simulation Framework (XMSF).  An overview is given in [31].In summary, C4ISR to M&S interoperability improved tremendously since the first Study Group on these issues.  It can be assumed that the various approaches will convert into infrastructure recommendations in the mid future, as M&S functionality is essential to fulfill the Warfighter driven requirements for future military operations, as envisioned in [11].Use-Case AnalysisUse-Case Studies to DateThere have been two use cases analyzed in the context of the TRM reported in “A Model for Use-Case Analysis For the C4ISR/Sim Technical Reference Model” [16].  One of the cases involved the linkage of a C4I Collection Management System to an Intelligence Sensor Simulation Interface [21], and the other, the interfacing a real C4I device to tactical communications simulations [22].  The second case was chosen primarily because its approach could serve as an archetype for the interoperability of C4I systems and simulations.An immediate goal of the use-case analysis was to develop modus operandi for use case analysis.  Continuing goals include development of a robust User Guide, documentation of a use case history through user feedback, and the validation of the TRM as a useful frame of reference.The Interoperability Analysis ProcessThe analysis in [16] involved categorizing the actual data transfers of the simulations under the broad headings provided by the TRM FIG.  Data transfers, selected from the use cases, were aligned with the broad categories of data exchange defined in the TRM FIG along with a description of how the data exchange was accomplished.  When broadly interpreted, the various categories of the TRM did correspond to issues that had to be addressed in the use case interfaces, indicating that the model is of value in guiding interface development efforts.  For example, under Simulation Effects, the TRM supports communication effects modeling which provides communications realism through the calculation of the effects of the communications channel through which the data is passed.  This category of the TRM FIG was required in [18] to support communications degradation data provided by the Communication Effects Server in the Tactical Internet simulations.  Other data, the TRM FIG helped classify, included an Order of Battle database which fell under the Persistent Data category; and C2 and SA data, which fell under the Non-Persistent Data category.In these studies, we found the TRM FIG to be a useful tool in helping to characterize transactions among systems and simulations.  However, there were some requirements not fully supported by the TRM FIG revealed in the analysis of the two use cases.  In the first use case, there was a need to add or transform information within the interface.  For example, the need to transform a “general collection request into a specific asset tasking.”  This requirement arises because C4I systems normally have humans on each end interpreting the data elements.  In the use case, artificial intelligence and automation assisted components were incorporated into the interface.  “It may be helpful to more fully represent such factors in future versions of the Technical Reference Model.”  The second use case used Global Positioning System (GPS) data, a data type not explicitly supported by the TRM FIG.  While this is not a short coming of the graphic, which is intended to define broad categories of interface data, it does indicate a need for a database underlying the graphic, which can be queried for information relevant to specific interface or interoperability elements.Relationship of the TRM FIG to the C4I FOMThe second use-case was also compared with the SISO C4I FOM [23-26] in the context of the TRM FIG, JVMF message interactions, and GPS data interactions, in this use case, are subclasses of generic interactions of the Tactical Internet Model Suite FOM [23], which itself uses a subset of the prototype C4I FOM objects and interactions.  In general, it was possible to draw a one-to-one correspondence from a C4I system through the TRM to a C4I FOM entity corresponding to an entity in the simulation.  Therefore, we found that the C4I FOM could be used as Reference FOM (RFOM) in cataloging these transactions.Interface Data Transfer Tables The next step in development of the User Guide will be the development of data transfer tables under the Information Exchange Categories delineated in Section 2.3 of this report.C4ISR/Sim Analysis in the Context of the TRMThe C4ISR/Sim TRM Study Group Final Report recommended the development of a User Guide to make the TRM easy to interpret and use [3].  The User Guide will provide comprehensive analysis guidance to TRM users.  This section of the Sourcebook introduces the interoperability analysis process.Process EvolutionTo a large degree, the interoperability analysis process will evolve based on use-case summaries, similar to those described in Section 4.0.  Both the C4ISR and M&S communities must contribute after-action reports if the analysis process is to become efficient and effective.  Given the transformation in C4ISR technology, the quest for a common architecture across all domains, the international composition of military forces, and the wide variety of systems that fall under the C4ISR umbrella, it’s important that the process remain current.  This can only be achieved through frequent and broad-based user feedback.Introduction to the Interoperability Analysis ProcessThe interoperability analysis process begins when a requirement for a simulation system(s) and a C4ISR system(s) to interact is identified.  The analysis process would unfold as follows:Review the TRM Sourcebook for high-level systems engineering guidance.  It provides the following types of information:Lexicon, context, rationale, and goals – to set the stage for new users.References to existing implementations, which allows the user to determine if new ground must be plowed.References and discussion that provide insight into issues such as a) status of interoperability standards and models, b) levels of fidelity and interoperability required for various applications, c) legacy and upcoming design approaches, d) differences between C4ISR and M&S requirements, and e) differences between U.S. and international military requirements.Use the TRM FIG described in Section 2.3 to determine specific (but not detailed) interface requirements.  This will ensure that broad categories of data and interactions are not missed during the initial analysis.  Refer to the use-cases cited in Section 4.0 for additional guidance during this phase.Consult the User Guide for comprehensive analysis guidance.  It will provide the following:Interoperability analysis process flowchart.In-depth discussion of the issues touched on in the Sourcebook.A TRM FIG analysis example.Detailed description of current and near-term C4ISR/Sim interfaces (hardware links and software protocols).Detailed discussion of C4ISR/Sim data engineering issues (common databases, data management, data translation, data alignment).Points of contact for further guidance and use-case submittals.Document the implementation and submit it as a use-case. Section SummaryRefer to the User Guide for a comprehensive description of the interoperability analysis process. SummaryThe C4ISR/Sim TRM Sourcebook provides, in one place, the rationale for having a SISO C4ISR/Sim Technical Reference Model, along with sufficient material to provide the reader with a full understanding of the TRM itself, and the requirements for C4ISR/simulation interoperability.To this end, the C4ISR/Sim TRM Functional Interface Graphic has been expanded to a greater level of detail.  Further development of the TRM will depend on use-case analyses.Section 1.3 separated alternative interoperability approaches into three broad groups.  The first two groups generally encompass existing, near and mid term approaches.  The third group includes new approaches surfacing as a result of technology advances (e.g., common database schema and web-services) and common operating environments/infrastructures, such as Global Information Grid (GIG) Enterprise Services (GES).  The difference between C4ISR and M&S users of information may eventually become indistinguishable (implicit interoperability [2]).  The C4ISR/Sim TRM should evolve as the interoperability environment and standards evolve.  Equally, the existence of a contemporary TRM may influence the evolution of the environment and standards.RecommendationsBased on the work being done by this and previous study groups under the aegis of SISO, including face-to-face meetings during the SIWs, evaluation of related papers, and discussions using the SISO reflectors, the following recommendations have been formulated:Form a C4ISR/Sim TRM Product Development Group (PDG) to establish the TRM as a SISO Reference ProductEvolve the TRM Sourcebook as a living document to support user needsEvolve the TRM User Guide and support user feedback to establish a use history to facilitate development of the TRM into a useful frame of referencePut out a call for papers for use-case analysis of the TRM, to be reported at the Spring 2004 SIWContinue to maintain a Categorical Bibliography for the C4ISR/Sim TRMUpdate and improve the C4ISR Systems-to-Simulations Data and Interface Lexicon to provide precise terminology for the domain spaceDevelop metrics for the various levels of the C4ISR/Sim TRM to measure necessary and achieved levels of interoperabilityExpand the C4I FOM to a C4ISR reference FOMDevelop a database to facilitate the evaluation of achieved interoperability in exercisesSupport use of the actual message formats of the real systems by the simulation side of the interfaceIdentify a common database approach to align internal data between real C4ISR systems and simulationsLexiconThe current lexicon for this work is that published as the C4ISR Systems-to-Simulations Data and Interface Lexicon [4].References[1]	Simulations Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO),  HYPERLINK "http://www.sisostds.org/" http://www.sisostds.org/ [2]	Timian, D. H., Hieb, M.R., Lacetera, J., Tolk, A., Wertman, C., and Brandt, K.: “Report Out of the C4I Study Group,” Paper 00F-SIW-005, 2000 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop.[3]	Griffin, A., Lacetera, J., Tolk, A., C4ISR/Sim Technical Reference Model Study Group Final Report, Paper 02F-SIW-022, 2002 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop.[4]	Lacetera J, Frazier G, Wertman C, “C4ISR Systems-to-Simulations Data and Interface Lexicon,” Version 2000.09.30, SISO C4ISR TRM Study Group, Orlando, Florida, September 2000.[5]	Furness C, Carr F, Hieb M, “A Generalized Unified Model (GUM) for C4ISR/Simulation Interoperability”, 01F-SIW-007[6]	US Department of Defense, “DoD Technical Reference Model,” Ver 2.0, 09 Apr 2001[7]	US Department of Defense, “DoD Technical Reference Model User Guide,” Ver 1.0, 10 Apr 2001[8]	Levels of Information Systems Interoperability, C4ISR Architectures Working Group, 30 March 1998, available at:  US DoD, OSD (C3I), CIO, Director for Architecture and Interoperability Website:  HYPERLINK http://www.c3i.osd.mil/org/cio/i3/ http://www.c3i.osd.mil/org/cio/i3/ [9]	Andreas Tolk and Dietmar Kunde: “Decision Support Systems in the Military Environment”, Chapter 6 in "Innovations in Decision Support Systems", Tonfoni G. and Jain L. (Eds.), International Series on Advanced Intelligence, Advanced Knowledge International, ISBN 0-86803-980-2, Magill, Adelaide, Australia, 2003, pp. 175-210[10]	U.S. Department of Defense Directive (DODD) 8100.1: “Global Information Grid (GIG) Overarching Policy,” The Pentagon, Washington, D.C., September 2002[11] David S. Alberts, Richard E. Hayes, “Power to the Edge – Command and Control in the Information Age,” Command and Control Research Program (CCRP) bibliography, Washington, D.C., June 2003,	  HYPERLINK "http://www.dodccrp.org" http://www.dodccrp.org [12]	U.S. Department of Defense, Chief of Information Operations (CIO): “Department of Defense Net-Centric Data Strategy,” The Pentagon, Washington, D.C., May 9, 2003,  HYPERLINK "http://www.defenselink.mil/c3i/hottopics.html" http://www.defenselink.mil/c3i/hottopics.html [13]	DoD Net-Centric Data Management Strategy: Metadata Registration, Memorandum by John P. Stenbit, April 3, 2003.[14]	U.S. Department of Defense (DoD), C4ISR Architecture Working Group (AWG): "C4ISR Architecture Framework Version 2.0,” Washington, D.C., December 1997, obtainable via OSD:	  HYPERLINK "http://www.c3i.osd.mil/org/cio/i3/" http://www.c3i.osd.mil/org/cio/i3/ [15]	NATO Consultation, Command and Control Board (NC3B) Publication AC/322-WP/0125: “The NATO C3 System Architecture Framework,” Brussels, Belgium, November 2000 [16] Lacetera J, Smith F G, “A Model for Use-Case Analysis for the C4ISR/Sim Technical Reference Model”, 03S-SIW-028, Spring 2003 SISO Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, Florida, April 2003.[17]	Carr F, Hieb M R, “Issues and Requirements for Future C4ISR and CGF Interoperability,” 07CGF052, 1998 Computer Generated Forces Conference, Orlando, Florida, Sept 1998.[18]	Carr F, “Examining the C4I-M&S Technical Reference Model”, 03S-SIW-014, Spring 2003 SISO Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, Florida, April 2003.[19]	Lacetera J, “The C4ISR/Sim TRM User Guide”, 03F-SIW-215, Fall 2003 SISO Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, Florida, September 2003.[20]	Hieb M R, et al, “Interim Report of the C4ISR/Sim Technical Reference Model Study Group”, 01F-SIW-094, Fall 2001 SISO Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, Florida, September 2001.[21]	Smith, F., Dunstan, A., Maier, M., Development of a C4I Collection Management System to an Intelligence Sensor Simulation Interface, Paper 00S-SIW-125, 2000 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, March 2000[22]	McConnell, J., Lacetera, J., et al, A Model for Interfacing C4I Systems to Tactical Communications Simulations, Paper 00F-SIW-064, 2000 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, March 2000[23]	Sudnikovich, W., Roberts, J., Lacetera, J.;  “Implementation of a prototype C4I FOM,” Spring 1999 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Paper 99S-SIW-061.[24]	Sudnikovich, W. and Roberts, J.: “Implementation of a prototype C4I FOM: Continued Progress,” Fall 1999 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Paper 99F-SIW-077.[25]	Roberts, J. and Dobbs, V., Application of a C4I Prototype FOM to an Existing Simulation Environment, Fall 2000 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Paper 00F-SIW-067[26]	Roberts, J., Dobbs, V., The Prototype C4I FOM, SISO Study Group C4I Document Library, HYPERLINK "http://www.sisostds.org/doclib/index.cfm"http://www.sisostds.org/doclib/index.cfm[27]	Timian, D.H.; Hicks, M.W., and Hieb, M.R.:  “An Approach for Using DII COE Components to Link Simulations and C4I Systems:  A Case Study Using the CMP,” Paper 00F-SIW-011, 2000 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 2000[28]	Timian, D.H.; T.M. Kelso; A. Marty; and R.D. Aaron: “The Command, Control, and Communications (C3) Driver Federation,” Paper 03S-SIW-002, 2003 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 2003[29]	Andreas Tolk, Michael R. Hieb: “Building and Integrating M&S Components into C4ISR Systems for Supporting Future Military Operations,” 2003 Western Multi Conference (WMC'03), International Conference on Virtual Worlds and Simulation (VWSIM'03), Orlando, Florida, January 2003[30] Andreas Tolk, James Muguira: “The Levels of Conceptual Interoperability Model,” Paper 03F-SIW-007, 2003 Fall Interoperability Workshop, 2003[31]	Andreas Tolk: “A Common Framework for Military M&S and C4I Systems,” Paper 03S-SIW-031, 2003 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 2003Categorical BibliographyA SISO C4ISR-to-Simulation Interoperability Categorical Bibliography is currently being developed under separate cover to be published to the SISO C4I Document Library.Author BiographiesFrancis H. Carr is a Lead Software engineer with MITRE.  A Boston University graduate, he has his M S degree from George Mason University in software engineering.  Since 1975, he has developed applications for artificial intelligence, reliability engineering, mathematical systems modeling, and business systems.  He has worked with both civilian (FAA) and in military simulations and has developed simulation-C4I interfaces.  He is currently an advisor for the DMSO on the COE M&S TWG.Jim Caylor is a System Architect with CAE USA Military Simulation & Training.  He joined CAE in 1982, following five years as an electronics design engineer with Smiths Industries Aerospace and Defense Systems.  He is a former infantry officer and a member of the Institute of Navigation, Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization, and International Council on Systems Engineering.  Jim has a Bachelor of Engineering Technology degree from the University of South Florida and is a registered Professional Engineer.Joe Lacetera has been involved in distributed simulations since 1989, and was the first SISO C4ISR Track Manager.  He has a B. S. in Mathematics and an M. A. in Physics from The Johns Hopkins University.  He worked 32 years for the U. S. Army, developing mathematics and physics models; six years for The MITRE Corporation in support of distributed simulations where he was involved in development of a SINCGARS Radio Model and an HLA Communications Effects Federate; four years for Monmouth Science and Technology, supporting Army, Navy, and joint programs; and is now the president of MSTI, Inc. in Bel Air, Maryland.Andreas Tolk is Senior Research Scientist at the Virginia Modeling Analysis and Simulation Center (VMASC) of the Old Dominion University (ODU) of Norfolk, Virginia.  He has over 12 years of international experience in the field of Applied Military Operations Research and Modeling and Simulation of and for Command and Control Systems.  In addition to his research work, he gives lectures in the Modeling and Simulation program of ODU.  His domain of expertise is the integration of M&S functionality into related application domains, such as C4ISR or web-based services, in particular based on open standards. AcknowledgmentsWhile the authors have collated submissions and edited this report, in truth it is the result of numerous direct contributions in the form of draft sections and the indirect contributions of the participants in the study group meetings as well as the subscribers to the SG-C4I reflector.  It is impossible to mention and thank all these persons explicitly, however, some individuals should be mentioned for their outstanding contributions to this report in form of papers, drafts, or comments on the semi-final versions of the sourcebook:Allison Griffin, DiSTIMichael R. Hieb, AlionBill Sudnikovich, ACSDon Timian, Northrop GrummanZach Furness, MITRE 03F-SIW-124Page  PAGE 4 of  NUMPAGES 1	03F-SIW-124	 PAGE 1603F-SIW-124	 PAGE 102003 Fall Simulation Interoperability WorkshopOrlando, Florida, September 20032003 Fall Simulation Interoperability WorkshopOrlando, Florida, September 200303F-SIW-124Page  PAGE 9 of  NUMPAGES 12003 Fall Simulation Interoperability WorkshopOrlando, Florida, September 2003	