Validation of Medical Modeling & SimulationTraining Devices and SystemsGerald R. MosesTelemedicine and Advanced Technology Research CenterHQ U.S. Army Medical Research Materiel CommandMCMR-AT504 Scott StreetFort Detrick, MD 21702-5012301-619-4000moses@tatrc.orgJ. Harvey MageeTelemedicine and Advanced Technology Research CenterHQ U.S. Army Medical Research Materiel CommandMCMR-AT504 Scott StreetFort Detrick, MD 21702-5012301-619-4002magee@tatrc.orgKeywords: Medical Modeling & Simulation; Validation, Assessment Methodology, Medical Training, Medical Education, TATRC.ABSTRACT:  For almost a decade, research has been conducted in many areas of science to develop medical simulation training devices and even comprehensive training systems.  To propel the field, the Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center (TATRC), an agency of the United States Army Medical Research Materiel Command (USAMRMC), has been managing a portfolio of research projects in the area of Medical Modeling and Simulation (MM&S) since 1999.  Significant progress has been made to identify and harness enabling technologies.  Generally, these developments can be categorized in four areas:  (1)PC-based interactive multimedia, (2), Digitally Enhanced Mannequins, (3) Virtual Workbench, or "part-task", simulators, and (4) Total Immersion Virtual Reality (TIVR).  Many medical simulation training systems have shown great potential to improve medical training.  But the potential shown has been based largely on anecdotal feedback from informal user studies.  Formal assessment is needed to determine the degree to which simulator(s) train medical skills and the degree to which skills learned on a simulator transfer to the practice of care.  A robust methodology is required as a basis for these assessments.  Several scientific workshops sponsored in 2001 focused on algorithm and metrics development in support of surgical simulation.  Also in 2001, the TATRC chartered a Simulation Working Group (SWG) in 2001 to develop a robust methodology upon which to base an assessment of the effectiveness of simulation training devices and systems.  After the terrorist attacks of "911", attention was redirected for a period, and progress was delayed.  In the summer of 2002, the TATRC chartered a follow-on group called the Validation, Metrics and simulation (VMAS) Committee.  The paper will summarize current recent and current efforts to develop and apply assessment methodologies the development of the methodology and identify validation studies to be conducted, supported by various funding sources and research programs.  The interaction between TATRC and the National Capital Area Medical Simulation Center (NCAMSC) will be noted.1.  AcknowledgementMaterial contained in this presentation was formally presented 23 Jan 03 at the poster session of the 11th Annual Medicine Meets Virtual Reality (MMVR) Conference by Mr. J. Harvey Magee.2.  BackgroundThe Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center (TATRC) is an agency reporting to the U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command, Ft. Detrick, Maryland.  The TATRC mission is to apply physiological and medical knowledge, advanced diagnostics, simulations, and effector systems integrated with information and telecommunications to enhance operational and medical decision-making, improve medical training, and deliver medical treatment across all barriers.  The program scope is to identify, explore, and demonstrate key technologies and biomedical principles required to overcome technology barriers that are both medically and militarily unique.The TATRC Medical Modeling & Simulation (MM&S) portfolio began to take shape as a result of the Medical Modeling & Simulation (MM&S) Integrated Research Team (IRT) meeting in February 2000.  Hosted by the TATRC, The IRT was jointly sponsored by the U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command and the U.S. Army Simulation, Training and Instrumentation Command (USASTRICOM).  Approximately seventy representatives from government, academia and industry expressed the need for simulation training from their own vantage point.  Military and federal agencies currently using Commercial Off-the-Shelf (COTS) simulators in medical readiness training gave their views of the value of simulation in training and their future needs.  TATRC-funded investigators provided details of their ongoing research and highlighted emerging and inchoate science.  In addition, a number of researchers not funded by TATRC but identified as on the leading edge of simulation modeling science were invited to present the latest work in their respective domains.  Four broad areas of simulation development emerged from the discussions:  1) PC-based Interactive Multimedia, 2) Digitally Enhanced Mannequins, 3) Virtual Workbench (“part-task”) simulators, and 4) Total Immersion Virtual Reality (TIVR).  Also resulting from the IRT were several pillars to the foundation of TATRC’s MM&S portfolio: 1) Integrated strategic plan, 2) Excellent science, and 3) Best Business Practices during all phases of the research and development process.  TATRC remains committed to those foundations.3.  The Challenge to  Medical Simulation: Validation, Validation, ValidationFor about a decade, research has been conducted to develop and apply medical simulation training devices and systems.  While many simulation devices and systems show potential to improve training, much is based on anecdotal feedback from informal user studies.  As integration efforts begun in 1999 continued, many simulation leaders around the world expressed the need to systematically validate the effectiveness of medical simulation systems.4.  Response to the ChallengeTo address this compelling need, the TATRC began in 2001 to focus on validating the “transfer-of-training” from simulators to actual medical practice, while continuing its integration efforts in research and development.Many others around the world recognize the need for validation of training effectiveness and effective integration into medical educational curricula.  We applaud our fellow researchers for their efforts.  While there is much vision and energy, there is no unlimited “money pot” from which to draw resources to support the efforts required.  Therefore, funding resources that were available are being used as effectively as possible.  Where efforts were required and funding was not, we have sought funding opportunities in creative ways.Table 1 identifies completed or ongoing efforts in this area and identifies the funding sources being invested.TATRC’s Validation Efforts5.  Simulation Working GroupThe Simulation Working Group (SWG) was chartered by the TATRC in 2001.  Chaired by Howard Champion, M.D. Gerry Higgins, Ph.D., its purpose was twofold: 1) to develop a robust scientific methodology to assess the effectiveness of medical simulation training systems, and 2) to apply the methodology to the Combat Trauma Patient Simulation (CTPS) System.  A draft methodology was completed by early fall in 2001.  But efforts to finalize it were hindered by the “911” attack.  With a combination of funding from congressional and military R&D funding, Phase I. (Verification: How well does the system “work” compared to design specs?) was completed by the Center for Total Access, Fort Gordon, GA.  The CTPS System passed 218 of 225 engineering checks; a couple of tests were deemed not applicable, so this result was very positive.  Full Phase II efforts (Validation: How well does it provide “transfer-to-training”?) are in progress as of this writing but in need of additional funding.  Phase III efforts (Comparison: How does it compare to other training options?) are dependent on funding as well.6.  Focused Scientific WorkshopsTATRC sponsored four focused workshops in 2001 to support the development of simulation technologies.  One of these related directly to validation and is presented first. The others are shown in the order of their occurrence.6.1  Metrics for Objective Assessment of Surgical Skills Workshop, July 9-10, 2001On July 9-10, 2001, the Metrics for Objective Assessment of Surgical Skills Workshop convened.  It was planned and moderated by Dr. Rick Satava (at that time from Yale University School of Medicine).  It was an international assemblage of both subject matter experts in objective assessment of surgical technical skills and of representatives of numerous official bodies involved in surgical education, evaluation and certification.The purpose was to establish a consensus on a baseline set of metrics from which future education, training, evaluation and research in the technical aspect of surgical and procedural skills can be measured.  The goals were to identify the validated, relevant measurements for technical surgical skills, to evaluate the currently available systems that have been validated in peer-reviewed publications, and to propose a set of objective training and evaluation tools for technical surgical skills that can be used by educators and program directors.  The objectives were to derive definitions, taxonomy, analysis of current systems, functional components for a core curriculum, and list the validated systems available for a core curriculum and identification of areas of needed research.In addition to the TATRC, there was sponsorship from the American College of Surgeons (ACS), Royal Colleges of Surgeons (RCS), Royal Australasian College of Surgeons (RACS), Society of Laparoscopic Surgeons (SLS), Society of American Gastrointestinal Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES), European Association of Endoscopic Surgeons (EAES), and Yale University School of Medicine6.2  Stanford Workshop on Surgical Simulation, June 20-22, 2001The Stanford Workshop on Surgical Simulation was hosted at Stanford University, co-sponsored by TATRC and the Stanford Computer Forum, in association with the Stanford Robotics Laboratory and the Center for Advanced Technology in Surgery at Stanford.  This workshop assembled researchers and developers world-wide who focus on modeling and simulation of deformable materials for applications requiring real-time interaction.  Of particular interest was medical applications including simulation-based training, skills assessment and planning, as well as other non-medical domains where real-time interactivity is needed.  Presentations and discussions helped to define the status of the field and to articulate future directions and possibilities that focus on algorithmic, modeling and real-time issues that affect the fidelity and applicability of deformable material simulation to medical and other applications. Considerable discussion focused on the level of fidelity necessary to achieve a positive transfer of training to practice.  Dr. “Srini” Srinivasan, MIT Touch Lab put this in perspective:  “In medical training, the bad news is that we will never be able to simulate tool-tissue interactions exactly in real time.  The good news is we don’t have to.”. Virtual proceedings are available at:  HYPERLINK "http://robotics.stanford.edu/~swss/" http://robotics.stanford.edu/~swss/6.3  The Digital Human: Open Source Software Framewok forOrgan Modeling and Simulation, July 23-24, 2001“The Digital Human: Open Source Software Framework for Organ Modeling and Simulation” convened at the Lister Hill Center, National Library of Medicine, hosted by Gerry Higgins, Ph.D., and Henry Kelly, Ph.D.  This workshop convened due to the urgent need to engage the larger biomedical community in the development of open source standards for organ modeling and simulation at multiple levels of hierarchy, including molecular biology, cell biology, bioengineering, systems physiology and anatomy.  These first steps involved gathering researchers together and soliciting input on the development of a process for development of an open source framework.The Digital Human project will support the development of a common, open source framework for the modeling and simulation of organs and tissues. The goal is to facilitate the creation of an open source community that will create, review, and continuously improve software components for modeling and simulation in this domain The Digital Human Project is based at the Federation of American Scientists in Washington, DC. 6.4  Sixth PHANToM Users Group, October 27-30, 2001One of the “enabling technologies” being developed to support surgical simulation is haptics, the sense of touch feedback.  Haptics is still in its infancy and rapidly evolving. There are two major reasons for the continuing rapid development: 1) fundamental paradigms for displaying the feel of models are still being envisioned, and 2) continued rapid increase in computer processor capabilities constantly expands what can be practically implemented.  By focusing on the researchers that are developing haptic applications, the PHANToM Users Group (PUG) conferences bring together a group with common core concerns. 7.  SBIR / STTR Topics to Support ValidationSeeking to leverage all funding avenues, the U.S. Army and / or the Department of Defense have supported the TATRC by approving three research topics in FY 02.7.1  STTR - US Army A02-TO17 - Refined Training Tools to Support Medical Readiness TrainingThis topic was awarded to Aptima Inc (with University of Maryland Department of Anesthesiology) and SimQuest (with Howard University)7.2  SBIR - US Army AO2-168 - Assessment Tools to Support Medical Readiness TrainingThis topic was awarded to Diamond Visionics LLC (with University of Maryland Department of Urology)7.3  SBIR - OSD 02-DH06 - Computer Based Simulation Technology for Training Technical Skills in MedicineThis topic was awarded to SimQuest Inc., Aptima Inc., Verefi Technologies Inc.The general objectives of all these topics are to spur development and application of tools to evaluate & report effectiveness of simulators and training systems to train medical personnel in key combat casualty care skills through exploiting and/or modifying systems in use in military aviation and aerospace industries.  8.  Formal Validation of STATCareAn 18-month study began in July at the Madigan Army Medical Center to compare standard Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) training versus standard EMT training supplemented by the use of a PC-based interactive multimedia program called the Simulation Technologies for Advanced Trauma Care (STATCare), a CD-ROM interactive multimedia training system developed for sustainment of Emergency Medical Technicians.  STATCare is physiologically and pharmokinetically responsive to assessment and treatment of a virtual patient.9. VIRGIL™ Chest Trauma Training SystemOn September 25th, 2000, at the Advanced Technologies Applied to Combat Casualty Care (ATACCC) 2000 meeting, the Center for Integration of Medicine and Innovative Technology (CIMIT) Simulation Group, led by Steven L. Dawson, MD, Massachusetts General Hospital, offered to produce a prototype simulator. Its purpose was to demonstrate how the individual design elements of CIMIT’s larger research program could be unified into a working system.  This was done in direct response to a critical request from Special Operations medical personnel.  On September 10th, 2001, Dr. Dawson and his team demonstrated VIRGIL.The VIRGIL chest trauma training system incorporates haptics, tissue-tool interactions, real-time graphics and augmented reality to present a realistic experience of assessing and treating penetrating trauma in a simulated battlefield scenario.  A free-standing but integral web-based and CD-compatible educational curriculum accompanies the training system, presenting treatment doctrine based upon the standards expressed in military doctrine documents.  The entire system is portable and can be run on standard 110 volt AC power or as a free standing unit for field training using an integral 12 volt DC power source.In September 2002, the National Capital Area Medical Simulation Center (NCAMSC), an agency of the Uniformed Services University (USU), conducted an on-site validation of VIRGIL’s training effectiveness.  This conclulded that training of medical students on VIRGIL™ was at least as effective as training students on porcine models.10. Validation, Metrics and Assessment of Simulation CommitteeContinuing the work begun by the Simulation Working Group (SWG) discussed earlier, the TATRC chartered the Validation, Metrics and Assessment of Simulation (VMAS) Committee.  Howard Champion, M.D. is the chairperson; the co-chair is Mark Bowyer, Col(s), USAF, director of the National Capital Area Medical Simulation Center (NCAMSC).The VMAS was chartered to develop methodology(ies) for validation of simulation training, identify key technologies for integration into training, and to establish credible panels of Subject Matter Experts in the disciplines necessary to develop and apply validation methodologies.At the “TATRC Day” preceding the 11th Annual Medicine Meets Virtual Reality (MMVR) Conference, the TATRC convened the first Committee-at-Large meeting, which attracted more than 190 participants.Areas of initial focus were identified in 1) validation methodologies, 2) medical errors, 3) outcome measures, 4) state-of-art educational framework / curriculum, and 5) metrics.  11.  National Center for Collaboration in MM&SA FY 02 congressional authorization funded the beginning of the National Center for Collaboration in Medical Modeling and Simulation involving the Old Dominion University and Eastern Virginia Medical School.  With R. Bowen Loftin, Ph.D., as its Principal Investigator, there are three major objectives: 1) collaborate in integrating and refining existing medical modeling & simulation technologies to create a coherent suite of tools with common computer hardware and interfaces, 2) collaborate on development of medical education and training curricula that explicitly incorporate medical simulations, and 3) collaborate on design & execution of systematic validation studies of existing and future medical simulations12.  Collaboration between the TATRC and the NCAMSCTo ensure that simulation development meets the needs for simulation use, program managers at TATRC and and the NCAMSC, discussions are now underway that will lead to collaboration of future efforts.13.  SummaryThe TATRC’s maturing strategy expands our consortia of research partners to address the core problems facing simulation, as we seek to constructively collaborate on essential research domains.  Underlying the strategy is a growing realization that the purpose is not to develop the “coolest” simulator; rather, it is to develop training systems that positively enhance training outcomes.  The goal remains the same: to revolutionize health care delivery by improving the way providers can train to deliver it.Author BiographiesGERALD R. MOSES is the Director, Clinical Applications Division, Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center (TATRC), U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command.  Doctor Moses came to TATRC in 1999 from the Congressionally Directed Medical Research Program where, since 1996, he managed the Department of Defense Breast Cancer Research Program.J. HARVEY MAGEE is the Project Officer for Medical Modeling & Simulation and Advanced Medical Technologies, Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center (TATRC), U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command.  Mr. Magee came to TATRC in 1999 after serving a career in the United States Air Force Medical Service Corps. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  