Simulation Interoperability forthe new RNLA Battlefield Management System Rudi Gouweleeuw <gouweleeuw@fel.tno.nl>Dennis Coetsier <coetsier@fel.tno.nl>Wim Huiskamp <huiskamp@fel.tno.nl>TNO Physics and Electronics LaboratoryCommand & Control and SimulationP.O. Box 96864, 2509 JG, The Hague, The NetherlandsTel +31 (0)70-3740253, Fax +31 (0)70-3740652Keywords:Simulator Architecture, C2-Simulation Interoperability, Battlefield Management SystemThe Battlefield Management System (BMS), which is being developed by the Royal Netherlands Army (RNLA), is a configurable information system that supports the Command and Control process of units ranging from single weapon system up to battalion level. The BMS supports the users in building and maintaining a Common Operational Picture (COP) in order to enhance their Situational Awareness. The BMS has provisions for interoperability with RNLA higher echelon C2 systems e.g. the Integrated Staff Information System (ISIS).TNO-FEL has recognised an opportunity to support the BMS assessment activities by our ongoing experimental studies on the subject of integration of C2 tools and simulation systems. Prototypes of the operational BMS systems were integrated into TNO-FEL's Electronic Battlespace Facility (EBF). The EBF is a synthetic environment consisting of interactive simulators (main battle tanks, armoured infantry fighting vehicles, reconnaissance vehicles), Computer Generated Forces and scenario management tools to monitor, control and evaluate the course of action in a scenario. The EBF is perfectly suited to assess the functionality and procedures concerning the BMS, in addition to and in preparation to field experiments. The use of the BMS in the EBF during training exercises proved to be successful and gave cause to many questions regarding the use of the BMS in a training context (e.g. Who within the training staff is responsible for the information in the BMS? What information regarding the use of the BMS by the crews is of importance to the training staff and should be logged? What functionality should be added to effectively use the BMS for tactical training?).A future addition of Simulation components to the operational BMS might be a more extended Decision Support functionality (e.g. route planning and battle evaluation).The architectural approach that was followed is to provide a software gateway between the BMS systems and the EBF simulation environment through a Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) interface. In the near future, interoperability between BMS and our simulators will be based on the High Level Architecture (HLA) simulation standard rather than DIS. The link to HLA provides the possibility to connect many modern simulation components to the BMS.This paper presents an overview of the architecture and the demonstrator under development. In addition, results are given of experiments regarding training aspects related to the introduction of BMS.IntroductionThis paper addresses the approach used by TNO-FEL to develop and demonstrate concepts for interoperability between C2 systems and Simulations. Simulation interoperability for C2 systems enables applications in training of military users, operational support, procurement and assessment and evaluation of C2 systems. The presented project is aimed specifically at the Battlefield Management System (BMS), a new system for the Royal Netherlands Army (RNLA), which is in under development. The requirements for the design of the C2-Simulation interoperability architecture are: flexibility, scalability, robustness and compliance to international standards.As a first demonstrator of interoperability between the BMS and a DIS (Distributed Interactive Simulation) based Simulation system, a tactical team trainer application was chosen, which concentrates on improved Situational Awareness (SA) of the trainees.The next section of the paper addresses the need for interoperability and the general concept of coupling C2 systems to Simulations. Section 3 explains the interoperability approach followed for the BMS. The following sections discuss the system architecture, implementation issues and some results and conclusions of this project. The final section discusses the plans for transitioning the demonstrator to the High Level Architecture (HLA) which has become the new interoperability standard for the Simulation domain.Linking C2 systems to Simulation modelsLinking C2 systems to Simulation systems has many potential applications.Simulation systems can stimulate the C2 system by providing data that simulates the 'real-world'. This information will now appear to have been received from peer C2 systems. In this way a simulated COP (Common Operational Picture) is created that is based on a simulation scenario. Applications of this technique are: assessment of C2 systems (performance, user interface etc.), assessment of C2 operator capabilities or training of C2 operators.The simulation can provide the C2 operator with operational decision support by executing 'what-if' scenarios. These scenario's can support the operator in his decision making process (e.g. mission planning or assessment of alternative COA's).New or experimental parts for an existing C2 system can be evaluated before purchase or even before full development of the component by replacing an existing component of the C2 system with an embedded or external simulation. Simulated systems can be 'initialised' from the existing COP in the C2 system and a simulation run can be started based on this information. The advantage of using simulations as a tool for stimulation of C2 systems, as opposed to 'role players', is that the simulation has a consistent, controlled and reproducible behaviour, which allows objective assessment of system and/or operator performance. TNO-FEL has recognised an opportunity to support the BMS assessment activities by ongoing experimental studies on coupling of our simulation tools with this innovative C2 architecture.The aim of the research is to develop a flexible and future-proof approach to the C2-Simulation interoperability problem. First we need to clarify what we really mean by 'interoperability'.Interoperability is the degree to which entities are able to co-operate in achieving a common goal. There are many interpretations of the concept of interoperability between computer systems. It varies from having a network connection and being able to transfer files (e.g. email) to using exactly the same applications at all systems and completely sharing the information they process. A commonly used form of interoperability is 'information interoperability', because it offers optimal connectivity between systems, while preserving maximum independence. Information interoperability is defined as the ability of systems to automatically exchange and interpret information that is common to those systems [Ref 1].In this paper we focus on information interoperability that is achieved by the automated exchange and interpretation of structured information between systems. With minimum user intervention, C2 systems and Simulation systems must be able to automatically interchange certain information and utilise that for further processing. This means that the information must be structured, because this enables functionality such as distribution by subscription on certain topics, presentation of information and filtering by specific selection criteria. The emphasis here lies on the exchange of information (rather than 'free format' databits), preserving its meaning, integrity and context. Structured information is described formally by a 'Datamodel'. The datamodel thus represents the foundation for information interoperability. In the most common case where many systems have to exchange information, standardisation of a common ‘interface’ is a key factor to achieve information interoperability. Otherwise, dedicated interfaces are needed between every pair of interconnected systems, leading to an exponential growth of the number of interfaces required [ REF _Ref30998844 \h Figure 1] [Ref. 7]. Preferably the exchange should not depend on proprietary products, such as database management systems and communication systems.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1 C2 and Simulation Interoperability (dedicated interface)The key notion for information interoperability is standardisation. By having common agreements on which information is exchanged, in what format, and under what conditions, it becomes easier to allow systems of different types to interoperate [ REF _Ref30998867 \h Figure 2].Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2 C2 and Simulation Interoperability (standard interface)BMSThe BMS is a configurable application platform and information system that provides generic functionality to support the Command and Control process up to battalion level. The BMS supports the users in building and maintaining a COP that provides adequate Situational Awareness [ REF _Ref30998910 \h Figure 3].The BMS is being developed at the RNLA C2 Support Centre, with co-operation of TNO-FEL. The system architecture of the BMS comprises of three layers: presentation services, business services, and data services [Ref. 2].The presentation services layer is responsible for gathering information from the user and presenting information to the user using the services of the business services layer.The business services layer is responsible for end-to-end business transactions such as maintaining roles, contexts and business objects and the logic that applies within these concepts.The data services layer is responsible for storage, retrieval, maintenance and integrity of data. The data services layer is also in charge of publishing as well as subscribing and listening to data on the C2 network.The information exchange in the BMS environment is based on commercial of the shelf publish/subscribe services and a tailored information exchange language [Ref. 3]. The information exchange language is based on the RNLA C3I Architecture (C3IA) Information Model (C3IA-IM) for C2 applications within the RNLA.The BMS has interface modules for several RNLA systems such as the Integrated Staff Information System 'ISIS' and for the C2 Workstation System. In addition, the BMS interfaces with the vehicle’s navigation system (GPS) to extract current position data of the own vehicle. Future plans include feeding in data from other vehicle and weapon systems (e.g. munition stores, fuel and other data).The operational BMS system uses the tactical voice-data radio networks that are maintained between vehicles and between the vehicles and their command cells. For test purposes this radio network can be simulated by a normal ethernet LAN. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3 BMS User Interface (prototype)Electronic Battlespace Facility (EBF)The changing role and organization of the armed forces requires new methods for development, evaluation and operation of military equipment, and for the training of personnel. Simulation is an acceptable solution to reduce costs and protect the environment. TNO Physics and Electronics Laboratory (TNO-FEL) has developed an infrastructure, called the Electronic Battlespace Facility (EBF), which provides simulation services for development, research and training purposes (See  REF _Ref30998942 \h Figure 4). The facility provides interoperability of simulators based on the DIS protocol (under transition to HLA) and is able to integrate both high and low-echelon command and control aspects.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 4 Generic Mockups in EBFThe EBF consists of two major parts: scenario management and electronic battlefield. Scenario management supplies modules for exercise definition, preparation (briefing), exercise monitoring and control and exercise analysis (debriefing and After Action Review). The electronic battlefield represents the synthetic environment including manned simulators and computer generated forces (CGF). The facility is situated in a dedicated location at TNO-FEL and supports worldwide connections to DSI (Defence Simulation Internet) and ISDN for multi-national exercises. Multimedia presentation modules provide the observers and participants with a realistic, up-to-date view of the ongoing session [10]. BMS-Tactis FederationThe first demonstration target of our project was to achieve interoperability between the BMS and a DIS Simulation system. More specifically, the objective of our experiments were :Demonstrate the potential of BMS for training simulators as Situational Awareness support tool.Investigate the requirements for C2 systems as training support tools (e.g. monitoring and control by instructors).Evaluate the operational value of BMS before purchase or even before full development.The Federation that was developed for this demonstration is named the 'BMS-“Tactical Team training” Federation' and consists of the following Federates:Leopard 2A5 Main Battle Tank simulators;YPR-PRI (Dutch Armoured Infantry Fighting Vehicles) simulators;Computer Generated Forces (MODSaf);Several scenario management applications to monitor and control the exercise, amongst others:Stealth Federate, a 3D viewer into the virtual environment;Plan view display, a 2D electronic tactical map;Simulator Status Display to monitor the exact status of all subsystems of a simulator;Communication tool to visualise the tactical radio communication;Training Objective tool to monitor the trainees behaviour based on training objectives;Datalogger;DIS-BMS converter.This federation was used during an exercise for aspirant company (team) commanders. One Leopard and two YPR-PRI are manned with a platoon commander. Another Leopard is manned with a team commander (See  REF _Ref30998987 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 5). All other platoon vehicles, flanking units, fire support, engineering support and opposing forces are computer generated.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 5 Commander’s position with BMSEvery commander position of the simulators and two positions of the training staff are equipped with a BMS. Commanders use the BMS to reach a higher situational awareness. The electronic map on BMS displays the position of the own vehicle, the position of friendly vehicles and lines of co-ordination. The same information is displayed at the training staff positions and they also have the possibility to insert information of opposing forces (e.g. intelligence reports). This (partial) information of opposing forces is also presented at every commander’s position. EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 6 Exercise briefingBridging the gapFor the purpose of the exercise, data was transferred from the simulated environment to the C2 environment in several ways (See  REF _Ref30999017 \h Figure 7):Objects from our 3D visual database were converted to a corresponding 2D map for the BMS;Coordination lines were copied from the plan view display and inserted manually into the BMS;Manned simulators generate a simulated GPS signal to insert their own position into the BMS;To insert computer generated forces a DIS / BMS converter was built. This converter takes every DIS entity of the own force from the DIS network and places it with the right attributes in a file at one of the BMS systems. This BMS system updates its information every second and feeds this data into the other BMS systems through the BMS network.Computer generated forces of the opposing forces were not inserted automatically. At the discretion of the training staff information about opposing forces may be inserted manually at a BMS station.The lessons learned proved valuable for both the military user community and the implementation team. The evaluation results will be used as input for the follow up of the project. EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 7 Information transfer from the simulated environment to the C2 environmentDemonstrator ResultsResults and findings are both in the technical and user requirement area.The Dutch BMS system and DIS are both relatively open and object-oriented, therefore the exchange of information was relatively easy to implement. There was no need to adapt the BMS software or its interface, so a next version of the BMS can be integrated effortless into the EBF.Through the use of BMS a higher situational awareness for the trainees was achieved. In practice, orienting oneself from a hatch down vehicle is not easy. In a virtual environment this is even more difficult, due to limited depth cues and limited details in the virtual environment. In exercises without BMS, simple training exercises had to be performed just to learn how to orient oneself in the virtual environment. Failing to run these “habituation” exercises resulted in undesired orientation problems in the tactical exercises and therefore loss of valuable training time.Firstly, the use of BMS in the simulators substantially reduced the time needed for habituation of the trainees. Secondly, the commanders in the vehicles knew exactly where they and their team members were, thus freeing time to focus on higher level tactical training goals.Many people found it an “eye opener” to use a simulation environment in conjunction with a C2 environment to test and evaluate  the functionality and operating procedures of C2 systems. The simulation environment offers a flexible and controlled context, suitable for experimenting with individual systems as well as large units, all at the cost of relatively few resources. The simulation environment demonstrated to be a useful addition to field experiments.One of the operational lessons learned was that the trainees had to be aware of the fact that not all information that is displayed on the BMS has the same timestamp. For example, the position of the own vehicle (originating from the vehicle’s GPS) was updated more frequent than the positions of other vehicles (transferred over the tactical data-voice radio). Especially during high speed movements, on the BMS display the own vehicle seems to lead the other vehicles of the platoon, while in fact all vehicles were close together. Concluded was that a BMS is an important addition to the sensors of a commander, but that it does not render all other means of observation redundant.In our next trials we will collect and log data from the BMS to use it during an After Action Review. Together with the instructors and trainees we hope to establish what data should be collected and how it has to be presented.Transitioning to HLAThe High Level Architecture (HLA) is an architecture for reuse and interoperation of simulations [Ref. 3, 4, 5], [ REF _Ref30999036 \h Figure 8]. The HLA is based on the premise that no single simulation can satisfy the requirements of all uses and users. An individual simulation or set of simulations developed for one purpose can be applied to another application under the HLA concept of the Federation: a composable set of interacting simulations.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 8 HLA FederationThe intent of HLA is to provide a structure that will support reuse of capabilities available in different simulations, ultimately reducing the cost and time required to create a synthetic environment for a new purpose and providing developers the option of different implementations within the framework of the HLA. The baseline definition of the HLA includes the HLA Rules, the HLA Interface Specification (IFSpec), and the HLA Object Model Template (OMT). The HLA interface specification defines the services that HLA provides to the application. These services include Object Management (publish/subscribe) and Time Management (i.e. synchronisation between distributed applications). The Federation Object Model (FOM) is the datamodel of the HLA Federation. The OMT is the standard datamodel format that is used in HLA documentation. The HLA specification was adopted by the US Defense Modelling and Simulation Office (DMSO) and it has been accepted as IEEE Standard 1516 for simulation interoperability. Development of a generic coupling between C2 systems and HLA thus provides the possibility to connect modern simulation components to the C2 environment.One of the main components of HLA is the Run-Time Infrastructure (RTI). The RTI implements the HLA IFSpec and allows the user to invoke the RTI services to support run-time interactions among Federates and to respond to requests from the RTI. This interface is implementation independent and is independent of the specific object models and data exchange requirements of any Federation. At TNO-FEL we developed an HLA based middleware layer, called the Runtime Communication Infrastructure (RCI) [Ref. 6] which supports HLA. The RCI shields the developer from many intricate details concerning the usage of the HLA-RTI, including Data Distribution Management (DDM) [Ref. 3, 4, 5], when developing either a Component or a Federate. The RCI includes a C++ code-generator to translate the required HLA-OMT descriptions into easily accessible object-oriented classes.The majority of the EBF software modules currently uses the DIS standard. In the near future, a switch to the HLA standard is foreseen. TNO-FEL based the DIS interface of its simulator modules on the our Advanced Simulation Framework (ASF) middleware to abstract applications from the type of communication protocols being used [Ref 8]. The ASF is suitable for transition to HLA with minimal impact on the application part of the simulator code. TNO has already ported some of its simulators to HLA using this approach. However, newly developed applications are based on the RCI middleware, which is similar to the ASF and thus allows a short learning curve for the developers familiar with ASF. In support of the transition to HLA, TNO has developed an ‘EBF FOM’, which is an extended version of the RPR-FOM. This FOM will be adapted and extended to support future C2-Simulation interoperability projects.Conclusions and further plansThe demonstration of coupling a BMS system to a simulation environment achieved its overall objectives and sofar received positive reactions from its audience. Some lessons learned to date from the project are:Use a single (authoritative) source for common data like terrain maps and data, co-ordinate conversion algorithms, equipment and weapon parameters, etc.;Test and Evaluation of BMS prototypes in a simulated environment is very cost effective;Operators need to become aware that BMS response is not ‘real-time’;Operators need to become aware that BMS information is not always the ‘truth’.The follow-up project will focus on added features, performance improvement of the architecture in general, and on logging suitable data concerning training effectiveness.References[1] Eddie Lasschuyt, Marcel van Hekken, “Information Interoperability and Information Standardisation for NATO C2 – a practical approach”, IST-2000 Workshop, April 2000.[2] C3I Architecture: Information Model, RNLA C2 Support Centre, 22 December 2000. [3] Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO), “High Level Architecture for Simulations Interface Specification”. http://www.dmso.mil/public/transition/hla/techspecs[4] Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO), “High Level Architecture Object Model Template”. http://www.dmso.mil/public/transition/hla/techspecs[5] Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO), “Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) Model”. http://www.dmso.mil/public/transition/hla/techspecs[6] Marco Brasse, Wim Huiskamp, Olaf Stroosma, “A Component Architecture for Federate Development”, Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Fall 1999. [7] Hans-Peter Menzler, Andreas Tolk, Jurgen Kuite, Thomas Weyrath, "Command and Control to Simulation Proxy Solution (C2SIM-Proxy) - Loose Coupling of Disparate Worlds", Proc. Euro SIW 2001, UK. [8] Hans Jense, Nico Kuijpers and Robert-Jan Elias, “Electronic Battlespace Facility for Research, Development and Engineering”, Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 8-12, 1997, Orlando, Florida, USA.[9] Merel Vertegaal – Geerlink, MMI BMS version 1.2, BMS-99-016, 01-02-02[10] Jeroen van Disseldorp, information board access module (IBXS) user manual version 1.1, BMS-00-05, 04-01-2001Author BiographiesDennis Coetsier is a senior scientist in the Command & Control and Simulation division at TNO-FEL. After his graduation in electronics (specialisation computer techniques) at the “Hogere Technische School Amsterdam”, Dennis Coetsier went to military service and was placed at TNO to support computer aided exercises with war-games like SOLTAU en KIBOWI. After his military service he stayed at TNO to work on a Tactical Procedure Trainer for maneuver teams (INTACT). He has lead projects on “digitization of terrain”, standardization of “3D visual models” and distributed simulation. He coordinated the research effort of TNO on behalf of the TACTIS project.  He is advisor of the Royal Netherlands Army in the procurement of the tactical team trainer TACTIS.Rudi Gouweleeuw is a senior scientist in the Command & Control and Simulation division at TNO-FEL. He holds an M.Sc. degree in Artificial Intelligence from the Free University in Amsterdam. His work is concentrated on research and specification of training simulators, with special interest in instruction support and Computer Generated Forces. He is advisor of the Royal Netherlands Army in the procurement of the tactical team trainer TACTIS.Wim Huiskamp is a research scientist in the Command & Control and Simulation Division at TNO-FEL. He holds an M.Sc. degree in Electrical Engineering from Twente University of Technology, The Netherlands. He works in the field of High Performance Computing and Networking and specialises in design and implementation of distributed computer architectures. His research interests include system architecture, real-time simulation and autonomous vehicle technology. Wim was the project lead for several national and international simulation (and simulation interoperability) projects.