Representing the Natural Environment:  An Integrated Development ProcessVirginia T. DobeyConsultant to the Defense Modeling and Simulation OfficeVTCDobey Associates, Inc.3512 Country Hill DriveFairfax, VA   22030 HYPERLINK "mailto:VTCDobey@aol.com" VTCDobey@aol.comKey Words:  SNE, Synthetic Natural Environment, Natural Environment, Environmental Representation, SNE Conceptual Reference Model, Environment Concept Model, Common Data Model Framework, V&V, VV&A, FEDEP, M&S, Simulation, ModelingABSTRACT:  As efforts are made to clarify and streamline system development processes, it has become apparent that including a representation of the natural environment in system development needs to be addressed in a comprehensive manner.  To date, several developmental paradigms for accomplishing this have been proposed, the most notable of which are the Synthetic Natural Environment (SNE) Conceptual Reference Model, the Environment Concept Model, and the Common Data Model Framework.  Confusion is rampant on whether each is a separate and complete developmental paradigm and, if not, how they fit together.  A closer examination reveals that none is self-contained, but all are complementary, as each addresses a particular part of a larger development process of the system environmental representation.  Used as part of a properly executed comprehensive development process, each of these paradigms supports key aspects of integrating an environmental representation into a system, in addition to providing significant verification, validation, and accreditation (VV&A) documentation.  This paper proposes such a development process for integrating an environmental representation into a system.  The proposed process places the three aforementioned environment development paradigms, together with additional activities, within the framework of the VV&A overlay to the 7-step Federation Development Process (FEDEP) .  Component developers will find it most beneficial to use this process, tailoring the steps toward the specific character of their development, in order to maximize reusability and ensure future ability to reuse and federate their component.Identifying the Environmental RepresentationIn the past, many different terms have been used to characterize the environmental representation included in a system.  Some of this confusion has its source in the understanding of what is encompassed by the term "environmental," and some has been caused by varying meanings of terms such as "system environment" and "synthetic environment."  In this discussion, "environmental" is specifically intended to include, at a minimum, those aspects of the atmosphere, ocean, terrain, and space domains which are governed by the laws of Nature, and may include manmade or artificial objects which are embedded in or become a part of those domains.  It includes the description of precise time as measured and governed by the laws of Nature (the fourth, or temporal, dimension) as well as those aspects of mapping, charting, and geodesy (MC&G) which describe the natural environment and provide for precise positioning within its three spatial dimensions. From a system perspective, the "system environment" is the actual set of conditions, natural or artificial, in which the system will operate.  This term is NOT interchangeable with "environmental representation," as the simulation environment will encompass far more than just the environmental representation (ER).  The atmosphere, the ocean, and the terrain are obvious parts of any ER.  Less obvious is the space environment of the earth's solar system and galaxy, as well of galaxies outside the Milky Way.  These may be incorporated as temporally or spatially static (unchanging) or dynamic (changing in one or more of four dimensions), with the ER providing system developers the ability to locate a point in four-dimensional space (latitude, longitude, and altitude with reference to a planetary centroid; time, with reference to a stipulated chronological reference datum).A complete ER is one that extends across all four dimensions of the full set of natural environment domains and their interactions within the system.  It is completely consistent internally and supports all interoperability demands placed upon it by the component(s) with which it interacts.  Each system development team (including sponsor, user, proponent, and developer) must (1) realize what is included in a complete ER, and (2) tailor that complete specification (with potentially significant downsizing) into something more manageable by and appropriate to their particular development.Environmental Representation:  The Circle of InteractionsIn discussing the ER, it is not sufficient to identify the four natural environmental domains (terrain, ocean, atmosphere, and space) that may be encountered in simulation play.  A comprehensive definition includes the dynamic interfaces between atmosphere/ocean, atmosphere/terrain, ocean/terrain, and atmosphere/space.  These are sometimes separately incorporated into a system, particularly when a weapon or sensor capability will be affected by the turbulence or flux of physical properties such as water vapor, air density, or any of the various types of environmental energy exchanged across these interfaces.  No less important is the inclusion of the pre-existent or upwind attributes which cause or change those conditions, as well as the inclusion of the resulting or downwind attributes.Extending outward from this "environmental" definition of the ER is the circle of interactions between the ER and all components in any system.  This circle represents the complete definition of the ER found in the real world—and thus the ideal system ER.  It includes, not only all aspects of the ER within the mission space, but also all changes to components and their performance caused by their presence in and interaction with the ER (effects) and changes to the ER caused by those objects and their presence and performance within the ER.  [See Figure 1.]Environmental Representation:  The Challenge of Information ConsistencyIn order for the ER to be exchanged within and among components in a truly lossless manner, it must be created, transmitted, received, and implemented in a consistent manner.  Consistency of data exchange requires some degree of standardization on each of three levels:  lexical, syntactic, and semantic.Information Consistency:  The Lexical LevelLexical consistency focuses on the common usage of data, ensuring that the same word is defined in the same way, preventing the same word from having two different meanings and two words from having the same meaning.  This type of consistency is usually resolved by the use of a common data element dictionary containing the set of "words," or data elements (identified by their names or labels), which are used by one or more components within the simulation or federation.  The need for lexical consistency for ER data was the motivation behind the development of the Environmental Data Coding Specification. EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1.  The Circle of Interactions in an Environmental RepresentationInformation Consistency:  The Syntactic LevelSyntactic consistency focuses on the common format of exchanged data, ensuring that data used in one component is handled identically in another.  It also addresses data transfer formats, ensuring that such transfer is lossless across multiple interfaces.  This type of consistency is also typically addressed by the use of a common data element dictionary, which specifies data element format and allowable values in addition to that information needed to ensure lexical consistency.Because of the impact of syntactic inconsistency on all aspects of information ingest, manipulation, exchange, and interpretation, the United States Department of Defense (U.S. DoD) has worked for over a decade on standardizing all data used in military information systems.  The resulting data elements and their metadata reside in the Defense Data Model  (DDM) and its related data element dictionary, the Defense Data Dictionary System (DDDS).  Conceptual standard data elements for produced ER data are captured in the Joint Meteorological and Oceanographic (METOC) Conceptual Data Model (JMCDM), which serves as both the set of standard data elements to be used by U.S. DoD METOC data producers and the natural environment functional area input to the DDM and DDDS.  Conceptual standard data elements for produced MC&G data are captured in the United States Imagery and Geospatial Systems (USIGS) Conceptual Data Model (UCDM), which parallels the role of the JMCDM for MC&G data.  These represent the most far-reaching efforts by data producers to establish a common data element dictionary for ER data.The SEDRIS project has developed the SEDRIS Data Representation Model, (SDRM) and associated data element dictionary (EDCS), but from the perspective of the ER user.  Ongoing efforts are being made to align the EDCS with both the JMCDM and the UCDM to provide consistency with producer data and prevent the need for change once those producer data elements become available.  Combined use of  SDRM and EDCS supports a reasonable level of syntactic consistency for ER data.Information Consistency:  The Semantic LevelSemantic consistency focuses on the common understanding and interpretation of data within and between components.  It requires both lexical and syntactic consistency, but extends far beyond either.  To achieve semantic consistency within or between components, one must ensure:Use of consistent input data (standard data elements)Use of appropriate and consistent data interpolation schemaUse of appropriate and consistent algorithmsUse of appropriate and consistent data processing within those algorithmsUse of consistent algorithms across data scales.Achievement of semantic information consistency is the greatest challenge to system developers, but it is essential if the system is to properly handle input data and provide accurate results.  The extent to which semantic information consistency is not achieved is the extent to which the system may produce questionable or erroneous results.Environmental Representation:  Interoperability ChallengesEncompassing the challenge of consistent ER data is the greater challenge of interoperability, both technical and substantive.  Technical interoperability is "the capability of entities to physically connect and exchange data through those connections, and focuses on terminology, format, and connectivity issues."  Substantive interoperability is "the capability of entities, when connected, to provide adequate, accurate, and consistent simulated representations that adhere to the principles of 'fair fight' and address mission objectives.  It is focused on content and understanding issues, as well as consistency of implementation by multiple entities."  [See Figure 2.]  An additional type, meaningful interoperability, transcends both of these others, addressing the ability of entities to "understand the context of the problem being addressed, the syntax and semantics of the data being provided and ensure the level of detail and fidelity is consistent across the entire federation without the need to develop custom hardware, software, or tools."Technical Interoperability of the Environmental RepresentationIn a single-component system, all data exchange remains within the component.  No connectivity issues exist to challenge data consistency, and all is well.  However, once a second component—be it another object, process, or simulation—is introduced, the technical demands of data exchange are also introduced and must be addressed.  Connectivity, or the ability of two components to losslessly exchange data between them, becomes a central issue in the quest for information consistency.  Because of the vast number of product-specific and production formats for natural environmental data, the ability of two components to exchange product-independent internal ER data across an interface and integrate the received external product-independent data into internal databases has become a necessity for systems.  Technical interoperability is essentially reached when lexical and syntactic consistency of ER data is achieved within and across all components in a system.For example, a ship "takes" a weather and oceanographic observation and transmits it to aircraft for use in adjusting sensor placement and performance.  If the aircraft receives the ungarbled observation transmitted by the ship, the two components have achieved technical interoperability.   EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2.  Interoperability Challenges in an Environmental RepresentationDeveloped to address the technical interoperability challenge, the SEDRIS Transmittal Format (STF) is a product-independent format which leverages the EDCS and SRM to decompose any of a very large number of producer-specific products and databases into their fundamental elements and allow them to be packaged in a language-independent format for transmittal to other entities within or between systems.  Used with a lossless network or other connectivity between two components, technical interoperability becomes reasonably achievable for ER data.  As an added benefit, many of the converters between producer-specific product and database formats are two-way, allowing the product- independent data (expressed in terms of the EDCS) contained in two or more transmittals to be integrated and reconverted back into any of a large number of producer-specific formats.Substantive Interoperability of the Environmental RepresentationSubstantive interoperability of the ER is the goal of ER developers and advisors on the system development team.  It is achieved when all components of a system have access to, and implementation of, an adequate, accurate, and consistent ER that supports a "fair fight" within and across components (be they objects, simulations, or federates) in accordance with development objectives.  It requires close coordination between ER personnel and the system development team, preferably their integration, to allow integrated development of the ER with the components which use, affect, and are impacted by the ER.  When semantic consistency is achieved within and across all components in a system, the essence of substantive interoperability has been achieved. For example, substantive interoperability is achieved when the cloud of dust generated by wind over the desert affects the downwind helicopter's visibility and the shipboard radar's performance.  Definition:  The Environmental RepresentationIt is difficult to define the "Environmental Representation" as a stand-alone object or thing.  It can be a fairly complex addition to any system, and must be viewed ultimately as an integral extension of each component and process within the system.  A complete integrated ER is one that encompasses the entire spatial and temporal extent of the physical environment governed by the laws of Nature.  It is not limited to the conditions of the natural environment, whether past, present, or future but includes all interactions with components, including the ER's effects on those components and the impacts of those components on the ER.  It supports meaningful interoperability as it achieves technical interoperability through lexical and syntactic consistency of ER data exchange, and substantive interoperability through semantic consistency of ER usage without custom hardware, software, or other tools.Incorporating the ER into the FEDEP/VV&A ProcessesWhile system developers encounter significant challenges in constructing models of components such as weapons, platforms, and sensor systems, they often perceive that building an ER in which such components are to perform will be so much more difficult as to be prohibitively expensive.  In many cases, the system developer fails to plan for an integrated ER that will provide consistent conditions and effects (not to mention incorporating impacts on the environment!).  Incorporation of ER effects is generally left to the developer of an individual component—leading to significant variations across the system both in separate (and often conflicting) depictions of the ER and in the many different ways in which it may or may not be included in components within and across systems.Remediation of this situation lies in recognizing that the ER is actually an extension of each component and process.  It is a modification of component capabilities and performance, and affects virtually every component process within the system.  Because of that, integrating elements of the ER into development of each component and related process may prove to be extremely cost-effective.  It may be determined that the ER will be represented as a set of individual conditions and effects separately included in individual components or provided to those components from a separately-modeled, freestanding subsystem, but in either case, a coordinated process which integrates the development of the ER with the development of components and processes potentially to be included is of great benefit to a system developer. While there are many possible ways in which this can be accomplished, the one herein proposed is based on the IEEE FEDEP.  Comprised of multiple sub-processes, the FEDEP is "a structured, systems engineering approach to federation development and execution."  Because the FEDEP is, in itself, a sound generic development process that can be tailored for a stand-alone system, it is a logical starting point for a process to include the environment in such developments.  Furthermore, because there is such a close connection between proper development of the environment, proper documentation of the development, and the Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) process, it is reasonable to use both the FEDEP and its proposed VV&A Overlay as the starting point for an integrated development process.It is not necessary to have dedicated environmental subject matter experts (SMEs) separately developing the ER, but it is important that the development team have access to such SMEs throughout the process, and in particular at critical VV&A points in the process.  It is also important that the development team involve ER  EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3.  Environmental Overlay to the FEDEP/VV&A Processpersonnel early in the process to ensure that the team has an appropriate understanding of environmental conditions, effects and impacts.The Environmental Overlay to the 7-Step FEDEP/VV&A ProcessIn Figure 3, the proposed integrated FEDEP/VV&A process with environmental overlay is presented.  While the FEDEP/VV&A process contains seven steps, this environmental overlay, as a separate process, spans only the first five.  In the two final FEDEP/VV&A steps, the development and VV&A activities simply include the ER, rather than add environment-specific activities.Environmental Overlay Step 1:  Define Environmental RequirementsAs the development team examines the need for and objectives of the proposed system, it is also identifying proposed tasks, with their context and constraints, to be performed in support of system objectives.  Definition of environmental requirements begins by identifying task context and constraints, such as is done for the Universal Joint Task List and its subordinate Service-specific Task Lists. These task lists, differentiated by system operational level (strategic, theater-tactical, tactical, etc.), identify potential environmental conditions under which event behaviors are to be performed.  Although conditions may vary by the context in which the task is to be performed (analysis, training, acquisition, logistics, and so forth), they provide a reasonable starting point, and should be adjusted as needed.  For example, in a system to be used for training, it is important to incorporate actual real-world conditions under which the trained behaviors will be performed.  In the case of a system to be used in analysis, it should incorporate all real-world conditions which would potentially impact analysis results.  This tailoring is important for every intended purpose of an existing or proposed system, not just those in training or analysis, and should be an important part of any system development, whether for new development or for reuse.Defining ER RequirementsIt is important to begin identifying environmental requirements with the assumptions that all should be specified and all can be met.  Identification and documentation of changes to this set of ER requirements caused both by design limitations on the part of the system and by production limitations on the part of the supplier is an important part of later development steps.A comprehensive set of questions to assist a development team in identifying their required ER is found in the DoD VV&A RPG.  These questions are grouped into two parts, one for individual components and one which applies to multiple components (whether a multi-component system or a multi-system federation), and focus on the following principal questions:Does the component require an environmental representation?What is the component's spatial scale?Does the component differentiate between day and night?Does the component require a spatially-varying environmental representation?Does the component require a temporally-varying environmental representation?Does the component require physical environmental processes?Must the environment affect the component and its characteristics and performance (C&P)?Must the component and its C&P impact the environment?When defining environmental requirements for multiple components, the focus shifts beyond that of the individual component to a comparison of the environmental requirements identified for each one:Are all components implementing a common ER?Are all implementing the same spatial reference datums and coordinate systems?Are all implementing the ER at the same or consistent spatial scales?Are all implementing the ER at the same or consistent temporal scales?Are all implementing the same or consistent diurnal differentiation?Are all implementing the same or consistent spatially-varying ER?Are all implementing the same or consistent temporally-varying ER?Are all implementing the same or consistent physical environmental processes?Does the environment consistently affect all components and their C&P?Do the components and their C&P consistently impact the environment?Available Environment Development Processes:  The SNE Conceptual Reference ModelA proposed development process for environmental data (see Figure 4) is less specific in the questions it asks but more comprehensive in its general description of the data which must be examined for environmental data requirements.  It provides a common perspective on the challenge of including an ER in a system so that various implementations of environmental information can be compared and contrasted.  By identifying the type of data included in a particular component or included in all components within and across a system, development personnel can determine the degree to which consistent environmental information is incorporated in the components of a system.It focuses on four types of information, beginning the data decomposition process at the information closest to the system user:Behaviors:  environmental effects which interact with a component and its emitted energy, resulting in changed component behaviors (C&P) EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 4.  The SNE Conceptual Reference ModelMilitary models:  user-directed segment of the interface between the ER and the component.  These data capture the changing C&P and component behaviors based on relevant environmental effects, and are the actual source data for determination of environmental impacts.Environmental effects and impacts:  ER-directed segment of the interface between the environment and components.  Effects data characterize the ER as it affects the performance of the individual component, while the impacts data capture changes to the ER as it is altered by the presence or behavior of the component.  The third type of data, internal dynamics, actually captures a snapshot of the ER at a particular point in time, as it is affecting and being impacted by components.Environmental data:  actual information about the natural environment, in four domains and in four dimensions.  They are the foundation of the ER, but are far from its complete contents.Proper use of the SNE Conceptual Reference Model involves close coordination with component developers as ER personnel work backward from the development team's identification of desired component behaviors to the environmental data which ultimately affect and are impacted by their C&P. This process of moving from the aggregated environmental information often embedded in components to fundamental environmental data on which it is based enables identification of common data used in multiple components and supports the establishment of a consistent environment within and across a system.Because of its initial focus on components and their behaviors, it is especially appropriate to use this model in evaluating environmental requirements for existing and reused components.  In determining environmental requirements for components to be developed, this model would be particularly useful when ER personnel are not involved in initial component design.Implementing Environmental Overlay Step 1Establishing environmental requirements for a system requires the development team to ask a comprehensive set of questions about the needs for the system and the context and constraints of its objectives.  These questions address the planned inclusion of the environment in the system and determine the level to which environmental conditions, effects, and impacts will be integrated in its performance.  Once their answers are compiled, the team can begin to determine the extent to which each object must incorporate environmental data and work to ensure that such data are incorporated consistently within and across system objects and interfaces.Environmental Overlay Step 2:  Develop ER Conceptual ModelIn the combined FEDEP/VV&A process, Step 2 is focused on the development and validation of the system scenario(s) and conceptual model.  The system needs and objectives are translated into specific objects and interactions, and given concrete context, C&P, and conditions.  Likewise, Step 2 of the Environmental Overlay develops a clear statement of environmental requirements in the form of a conceptual model of the environment—whether a stand-alone model or simply environmental extensions to the system's conceptual objects and model.  It leverages the comprehensive set of environmental requirements identified during the Overlay Step 1 and matches the requirement to the object, so that consistency and interoperability can be established and monitored.Available Environment Development Processes:  the Environment Concept ModelSeveral years ago, the Navy's Maritime Virtual Environmental Data System (MARVEDS) program devised a documentation product, the Environment Concept Model (ECM), for integrating the natural environment into the simulation development process such that a developer could ensure that the natural environment was being incorporated CONSISTENTLY within a federation and its components.  MARVEDS proposed a related product development process, known as the Environment Reference Implementation Process and more commonly referred to as the ECM process.  [See Figure 5.]In the ECM process, ER personnel work with the development team during the FEDEP to identify ER requirements, translate them into an ECM, adjust the ECM to reflect system and production constraints, and ultimately translate it into recommended sources and services to provide the ER.  The initial ECM (the inferred environment) is constructed during FEDEP Step 2.  It identifies the environmental information needed to fully support analysis objectives as portrayed by the set of system use cases (scenario(s), object representations, and range instrumentation requirements).  When constructed using a common data dictionary, such as the EDCS, it becomes a useful starting point for discussion with ER  EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 5.  The Environment Reference Implementation (or ECM) Processproviders regarding potential information sources and services to support the emerging system.This initial ECM will be updated, concurrent with the evolution of the system's conceptual model as part of FEDEP Steps 3 and 4, to reflect design tradeoffs and document implementation decisions which generate differences between the inferred environment and the implemented environment as it appears in the fielded system. It will be adjusted to reflect the ability of ER producers to provide appropriate environmental information sources and services, and should reflect tailoring requirements of all system components.  Ultimately, the ECM becomes valuable input to the system Federation Object Model (FOM).  Implementing Environmental Overlay Step 2ER personnel need to develop environmental input to the FOM in order to facilitate all three levels of consistency of environmental information.  Whether this is called an ECM or given another name, the product resulting from this development step is an essential part of any system.  It is important that this ER concept model be built using a standard data dictionary such as the EDCS so that component developers know and use the specific ER data which will be operationally available to their components.  ER personnel should ensure that they closely examine all component conceptual models used as development paradigms in order to identify their explicit and implicit environmental requirements.  In that way, the ER concept model can be used in the same manner as the system's conceptual model—to maintain backward traceability of conceptual model to requirement, design to conceptual model, and implementation to design.Environmental Overlay Step 3:  Design Integrated ERUsing the ER concept model as a guide, the ER team assists the development team in designing the required ER.  It is at this point that the team must determine how environmental data is to be ingested by and distributed within the system.  Will the system use an environmental data/effects server?  Will components receive (or internally develop) their own environmental data?  From what products and sources will atomic and derived environmental data be obtained?  How will information consistency be maintained within and across components?  Answers to these questions must be examined from the perspective of information quality and consistency, providing critical input to the VV&A process.Available Environment Development Processes:  Common Data Model FrameworkThe Common Data Model Framework is a process by which system databases, existing or proposed, are "mapped" from their native lexicon, or data dictionary, to the EDCS standard data dictionary.  The mapping process is loosely based on the information engineering principles of logical data modeling (see Figure 6).  CDMF implementers usually apply their efforts to an existing system database, untangling data elements to identify implicit and explicit ER information requirements, capture them in an entity-relationship data model format, and reconstruct them using the EDCS concepts of classification (object) and attribute.  It is particularly useful when examining existing system components, whether newly-developed or reused, to determine the environmental information already available for inclusion in components to be developed—and identify ER information which represents a requirement for additional data acquisition. EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 6.  Role of the CDMFFrom a system design perspective, the CDMF is a tool to assist in designing semantic consistency into the ER, providing a solid foundation for the substantive interoperability so necessary to proper system implementation.  (See Figure 7.)   Implementing Environmental Overlay Step 3ER personnel need to work very closely with the development team as the ER is designed.  Using the ER concept model developed in Step 2, ER personnel begin to identify specific sources of environmental data and services.  These sources need to agree to provide ER data consistent with the ER concept model data dictionary.  If they cannot, provision must be made for these data to be mapped to the ER concept model data dictionary (underscoring the ER concept model's  role as the environmental input to the system FOM).  Changes to the ER concept model need to be matched to their cause and documented as a deviation from system requirements, generating the "implemented environment," and providing additional information to VV&A personnel on potential system use restrictions. EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 7.  Designing Semantic ConsistencyEnvironmental Overlay Step 4:  Develop ERUsing the ER concept model as a guide, ER personnel need to develop the specific set of data which comprise the ER.  These data may be provided as static databases, as data output from object transformation processes, and as externally-generated products supplied either before or during system runtime.  Available Environment Development Process:  Integrated Natural Environment Authoritative Representation Process (INEARP)DMSO, with the assistance of the MSEAs, is in the process of establishing a method for simulation developers to obtain their required ER.  This process, depicted in Figure 8, enables the user to define system ER requirements in terms of databases, data products, or data elements and order a particular scenario for pre-runtime installation.  The INEARP uses these requirements to determine available data sources, identify needed data production, generate ER model runs, compose the integrated ER using EDCS, and transmit it to the user in SEDRIS Transmittal Format.Implementing Environmental Overlay Step 4During this step, the team develops the specific ER to be used by the system.  They acquire the ER described by the ER concept model, ensuring that any changes to the implemented environment caused by production, system design, or component implementation limitations are reflected in the updated ER concept model and fully.documented.  ER personnel should work with the team to ensure that the most appropriate data sources are used, recognizing that the quality of "authoritative" sources and products is compromised when they are used in an inappropriate  mannerEnvironmental Overlay Step 5:  Validate ERValidation of the ER takes place within the framework of validation testing.  The ER is validated against system acceptance criteria in the same manner as for every other system component.  Deviations from proper component performance within or caused by the ER need to be documented for use by the VV&A team.ConclusionIncluding an ER in a system can be challenging, but it is not impossible.  Many tools have been developed to assist a system development team in establishing multi-level consistency of environmental data and in facilitating the interoperability so critical to "fair fight" principles in any system.  The ER development process is an extension of the FEDEP and, when performed alongside system development, facilitates development of a consistent, interoperable ER which should satisfy system VV&A requirements, as well EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 8.  INEARP Concept.Author BiographyVIRGINIA T. DOBEY is an information engineer and consultant to DMSO.  She holds a Master of Science (Meteorology and Oceanography) degree from the Naval Postgraduate School.  A former Navy Oceanographer, she achieved the rank of Commander, USNR.  In addition to Fleet assignments in Iceland, Japan, and onboard USS Lexington (AVT-16), she has served on headquarters staffs at what are now the National Imagery & Mapping Agency and Commander, Naval Meteorology &Oceanography Command. She is an expert in DoD data and algorithm standardization and its related VV&A in the environmental disciplines of meteorology, oceanography, and mapping, charting & geodesy.  She has over 25 years of experience in environmental data, algorithm, and software standardization, and has been a leader in DoD VV&A activities since 1991. While this paper uses the FEDERATION development process as its baseline, the information contained herein is also applicable to individual simulations, systems within simulations, and objects within systems.  Rather than confuse the reader, "system" will be generically used to describe {federations, stand-alone simulations, systems, and objects}, "component" will describe {stand-alone simulations, systems, and objects}—and particular words will be used when  specificity is required.Birkel, Paul A., SNE Conceptual Reference Model, Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization, 98F-SIW-018, September 1998.Chadbourne, C. and D. Clark, Building, Using, Sharing and Reusing Environment Concept Models, Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization, 99F-SIW-093, September 1999.Initially presented in Birkel, Paul A., Miller, Dale D. and Eric Root, The Terrain Common Data Model (TCDM):  A Joint Effort of JSIMS, STOW, and JWARS, Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization, 8th CGF-004, May 1999.Dobey, Virginia T., Foundations for Verification and Validation of the Natural Environment in a Simulation, Special Topic Paper for the DoD VV&A Recommended Practices Guide, August 2001.  To be incorporated in the online DoD VV&A RPG (Build 2.5).Numrich, S.K., Dobey, V., Chadbourne, C. and D. Clark, Environment Concept Model:  A Step Toward Validation, Simulation Industry Association of Australia, paper 039--Simulation Technology and Training Conference, April 2000.Dobey, Virginia T. and Robert O. Lewis, Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) Process Overlay for the FEDEP, Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization, 03S-SIW-085, March 2003.IEEE P1516.3TM Draft Recommended Practice for High Level Architecture (HLA) Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP), Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 7 Oct 02.Confusion is rampant because of the use of "synthetic natural environment," which is often equated with not real and/or contrived environmental conditions (see discussion at:  HYPERLINK "http://www.sedris.org/definition.htm" http://www.sedris.org/definition.htm).  The more correct term, used in this paper, is "environmental representation."Using the Spatial Reference Model, ISO/IEC 18026:  HYPERLINK "http://www.sedris.org/wg8home/wd_srmWD6.htm" http:www.sedris.org/wg8home/wd_srm WD6.htm.Numrich, Dobey, Chadbourne and Clark, op. cit.Environmental Data Coding Specification, ISO/IEC 18025.  The final committee draft is available at:   HYPERLINK "http://www.sedris.org/wg8home/wd_edcsFCD.htm" http://www.sedris.org/wg8home/ wd_edcsFCD.htmDoD Directive 8320.1, DoD Data Administration dated 26 Sep 1991.available at:  HYPERLINK "http://www-datadmn.itsi.disa.mil/ ddm.html" http://www-datadmn.itsi.disa.mil/ ddm.htmlavailable at:  HYPERLINK "http://www-datadmn.itsi.disa.mil/ ddds/ddds40.html" http://www-datadmn.itsi.disa.mil/ddds/ ddds40.html "Conceptual standard data elements" are those standard data elements that represent currently produced data as they SHOULD, and hopefully WOULD, be produced.  They provide a roadmap for data production updates, particularly as they disaggregate composite data and move away from legacy system-specific data formats.  Only a portion of these data elements is actually in production by DoD ER providers and MC&G data producers (which include the National Imagery and Mapping Agency, the Naval Oceanographic Office, the Fleet Numerical METOC Center, the Air Force Weather Agency, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which provides input to DoD data producers).available at:  HYPERLINK "http://pao.cnmoc.navy.mil/scripts/ public_JMCDM/home_pwd.pl" http://pao.cnmoc.navy.mil/scripts/public_ JMCDM/home_pwd.plavailable at:  HYPERLINK "http://www.nima.mil/sandi/ datamodel/ucdm/modelmenu.html" http://www.nima.mil/sandi/datamodel/ ucdm/modelmenu.html information available at:  HYPERLINK "http://www.sedris.org" http://www.sedris. orgthe SEDRIS Data Representation Model, ISO/IEC 18023-1, SEDRIS:  Part 1: Functional Specification,  HYPERLINK "http://www.sedris.org/wg8home/wdsedrisP1WD6.htm" http://www.sedris.org/wg8home/ wdsedrisP1WD6.htmThis "Data Representation Model" is an object-capable model which leverages the EDCS to represent objects and their relationships in support of system ER requirements and development.Dahmann, J., Salisbury, M., Barry, P., Turrell, C., and P. Blemberg, HLA and Beyond:  Interoperability Challenges, Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization, paper 99F-SIW-073, September 1999.  While the definition of technical interoperability is explicitly stated in the paper, the concise definition of substantive interoperability is found only in the related presentation.Clark, D.L., S.K. Numrich, R. Howard, and G. Purser, Meaningful Interoperability and the Synthetic Natural Environment, Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization, paper 01E-SIW-080, June 2001.Youngblood, S.M., "Federation Credibility Challenges," a tutorial presented at ITEC Europe, 24 Apr 01.ISO/IEC 18023-2, available at:   HYPERLINK "http://www.sedris.org/ wg8home/wdsedrisP2WD1.htm" http://www.sedris.org/ wg8home/wdsedrisP2WD1.htmIEEE FEDEP, op. cit.Ibid.Dobey and Lewis, op. cit.for DoD, the Modeling & Simulation Executive Agents (MSEAs) for Terrain, Ocean, and Air & Space Natural Environment [MSEA(Terrain), MSEA(Ocean), and MSEA(ASNE)] are chartered to provide this type of assistance to developers throughout the FEDEP. The Universal Joint Task List is found in CJCSINST 3500.4B (version 4.0) dated 1 Oct 99.If the intent of training does not involve real-world conditions (for example, target practice or stimulus-response training), then such are clearly extraneous.  But for directly portable training ("Train as you operate so you can operate as you train"), inclusion of relevant real-world conditions is essential. Dobey, op.cit.Strategic (worldwide), Theater-Tactical (ocean-wide/continental), Battlefield, Mission Space Entity, or Engineering-Level.  Definitions are provided in the referenced paper. Birkel, op.cit. Birkel, ibid. Chadbourne and Clark, op. cit.