Simulation Interoperability Between the U.S. and KoreaMajor James J. DonlonCombined Battle Simulation CenterCombined Forces Command/U.S. Forces KoreaPSC 303 Box 50APO, AP 96204-0050 (Seoul, Korea)DSN 315-723-8290donlonj@usfk.korea.army.mil HYPERLINK mailto:pbarry@dmso.mil Keywords:Deployed Simulations, Theater-level Joint and Combined Simulation, Interoperability, KoreaABSTRACT: The U.S. Military makes significant use of modeling and simulations in training for its wartime missions. This use of modeling and simulation (M&S) is particularly apparent in the constructive simulation of large-scale operations, such as Ulchi Focus Lens (UFL), the U.S. military’s theater-level joint and combined simulation of the defense of Korea. These exercises require the modeling and simulation of U.S. forces from all services, as well as those of our allies. As our allies become more sophisticated in their own use of simulations, it becomes increasingly important for U.S. and allied simulations to interoperate with one another in training. Significant progress has been made as US elements have worked closely with the Republic of Korea to validate and integrate emerging Korean battle simulations. The first of these, Chang Jo 21 (CJ21), recently underwent HLA certification and confederation testing through a series of experiments hosted at Combined Battle Simulation Center (CBSC) in Korea. These tests demonstrated the interoperability between CJ21 and the U.S. joint training confederation. Successful interoperability between the U.S. and Korea provides a model for further interoperability with other allied partners. This paper describes the need for interoperability between the U.S. and Korea, the testing conducted at CBSC, the outcome of those experiments, and briefly explores the implications for simulation interoperability between the U.S. and it partners.	Introduction Simulation interoperability is crucial to the military use of modeling and simulation. Effective interoperability enables the U.S. military to integrate diverse simulations from various services in training for a wide variety of wartime missions.  This is evident in constructive simulation of large-scale military operations, such as Ulchi Focus Lens (UFL), the U.S. joint and combined simulation of the defense of Korea. This theater-level exercise is supported by a simulation architecture consisting of ten simulation models and wide a range of “real world” command and control systems.  These systems model U.S. forces from all services, the forces of our allies and those of our potential enemies.  Currently, all of the systems used in this architecture are U.S. systems.  However, as the U.S. makes increasing use of modeling and simulation in training with its allies, it will be necessary to include simulations from other countries in the overall exercise architecture.  This paper describes progress made between the U.S. and the Republic of Korea (ROK) toward this sort of interoperability.Combined Forces Command (CFC) and U.S. Forces Korea (USFK) use models and simulations for a wide range of exercises.  The most significant are theater-level exercises, involving combined operations by U.S. and Korean forces.  Typically, a confederation of U.S. models drives the exercise.  However, the ROK recently has stressed indigenous development of a Korean family of simulations, including ground, air, and maritime versions, plus supporting components (e.g., analysis tools facilitating after action reviews).    The first of the family of these simulations, Chang Jo 21 (CJ21), has been deployed and is in use modeling ground combat in support for training of ROK forces.  The success of CJ21 presents an opportunity for integrating this allied model into evolving combined battle simulations. This paper presents the recent progress made by CFC/USFK in integrating CJ21 with existing U.S. simulations. To provide background on the need for interoperability in the theater, an introduction to the use of simulations in CFC/USFK is presented in Section 2. Section 3 describes Chang Jo 21, a ROK ground combat simulation, which is the Korean application described in the interoperability tests this paper discusses. Section 4 presents the interoperability testing and certification conducted at CBSC.  Section 5 discusses the results of those tests and their implications.  Finally, Section 6 summarizes and makes recommendations for further progress toward simulation interoperability.Theater-Level Simulation in KoreaModels and simulations play a key role in preparing the combined U.S. and ROK forces to conduct their wartime missions.  The most demanding simulation-driven exercises are theater-level exercises.  These require the simulation of ground, air, and maritime combat, modeling forces from all services, and from both the U.S. and ROK sides.  Many thousands of elements and their interactions are represented, and their interactions feed a wide range of C4I systems in theater.  All such theater-level simulations are hosted and run by the CBSC.  An example of such an exercise is Ulchi Focus Lens (UFL).  UFL is a joint and combined simulation involving eleven different simulation center sites worldwide, integrated over a simulation wide area network.  In UFL 02, three models were used to portray combat and associated activity.  The Corps Battle Simulation (CBS) simulated ground operations, including the landward portion of amphibious operations.  The Navy’s Research, Evaluation, and System Analysis model (RESA) simulated naval operations, including the seaward portion of amphibious operations.  The Air Warfare Simulation Model (AWSIM) simulated air operations, except army aviation and Marine rotary wing. (Respectively, these were addressed in CBS and via naval air in RESA.)  A number of additional models participate in UFL to perform special purpose functions.  For example, Missile Defense Space Warning Tool (MDST) provides the simulation of space-based capabilities such as theater ballistic missile warning and defense.  Other models simulate special-purpose capabilities in areas such as information operations, intelligence, and electronic warfare.  And some models collect data from the combat models for use by player C4I systems.  These simulation models are combined into a joint training confederation, or JTC, using the Aggregate Level Simulation Protocol (ALSP).  During UFL, the CBSC supports three separate confederations simultaneously.  The “production confederation” is the primary JTC used to host the simulation.  As a backup, an “alternate confederation” duplicates the production game.  If necessary, the exercise can be run from the alternate confederation at any time.  The third is a “test confederation”.  This version duplicates the production confederation in terms of entities and environment, so that the scale of the production game is reproduced.  However, the test confederation can differ in significant technical respects to explore future technologies, alternate versions, etc. The confederation tests described below were conducted in these test JTCs (JIS-supported, HLA compliant).   Following a brief description of CJ21, this paper presents the test procedures used and the results.  Chang Jo 21CJ21 is an indigenously developed ROK simulation designed primarily to facilitate corps and division command and staff training.  It is the first in an emerging family of ROK service simulations, designed to federate with one another and with other U.S. HLA-compliant simulations.  It is regularly used in Korean corps, division, and brigade exercises.  CJ21 is also used by the ROK Battle Command Training Program (ROK BCTP).  CJ21 simulates land and air combined arms combat over a corps area of operations.  The pertinent elements of combined arms operations are represented, covering all battlefield functions (i.e., maneuver, intelligence, fires, protection, combat service support, and command, control, and communications).  CJ21 simulates conventional and tactical nuclear warfare, counter fire, close air support, battlefield air interdiction, air defense, airlift, maintenance and replacements, logistics, and medical operations.  It also has the ability to display, or “ghost”, simulated ground, air, and naval entities from other simulations.The PC-based model can simulate up to 50,000 entities simultaneously.  Ground units are represented at multiple levels of aggregation, down to platoon level, with detailed specification of unit composition.  Air units are represented to the individual aircraft level.   A representative CJ21 architecture consists of three servers supporting 30 workstations and 300 PCs.  A dynamic, event-stepped simulation, CJ21 can be accelerated to run at up to 60 times wall clock time.  Terminals depict the simulation on high-resolution map displays at seven different map scales.  CJ21 is the current standard ROK ground combat model.  As a ROK-developed simulation, CJ21 has earned the respect of the ROK Army (ROKA) for its ability to represent Korean ground combat.  As a result, ROKA is eager to integrate the model for use in combined, theater-level exercises (e.g., UFL).  The CBSC, together with ROK BCTP, established procedures to test the potential for this sort of interoperability.  Confederation Test ProceduresThis section presents an overview of the process used to advance and test the interoperability of CJ21 with U.S. models.  All testing was conducted as a combined effort between the ROK and U.S. at the CBSC. This combined effort was facilitated by the CBSC organization that is staffed by both ROK and U.S. personnel (military and civilian).  Thus, all of the following tests were conducted as a ROK-U.S. combined effort and in conjunction with the ROK BCTP.  The main objectives of ROK BCTP for 2002 were: (1) to have CJ21 certified by DMSO as being HLA compliant, and (2) demonstrate the ability to federate with a U.S. JTC.  The confederation test to accomplish #2 was conducted in two phases: CT-I in April 2002, and CT-II, in August 2002.  Each activity is described in detail below.  HLA CertificationThe U.S. commitment to HLA as a standard for future simulation interoperability signaled to ROK simulation developers that future interoperability of CJ21 depended on HLA compliance.  Thus, from the outset, CJ21 was developed with the goal of interoperating with emerging U.S. (HLA-compliant) simulations.  In February 2001, ROK TRADOC demonstrated a prototype HLA-compliant version of CJ21.  Through the CBSC, ROK TRADOC solicited the support of the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) for evaluating and certifying a future version of CJ21 as being fully compliant with HLA.  Following a year of developmental effort and the support of DMSO, CJ21 v.1 was certified as compliant with the HLA standard.  This was an important milestone for continued development and testing of CJ21 as a JTC federate.  Development continued on CJ21 and confederation testing was scheduled in two parts for 2002.  These tests were scheduled to allow adequate time for continued model development and to coincide with the occurrence of two CFC theater-level exercises.  It is during such events that the most suitable full-scale test confederations, complete with large simulation databases, would be available.  CT-I (April 2002)The April 2002 confederation test, CT-I, was conducted following a theater-level exercise using the test confederation from that exercise.  The goals of the first confederation test were developed by ROK BCTP and CBSC.  They were focused on the ability of the ROK model to join a confederation and act as a listener.  Specifically, the goals were:Validate that CJ21 is capable of operating in the listen only mode in a JIS supported, HLA compliant Joint Training Confederation.Identify and verify confederation procedures and techniques, through current ROK/U.S. model compliant testReceive and process the U.S. ground, maritime, and air models’ confederation data through the RTI.Properly reflect and update execution status of HLA/RTI service functions between ROK and U.S. models including federation management, time management, object management, declaration management, and ownership management.Identify objectives and test items for CT-II scheduled for August 2002.Overall, the test plan called for a joint ROK and U.S. test conducted at the CBSC.  Prior to the test, several days were used for installation of the CJ21 components in CBSC and the connectivity to the JTC.  CT-I was scheduled to be performed for five days following installation of components and connectivity.  The first four days were for scheduled testing, and the fifth day was used for review and presentation of results.   The following test items describe the categories of tests performed in the CT.  Each test item had a corresponding checklist of tasks, conditions, and standards for performance.  The test items for CT-I were:Federation Initialization: Confirm correct installation and configuration of software, setting of environment variables, that the infrastructure can be started correctly, and that all federates can execute and join the federation properly.Declaration Management: Verify that CJ21 can successfully subscribe to the attributes published by CBS, AWSIM, and RESA. Time Management: Verify that CJ21 can successfully advance in time in a manner consistent with CBS, RESA, and AWSIM.  Verify the ability to enable time-constrained status with the RTI in order to function as a listener and receive time-stamped messages from CBS, RESA, and AWSIM.  Object Discovery: Ensure proper discovery of CBS, RESA, and AWSIM objects within CJ21.Object Updating: Ensure proper propagation of CBS, RESA, and AWSIM object updates through the JIS. Verify proper reception, parsing, and use of the object information in CJ21.Federation Shutdown: Ensure proper simulation state is maintained in CJ21 as a result of resigning and rejoining the federation.  Ensure proper propagation and use of CBS deletes in CJ21 when CBS, RESA, or AWSIM resigns.  Ensure proper and clean shutdown of CJ21.CT-II (August 2002)The August 2002 confederation test, CT-II, was conducted during UFL 02, using the UFL test confederation.  The goals of this second CT expanded significantly on the goals of the first by aiming at validating CJ21’s ability to publish and subscribe to objects and interactions as a full player in a JTC.  Thus, the goals were expanded in the following ways:Revalidate successful test items from CT-I and perform any tests scheduled but not completed in CT-I (there were none).  Validate that CJ21 is capable of publishing objects and interactions in a JIS supported, HLA compliant Joint Training Confederation.Identify objectives and test items for future confederation tests.As in CT-I, the execution of CT-II was scheduled over a five-day period, (exclusive of installation/set-up time).  The first four days were scheduled for testing and the fifth day for review and presentation of results.  Although not needed, the fifth day was also available for additional test time.  The test items for CT-II repeated all test items from CT-I, and, as a means of realizing the expanded goals, added additional tests as noted below:Federation Initialization: As in CT-I-1.Declaration Management: As in CT-I-2, plus verify CJ21 ability to send publication sets. Time Management: As in CT-I-3, plus verify CJ21 ability to regulate time, and thus send time-stamped messages to CBS, RESA, and AWSIM.Object Discovery: As in CT-I-4, plus demonstrate ability to scale up to receive over 6000 object discoveries.Object Updating: As in CT-I-5, plus display all object attributes on graphical display.Object Compliance Simulation: Show proper detection, engagement, and dis-engagement with enemy units.Send Interaction: Verify that interaction information can be successfully sent from CJ21 and CBS, RESA, AWSIM may parse and utilize this information.  Receive Interaction: Verify that CJ21 properly receives and parses interactions from CBS, RESA, AWSIM.Interaction Compliant Simulation: Verify effects of air-ground, ship-ground, and ground-ground interactions received from other models.  Federation Shutdown: As in CT-I-6.Results and DiscussionBoth CT-I and CT-II were conducted in their entirety and all test items were completed successfully.  CT-I in April 2002 was completed ahead of schedule.  This prompted the testers to perform additional tests in anticipation of CT-II.  In light of the excellent results in April, the August test was configured to include a number of optional tests, all of which were completed during CT-II.  These better-than-anticipated results were due in large part to the quality of the CJ21 development and the support rendered by all concerned.Another key enabler to the success of the test process was that the model developers were present for the test and equipped to perform repairs on the simulation build if necessary.  This enabled the developers to observe the model in actual use, and to test, debug and patch as required.  This sort of immediate response and on-site expertise greatly enhanced the value of the tests.Results of CT-IIn addition to all CT-I tests being successfully completed ahead of schedule, the following narrative notes are the significant accomplishments of CT-I.In the Federation Initialization Test (CT-I-1), all software was successfully initialized, including, CBS, AWSIM, RESA, CJ21, and associated Adaptors.  Each model joined the federation properly.  In Declaration Management (CT-I-2), each federate published normally.  CJ21 published its objects upon joining.  CJ21 also subscribed properly to the pertinent objects and interaction data. In Time Management tasks (CT-I-3), CJ21 demonstrated the ability to operate in a time-constrained JTC.  Once in a time constrained mode, adjustments to the constraining model (e.g., RESA) were properly obeyed by CJ21.  When RESA was manipulated to cause a delay, CJ21 waited to advance in time accordingly.   When RESA was subsequently allowed to advance, CJ21 advanced at the appropriate time as well.  CJ21 also responded properly to all tests that required differing rates of time advance.  In the Object Discovery Test (CT-I-4), CJ21 demonstrated the ability to detect the subscribed objects from CBS, AWSIM, and RESA, and to reflect them in its object display.  In Object Updating (CT-I-5), object updates sent from the other federates were reflected via the updating of the corresponding attribute values in the CJ21 object display.  Proper locations were reflected in the CJ21 graphical display.  Finally, in the Federation Shutdown tests (CT-I-6), CJ21 was able to resign from the federation properly.  Following a resignation, CJ21 could rejoin the JTC, and request a refresh from other federates, and properly reflect the changes from the other models.  Overall, CJ21 demonstrated its ability to act as a “listener” in a JTC.  The suggested readiness for a more ambitious test in August was reflected in test planning for CT-IIResults of CT-II.The next step, in CT-II, was for CJ21 to perform as a full actor in a JTC.  As outlined in the previous section, the CT-II tests verified all of those performed in CT-I.  Further, some additional performance measures were added to most of the CT-I test items, and several significant test items were added to test CJ21’s interaction with other models.  Only the new results are presented here.  In the Declaration Management test (CT-II-2). CJ21 subscribed to a greater number and range of objects and interactions, using more selective criteria in publication sets.  In the Object Discovery test (CT-II-4), CJ21 subscribed to a larger number of objects, and demonstrated object registration for a greater number of object classes.  Furthermore in Object Updating (CT-II-5), CJ21 demonstrated correct parsing of received object updates for all JIS objects and for interested objects, as required.  CJ21 maintained a dynamically updating graphical display.  Through the graphical interface the user could query objects for all updated attributes.  The Object Compliance Simulation test (CT-II-6) was new to the August CT.   CJ21 demonstrated the ability to detect ground units represented in other models.  For example, enemy units in CBS were detected by friendly units in CJ21.  Detection was properly maintained and terminated as the units maintained and subsequently lost contact with one another.  When within combat range, CJ21 simulated the proper engagements, and those engagements were terminated when units moved out of range or were destroyed.  Whether interactions were between CJ21 entities or between objects in both CJ21 and another federate, the model demonstrated the ability to Send Interactions (CT-II-7) to the other federates.  Those federates made proper use of the CJ interactions (with the exception of CBS, which is designed to ignore the interactions and objects of other ground models).  CJ21 also demonstrated the ability to Receive Interactions (CT-II-8) from other models.  CJ21 received such interactions from CBS, AWSIM, and RESA.  Objects were properly displayed and updated on the CJ21 display.  In addition, effects and interactions were also displayed, such as strike points from effects of engagements in CBS, AWSIM, and RESA.  In Interaction Compliant Simulation testing (CT-II-9), CJ21 simulated attacks from ground, air, and ship engagements from other models.  CJ21 received ship-to-ground fire from RESA, and where artillery effects overlapped a unit’s position in CJ21, artillery damage was simulated and appropriate shelling report and combat damage reports were generated.  The same interactions were verified for air-to-ground from AWSIM and for ground-to-ground from CBS.  In CT-II CJ21 progressed from HLA-compliant “listener” to fully capable JTC federate.  In the above tests, CJ21 sent and received interactions and properly ghosted the objects of other federates.  Only CBS’ inability to interoperate with other ground models prevented the demonstration of complete interoperability between CJ21 and an existing JTC.  DiscussionThe success of CJ21 development and confederation testing to date demonstrates the feasibility of interoperating with CJ21 in future exercises.  CJ21 could participate fully in a major combined simulation exercise supported by an HLA compliant RTI--if that exercise did not require the use of CBS.  CBS’s current inability to interoperate with other ground models is a serious impediment to interoperability with CJ21 and similar models.  Nonetheless, these results suggest a bright future for the role of ROK simulations in U.S.-ROK combined exercises.  CJ21’s success bodes well for the prospects of the up-and-coming ROK maritime and air models.  There are several important benefits to achieving interoperability with the models and simulations of our allies.  In the case of CJ21, the ROK military has developed confidence in their simulation.  The credibility of joint and combined simulation can only be enhanced with the integration of allied models.  A second, closely related benefit is the potential that the models of our allies will more accurately model their forces, their doctrine, and their tactics, techniques, and procedures.  The modeling assumptions implicit in such “native” models might well be more fitting to those forces than those in U.S. models.  Finally, the availability of mature allied models and simulations reduces the demand on U.S. models and databases to represent other forces.  Varying force structures, training objectives, and C4I linkages might be more easily accommodated by tailored models than by a single solution.ConclusionThis paper presented the recent cooperation between the U.S. and Korea as a success story of simulation interoperability.  The development of CJ21 by the Korean military and the confederation of that model with U.S. simulations is a significant technical feat.  This is a step forward for combined simulations in Korea and provides an example for testing and integration of future ROK models and for similar efforts between the U.S. and its other allies.    This is only a single example, however.  Many other countries are developing M&S capabilities.  Each allied partnership and every situation presents unique challenges.  Allied modeling and simulation is still in many cases sufficiently nascent that planning for interoperability remains possible. Both the U.S. and its allies might make significant progress by enabling and assisting early in the development of those models and simulations.  The U.S. modeling and simulation community should continue to support and develop standardized interchange protocols such as HLA, and encourage allied compliance.  The best way to encourage compliance, of course, is by getting our own house in order.  Future joint and combined training will rely increasingly on modeling and simulation applications to train for wartime missions.  We need to replace our current decades-old family of simulations (FAMSIM) with a modernized, working family of simulations that conforms to established standards of interoperability.  Along the way, we should make our ground model (CBS or its replacement) interoperable with other ground models, so that joint and combined training will not be decremented. The U.S. is committed to a national security strategy embodying coalitions. The U.S. military is committed to the use of modeling and simulation in various aspects crucial to many portions of the military component of that national security strategy. Training, for one, now relies on the use of modeling and simulation.  If we are to train with our allies as our coalition strategy demands, we must interoperate with them in modeling and simulation. Thus, technical interoperability with other countries is an imperative for future combined simulations.  For a number of reasons, the U.S. naturally has a primary leadership role in that progress.  Our experience with the interoperability of CJ21, as described in this paper, is an encouraging start.  AcknowledgementsROK TRADOC and ROK BCTP is the driving force behind the continued development of CJ21, including its testing and integration.  ROK BCTP played a significant role in developing all testing and integration plans.  MITRE Corporation provided considerable technical assistance regarding configuration and operation of the RTI-driven JTCs discussed in this paper.  The Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) provided constant support to the certification and testing of CJ21. The U.S. Army Program Evaluation Office for Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation (PEO-STRI) provided invaluable assistance in all matters related to modeling and simulation.  Author BiographyMAJ JAMES J. DONLON is the Chief of Technical Support at the Korea Battle Simulation Center in Seoul, Korea. He was previously Director of the Knowledge Engineering Group at the Center for Strategic Leadership, USAWC. He holds a Master's Degree in Computer Science form Northwestern University and a Masters of Military Arts and Science from the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College. His previous work includes papers and articles in knowledge engineering, qualitative reasoning, learning agent development, and genetic algorithms.