“The Burgeoning Requirements and the Deep Bench”Warren H. Switzer, Ph.D.Korea Battle Simulation CenterUS Forces, KoreaPSC 303 Box 50, APO AP 96204-0050011-822-7913-5462 HYPERLINK "mailto:SwitzerW@usfk.korea.army.mil" SwitzerW@usfk.korea.army.milKeywords: Ulchi-Focus Lens, ChangJo 21, distributed training, reachbackAbstract: The expanding envelope of military operations now includes functions for which the military staff was not configured. Significantly, the complexities of the missions often exceed organizational capabilities to analyze and successfully manage such missions. Nonetheless, military commanders are held responsible for other-than-combat missions for which the tools and resources are both scanty and marginal. M&S applications hold promise, but are a mixed blessing in that to have and use them, there are requirements for personnel, training, facilities and budget often attainable only in a zero-sum context. Additionally, this double burdening often broaches into other areas of responsibility, inviting, (at the least) more complexity, and (at the worst) friction. This worsening situation invites a remedy that may be discerned in the execution of US-ROK Joint and Combined Exercise ULCHI-FOCUS LENS 02.1. IntroductionStatement of the Problem Today, US and allied forces often are propelled into uncertain environments characterized by endemic violence, ethnic separatism, and a complex (often variable) delineation of categorization. Moreover, these environments usually are burdened by political, sociological, humanitarian, ecological and economic factors often stemming from the effects of failed ideologies, religious zealotry and historical animosities. In short, it’s a murky, dangerous environment where ‘victory’ is elusive and ‘success’ often is a changeable, politically charged commodity. The Military’s ReactionsNot surprisingly, the US military forces whose Title 10 responsibilities may be summarized to ‘fighting and winning the nation’s wars’ sought (initially) to decline the additional missions and, failing that, to manage them as best they can. In the former case, they were unable to evade as the requirements as evidenced by a series of continually expanding missions that have been placed directly upon them. Of course, placing such requirements invites the question of ‘why?’  But, the answer to that query is more properly the subject of another paper. 2. The Burgeoning Requirements 2.1 The Expanding Spectrum of the Military’s Mission Responsibilities The levying of additional missions and expansion of the military mission envelope is not limited to activities such as peace support operations, humanitarian assistance, disaster relief and the host of other ill-defined activities casually (and improperly) termed operations other than war (OOTW). Even well recognized military arenas such as the Korean peninsula now must address political-military and civil-military activities as a crucial portion of their operational planning. Whether addressing the evacuations of non-combatants, the terms and conditions of conflict resolution or the economic factors associated with use, damage or rehabilitation of transportation infrastructure, military planners are forced to assess the impact of complex factors affecting a joint and combined military theater.  While it may be a ‘backhanded compliment’ that such considerations can be passed into the purview of the military staff during crisis, it seems hardly likely that the military staff would retain such authority since the evolution of the crisis inevitably would change the parameters. Such shifts in responsibility are bound to add to ‘the fog of war’ and further burden the military planners. 2.2 The Mission Bottom LineAll that said, the blunt facts are that the US military has the missions and the mission environments are messy. 3. A Few Considerations3.1 Staff OrganizationIt also is a blunt fact that the military staff was not and has not been configured for such tasks as are incident to such missions and environments. The expanding requirements have prompted a military response of generating additional staff positions to address the requisite functions or assigning the additional functions to existing staff sections. Although such generation of positions and seconding of functions are, in part, a solution, that response also generates a host of burdens in training, personnel staffing, procedural process and increased complexity. The costs (fiscal, procedural and human) of such burdens (all usually in a zero-sum context) are not insignificant. 3.2 TechnologyNor is this all. US military forces are grappling with the impact of a virtual tidal wave of technology. While this adjustment is going well in places, the ability to integrate the applications, systems, and implications add extra challenges in training, doctrine and coordination. The truth is that sophisticated capabilities usually carry the necessity for sophisticated training, support and maintenance. Knowledge of the various technologies is necessary to fully use the capabilities inherent, and such knowledge exacts its price. That price sums to extra burdens, especially on the military staff. 3.3 Adjustments Via Modeling and SimulationThere have been strenuous efforts to address the increased mission and simultaneously relieve such burdens. For example, the use of modeling and simulation applications have saved money, allowed a nearly indistinguishable replication of staff functions in training, and precluded an immense waste of time. Various technologies have created training environments coupling live, virtual and constructive simulations in ways that facilitate training in multiple locations, at multiple levels and between and among multiple training entities. The results have shown consistent improvement with trainees increasingly unable to distinguish between an actual and a portrayed (simulated) event. 	4. The Absolute Importance of Modeling and SimulationThe importance of conducting training in this manner cannot be overstated. Simply put, we cannot adequately train our forces without using such models and simulations. There are no training areas capable of simultaneously training ground, air, naval, marine and allied forces of similar composition at the theater, operational and tactical levels. Nor, even were such an area available, would such training be affordable. Nor can the US afford not to train at such levels. The American military has embraced joint operations as the most efficient (and perhaps only viable) mode of modern warfare. 5. Coalitions and Allies5.1 The Historical RecordFor the past 86 years, the US has entered every significant conflict as a partner in a coalition, meaning that all US operations are conceptually and practically planned as joint and combined operations.  But not every US ally can or is willing to train at such levels and bear the costs of such training.  Yet, for a variety of important reasons, the US is loath to ‘go it alone’ and because of that, must depend upon the use of modeling and simulations to enable the credible, broad participation of its allies. Thus, the primary burdens of developing, testing, validating, integrating and maintaining modeling and simulation applications fall to the US.  Yet, US allies are sensing that their need to maintain close coordination with the US is crucially important to their own objectives. Certainly they wish to insure that any rendering of their forces in any such joint and combined training simulation is accurate. Moreover, they wish to insure that they also can leverage this technology, not only for combined allied operations, but (often more pertinently) for their own local requirements. 5.2 Allied ConcernsAdditionally, there are ancillary reasons of varying magnitude that also incline US allies to embark on collateral or independent development of models and simulations. Such reasons include security  and fiscal considerations. Significantly, such considerations may drive US allies to independently develop and use indigenous models and by that generate friction in combined training. Such developments are detrimental to coalition strategy, especially from an American perspective. 5.3 A Positive DevelopmentFor this reason, the development by the Republic of Korean (ROK) Armed Forces of a US High Level Architecture (HLA) compliant military simulation – ChangJo 21 – is extraordinarily important. It directly assists in overcoming the friction unavoidably generated through the use of incompatible training simulations. The successful use and integration of ChangJo 21 in US-ROK joint and combined training serves as a model that such developments can be successfully accommodated, and by that, ChangJo 21 serves as a model to other US allies.  5.4 An Additional LoadHowever, like any development there are implications; one of these is the expanded need to address allied concerns – concerns that now become part of the planning load for the military staff. Significantly, these concerns are the historically difficult problems for the simple reasons that it has been largely through the use of M&S applications that such problems are revealed and, perhaps, only through using M&S may such problems be successfully addressed. 5.5 ComplexityWhat kind of concerns are we talking about? Specifically, this paper only concerns itself with those that have significant impact on the conduct of military operations. And even with this limitation, there are a great number of concerns. For example, to use the situation of Korea, US forces would be required to conduct operations in support of its ROK ally in an operational theater characterized by limited maneuver space, very high densities of non-combatant civilians, an overburdened surface transportation network and all the complexities incident to military operations occurring simultaneously with national mobilization, restricted movement, degraded communications, and the effects of weapons of mass destruction. 5.6 Differing AgendasNor is this all. Such a conflict aims at reunification of the peninsula (either by North or South) and for this reason (since the ROK is expected to prevail) must be conducted with due consideration towards limiting unwarranted or collateral damage which would retard and further burden the process of national rehabilitation. Thus, attacks on infrastructure anywhere in the Korean peninsula during such a conflict must be predicated on both their immediate combat utility and on the probable long-range effects. Reducing a city to rubble may be less preferable to investing it or inducing the enemy to abandon it as defensibly untenable. Yet, such considerations may run counter to military proclivities of visiting profound violence on the enemy as speedily as possible (as the shock effect produced usually shortens the conflict and by that saves soldiers’ lives).  Certainly history is replete with many examples of such speedy violence causing such reaction. Unfortunately, there are many examples of such violence being egregiously ‘unfair’ but insufficiently overweening. This may insure that visceral hatreds outlast the more pragmatic and rational realization of the need for accommodation to attain or regain the semblance of social order. Speed of application also is important. Even vast destruction if applied over a protracted period can strengthen resolve and have a counterproductive effect on the conflict as well as making post-conflict recovery more difficult. Moreover, the difference in the respective sets of objectives between allies often has been the source of their falling out as partners. Historically, soldiers and diplomats often have had to hammer out such differences (albeit with much friction) with their partners (and each other) during times of crisis. Understandably, subjective factors and differences in perceived values were major and ill-understood features. However, modeling and simulations now allow the effects of such operations to be understood more completely and accurately, and by that make plain the tradeoffs. 	6. M&S as a Possible Tool – With ReservationsAgain, the expanding set of problems looks to M&S applications for some form of resolution. Moreover, it looks to the military staff as its agent in performing those functions in M&S. 6.1 M&S TrainingIt would be most appropriate and welcome news if this paper could unequivocally state that military personnel (both US and allied) were being adequately trained to address these manifold applications. Unfortunately, in neither the US nor allied case is this true. This is not to say that training for and in the use of M&S does not occur or that that there is not multiple forms offered by a plentitude of providers and pitched at almost every conceivable level of expertise. Various military schools, (e.g., the US Army’s Command and General Staff College and the Armed Forces Staff College) include M&S-related courses and there is now a specialty career track for M&S (Functional Area 57) within the Army. The US Navy has the Naval Air Warfare Center Training Systems Division (NAWCTSD), which largely addresses the interaction of sailors and their equipment. For more than 50 years, the Navy and Army have been collocated in Orlando Florida for the development of training devices and technology. The US Air Force Modeling and Simulation entity (AFAMS) has collocated with the other services’ primary modeling and simulation implementation and support agencies at the Central Florida Research Park, the main Department of Defense location for simulation and training implementation and support, that also hosts the Joint Simulation System, Joint Program Office, the University of Central Florida, and the Institute for Simulation and Training.   Yet, the M&S field broadens and deepens daily, training is far more than interactions between men and machines, and the training available to interested persons reacts to rather than leads such developments – often in a tardy manner. More often, expertise within the military’s ranks is a combination of formal training, occasional (usually elective) courses available on an ad hoc basis, so-called ‘on-the-job-training’ (usually during exercise play), and personal endeavor on the part of individuals – these last two constituting a significant portion.  Moreover, as M&S is a broadening and deepening arena, there are various specialty areas, each in themselves demanding considerable endeavor to attain full proficiency. The expertise required for these various aspects of M&S may well preclude an officer from being both a master of all aspects and, simultaneously, having a ‘normal’ military career. This has led to M&S-related education being offered at various levels specificity. 6.2 Variations at FixingOne obvious (and current ‘solution’) is the extensive and growing use of contractor personnel. These subject area experts do a considerable service in that they provide continuity – an aspect that military personnel rotation policies exacerbates - in addition to expertise. Further, as such contractor personnel are usually individually focused in their expertise but bunched in teams for specific functionality, they splint the current military system. But contractor personnel are not military personnel. They are not on military staffs and during crisis function according to very different parameters than do uniformed personnel.  Such personnel should be seen as complementary to the military M&S education system, not a substitute for it. 6.3 A Less-Than-Pretty PictureWhat is lacking within military structure is holistic coherency of planning for such training, the requisite density of trained persons is too low, and the tools themselves are spotty and marginal. In all, there is the impression that the appreciation of the importance of M&S applications is muted; the profound implications are incompletely understood. 7. Where We AreThus, today’s military staff finds itself overburdened with a grotesquely expanded mission envelope, incompletely trained personnel, limited and not wholly appropriate planning, assessment and training tools, and dependent upon both contractor personnel and the development of allies. Often undermanned, the staff’s major mission is fighting and winning the conflict, the known difficulties of which are extraordinary and the unknown difficulties are perhaps unfathomable. What the warfighters need is help, not someone telling they have problems. Fortunately, a viable solution – if pursued vigorously - may be at hand. 8. Joint and Combined Exercise ULCHI-FOCUS LENS (UFL)8.1 BackgroundFor a number of years, the US and ROK forces have held a major joint and combined training exercise known as ULCHI-FOCUS LENS (UFL). This exercise aims at assessing plans and training personnel for the defense of Korea against an invasion by North Korea. UFL was teamed with exercise Team Spirit, which focused on rapid reinforcement of Korea by US forces. Separately and jointly, these exercises were designed to support force readiness and test various defense concepts, and also serve as a very visible demonstration of national resolve. Collectively, these objectives aimed at securing stability by sustaining deterrence.In its early iterations, UFL was a combination of tactical field training exercises (FTX), command post exercises (CPX), and map exercises (MAPEX). However, as various useful forms of computer assistance developed, increasingly greater use has been made of M&S applications. Indeed, UFL is now the largest joint and combined computer assisted exercise in the world. 	8.2 Large Scale and Many PlayersUFL spans two continents, incorporates several nations, as players from every military Service and several civilian entities, incorporates multiple echelons of command, and replicates the presence, movement and interaction of the military forces of US, allied, and enemy forces in ground, air and sea environments in a common operating picture. To perform this quite considerable feat, two parallel systems of communication and information connectivity had to be established – one for the ‘normal’ exercise of C4ISR and another for the M&S applications. Moreover, these two systems had to be mated to each other in a mutually supporting, non-fratricidal fashion, if a seamless presentation of the various battle functions were to be displayed completely, accurately and in a timely fashion. 	8.3 Demonstration Equals OpportunityOf crucial importance to this investigation, these systems were successful and the conduct of UFL 02 (recently concluded) provided a vivid demonstration of availability and reliability under stress. Indeed, such success is more than a well-deserved commentary on the efforts of a great number of persons; it is the harbinger of opportunity. During the exercise, player cells in locations geographically remote from Korea (e.g., Fort Lewis Washington, Fort Hood, Texas, and Fort Campbell, Kentucky) were able to see before them the display of various situations exactly as were those forces in Korea. This situational awareness was ‘real time’ – meaning that assessments of the various elements of the ongoing or projected operations were as possible from their locations as they were in Korea. This has obvious advantages of situational awareness for forces that may soon be rapidly deployed into a combat theater. However, it has other, deeper implications. 9. Implications of Demonstrated Capability – The ‘Deep Bench’9.1 The Resources of the ‘Deep Bench’Because the CONUS locations have personnel, equipment, security, M&S applications, situational awareness, and connectivity, these locations constitute a ‘deep bench’ of capability. It means that those remote locations and nodes of expertise can be tapped by having them undertake portions of the staffing missions that overburden local in-country staffs. During time of crisis, this assistance could (and would) be invaluable. 9.2 The ProcessIn particular, various excursions of future operations (courses of action or COA) could be gamed to determine feasibility or advisability. Projected interactions between complex processes could be illuminated and alternatives succinctly presented. Various multiple levels could be incorporated simultaneously and the best national expertise harnessed to better leverage the US asymmetrical advantage in information operations (IO). This provision of support ‘from higher to lower’ has profound benefits for the warfighter.10. Benefits to the Warfighter10.1 Direct Warfighting BenefitsFirst, if this shift is accomplished, the warfighter will have effectively expanded the size, competence and capabilities of his staff. Second, the focus of the best efforts by both his organic staff and those elements he can leverage in CONUS would then be responsive to his mission requirements. Third, by shifting part of the staffing burden elsewhere, his staff personnel are freed to spend more time on immediate tasks. Fourth, in an environment where his own assets can be sharply degraded by enemy action, this remotely sited capability prohibits the enemy from denying him use of this critical resource. Fifth, off-loading part of the staffing burden allows more flexible use of his own resources – which in time of crisis may be crucial as certain sectors are likely to be overly saturated. Sixth, the functionality explicitly demonstrated in UFL is a direct application to crisis. Commands now present as exercise players would become participants. The ability of those commands to acquire pertinent information and assist in its processing enhances their understanding and preparation while simultaneously unloading the command communication and IO assets crucial to the warfighter. Seventh, the appearance of “real time depiction” and sense of urgency likely to be communicated to senior US officials at various locations in the US helps bring focus through heightening awareness. Such visibility and timing helps senior US decision makers best gauge competing demands and adjust priorities. Last, there is a minimal need for funds. Already in existence and demonstrated as viable during UFL, this system only needs organizational functionality to be assigned, procedures to be refined and practice. 10.2 Alignment with Future TrendsMore distantly, this system abets the trend of integrating the use of M&S into operations at all levels instead of relegating such use to one-step-removed satellites for assisting in training, acquisition, experimentation or analysis.  Such activities as mission rehearsal, COA analysis, and real-time logistics operations (e.g., Time Phase Force Deployment List [TPFDL] generation) all point to the need for more operational M&S integration. 10.3 TransmutabilityIt should be noted that while this case is premised on a Korean scenario, there is no reason that the UFL ‘reachback’ example could not be transmuted to other theaters and major commands. Indeed, under conditions of multiple theater engagement the US may find it possible to choreograph such extraordinary demands as would be apparent (and perhaps critical) only through the use of such ‘reachback.’ 11. ConclusionIn short, US Forces Korea have what may be a viable solution; assuredly one that may be significantly improved, but nevertheless a solution to a growing and as yet unanswered set of problems that beset every theater warfighter. UFL 02 demonstrated that the C4ISR and M&S communications systems could be linked and operationally merged. The solid availability of connectivity to remote locations demonstrates reliability. The complexity, scale and urgency of tasks suggest great need. It’s time to look seriously at what we have here.DR. WARREN H. SWITZER is a Senior Program Analyst at the Modeling and Simulation Operational Support Activity, Alion Corporation and presently is located at the Korea Battle Simulation Center at Yongsan, Korea.  He is a 25-year veteran Army officer, a non-resident professor at the University of Sarajevo, and has been a consultant to the Ministry of Defense and Joint Command for the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. A frequent guest lecturer and invited panelist at US and foreign universities, his publications deal with socio-economic strategy and complex emergencies.  Bibliography[1] 	Johnson, Thomas. A History of Large-Scale U.S. Military Maneuvers, 1938-1942. 	Monograph. Paper. 1957.[2]	Koons, R. Paradoxes of Belief and Strategic Rationality. Cambridge: Cambridge 	University Press. 1992.[3]	Lee, Bruce. “Why Truman Bombed Hiroshima” excerpts from The Wall Street Journal as found at  HYPERLINK "http://www.centurychina.com/wiihist/hiroshima/ytruman.htm" http://www.centurychina.com/wiihist/hiroshima/ytruman.htm.  [4]	Poundstone, W. Prisoner's Dilemma. New York: Doubleday. 1992.[5]	Rosenberger, John D. COL. “The Inherent Vulnerabilities of Technology: Insights from the National Training Center’s Opposing Force,” presentation made circa. 2000.[6]	Schelling, T. C. The Strategy of Conflict. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 1960.[7]	U.S. Government. Congress. Senate. Department Of Defense Appropriations Act Of 1994 (Senate - October 18, 1993 in Congressional Record Senate, page: S13567[8]	U.S. Government. Executive Branch. Office of the President. Presidential Decision Directive (PDD) 25: US Policy on Reforming Peace Operations (May 1994)[9]	U.S. Government. Executive Branch. Office of the President. Presidential Decision Directive (PDD) 39: U.S. Policy on Counter-terrorism (June 1995).  [10]	U.S. Government. Executive Branch. Office of the President. Presidential Decision Directive (PDD) 56: managing Complex Contingency Operations (May 1997)[11]	U.S. Government. Executive Branch. Office of the President. Presidential Decision Directive (PDD) 62: Combating Terrorism (1998)[12]	U.S. Government. Executive Branch. Office of the President. Presidential Decision Directive (PDD) 63: Protecting America’s Critical Infrastructure (1998)[13]	U.S. Government. Executive Branch. Office of the President. Presidential Decision Directive (PDD) 64: Humanitarian Demining (May 1998)[14]	U.S. Government. Executive Branch. Office of the President. National Science and Technology Council’s Presidential Policy Announcement #7 (NSTC-7) (Threat of Emerging and Reemerging Infectious Diseases) (June 12, 1996)[15]	U.S. Government. War Department.  The United States Strategic Bombing Survey, Summary Report, (European Theater), September 30, 1945, US Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., p.16. The ‘disinclination’ essentially revolves about three rebuttal points: 1. Such missions are not properly the function of combat forces. The responsibility for their execution belongs elsewhere. 2. Such activities are detrimental to the military efficiency of combat forces as the functions performed often are directly counter to military activities.  All time and other resources expended in such activities are at the expense of combat functions and training/preparing for combat. 3. The additional provision of resources for such functions has been wholly inadequate. Quite apart from the patchy additions to funding, not training, personnel nor even (in the example of homeland defense) supporting legislation has been adequately provided.  A series of Presidential Decision Directives (PDD), including PDD 25, PDD 39, PDD 62, and PDD 63 are only a portion of this expansion of responsibilities. For example, the National Science and Technology Council’s Presidential Policy Announcement #7 (NSTC-7) included the following: “The mission of the Department of Defense (DoD) will be expanded to include support of global surveillance, training, research, and response to emerging infectious disease threats. DoD will strengthen its global disease reduction efforts through: centralized coordination; improved preventive health programs and epidemiological capabilities; and enhanced involvement with military treatment facilities and United States and overseas laboratories.” (Emphasis added.)  Without extensive recitation, the answer is because they can and because they must. For example, in response to the latter, there is the involvement of the US in UN activities which, to use the words of the then Secretary of State M. Albright, “If I had to choose a single word to evoke the problems of U.N. peace keeping, it would be `improvisation,'. A kind of programmed amateurism shows up across the board, . . .” including what she described as, “the near total absence” of contingency planning, as evidenced by “hastily recruited, ill-equipped and often unprepared troops and civilian staff,” the absence of centralized military command and control and “the lack of a durable financial basis for starting and sustaining peacekeeping operations.” Given the risk in such activities spiraling out of control, such US response is unsurprising.  (See DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE APPROPRIATIONS ACT OF 1994 (Senate - October 18, 1993 in Congressional Record Senate, page: S13567) There are dimensions to such planning that broach into the strategic and operational realms, which in a combined context carry significance well beyond the scope of this paper. For example, the difference between ‘winning the war’ quickly in Korea with the fewest American casualties may not be synonymous with winning the war in such a way as to facilitate reunification under the best economic, sociological and political conditions from a Korean perspective. ‘Winning’ has different metrics depending upon whose viewpoint is taken.  Indeed, US DoD is in the global forefront of applying such technology to military use.  Ready historical examples (such as pilot training) abound, but the sophistication of current fielded systems (such a ground combat vehicles), increasingly exact similar requirements. Indeed, what used to be true for maintenance of equipment (i.e., civilian contractor support) now becomes more pervasive in training with such civilian ‘tech rep’ support a necessity for the training simulators. Already, these technical specialists perform key functions in every theater.  Figures are imprecise and variable by specialty, but US military officers can expect to spend between a fourth and a third of their careers in training, giving training or being tested on their training – much of which pertains to new systems. One officer opined, “We hardly get proficient – set aside master – a new application before there is something new; and so we always are on a treadmill of various stages of incompetence.”  Even contracting out tasks is a burden. Such contracts must be funded from finite defense budget dollars, managed, and accounted. It means that military personnel must do ‘non-military’ tasks and defense dollars are used to rent rather than acquire skills. Meanwhile, such dependency creates vulnerability, as the military services are then dependent, even at the tactical levels, for proficiency on such contractual support.  It is not an overstatement to say that the US military – in all services – has wagered much of its combat effectiveness on it ability to develop, verify, support and maintain M&S applications as almost all weapon systems, individual and unit training, planning and experimentation depends upon them. As goes M&S so also goes US military effectiveness.  Aside from the direct, observable costs such as fuel, equipment repair and losses due to accidents that occur in every exercise, there are the less obvious costs (such as getting to and from the training area), and the imprecise but significant costs associated with public opinion and ecological disruption associated with maneuver damage. (The tracks of General Patton’s tanks in the Mohave Desert were still quite visible 35 years after he trained his forces there during WW II.)  Realization of this was driven home in 1940 (after the fall of France to the Nazis) when, to senior US decision makers, the prospect of involvement in the war in Europe was almost certain. The US military realized it had not a single officer on active service who had handled a unit the size of a division (set aside a corps or army) in combat or even in a field training exercise. This generated the Texas-Louisiana Maneuvers of 1940 – the largest scale peacetime training maneuvers in US history. The exercises covered portions of three states. This is not to say that other modes are not effective or entirely outmoded. The battlefield (however defined) has many dimensions and crude weaponry, simplistic tactics, or knowledgeable adaptation can be extraordinarily effective – as the September 11, 2001 attacks and the return to Serbia of the virtually unscathed 3rd Serbian Army demonstrated. See Rosenberger, John D. COL. “The Inherent Vulnerabilities of Technology: Insights from the National Training Center’s Opposing Force,” presentation made circa. 2000.  And almost every minor one (e.g., Haiti) as well.  In fact, many US allies are quite content to let the US bear the majority of the burden of coalition defense, concentrating their own activities on self-defense, ‘coalitions of the willing’ (depending upon their own national interests), and affordable training that permits them to stay abreast of military developments.  One of these is national security. The accuracy of results of using M&S applications is directly proportional to the accuracy and comprehensiveness of the databases used. However, such required databases are very sensitive. Not all US allies have friendly relations with each other (e.g., Greece-Turkey or Korea-Japan). Thus the use of such databases in multi-participant combined exercises may constitute security vulnerability.  The software for M&S applications is often expensive and while the use of such applications can rapidly show great value and ROI, the local development of such applications provides both a use for the skills of educated elites, may constitute a cash flow advantage and simultaneously contribute to nurturing the technological knowledge base required for other developments or transmutations to other fields.  Sad, but true, is that the combination of “not invented here” and national pride often override common sense. It must be mentioned that all parties, specifically including the US, are tarred with this brush.   Assuaging multiple concerns that often derail such cooperation. There are major implications here for NATO, especially with the recent expansion of that organization to include poorer members whose military structure is dissimilar to that of Western democracies.  Thus, the use of atomic weapons against Japan in 1945 abruptly ended the war, precluded an invasion and perhaps saved the lives of millions of Japanese – in addition to the lives of many hundreds of thousands of American servicemen and approximately 400,000 prisoners of war and civilian detainees in Japanese hands who were to be executed if the US invaded. (The US military estimated that US causalities incident to the invasion and subjugation of Japan would number about 1 million. No figures were given for estimated Japanese casualties, but if the ratios evident from the Battle for Okinawa are used, the figure runs into the several millions.)  However, destruction always saps recovery and victors have often been faced with more profound difficulties in resurrecting or even maintaining societies than in winning conflicts. Such difficulties are even more problematical if the economic infrastructure is overly damaged or if the economic environment forecloses development. The comparative case of Europe in the aftermath of the First and Second World Wars is illustrative.  The Nazi assault of France in 1940, the Israeli Six Day War in the 1960s, and the US conduct of Desert Storm in the 1990s are three such examples.  The ongoing (several centuries) cycle of violence in the Balkans serves as an immediate example.  For example, the US strategic Bombing Campaign of WW II did not have the intended effect on the Germans’ morale and greatly burdened post-war reconstruction (some of which, in the former East Zone, was still underway 50 years after the conflict).  Obviously, this does not ipso facto make for agreement, but it does damp the subjective perceptions and perhaps make clear the differences between multiple less-than-ideal alternatives.  For example, a web search for modeling and simulation training returned hundreds of sites on a single attempt.  Indeed, within military education M&S education may be found in forms ranging from a one-day introductory course for higher-level officials to programs resulting in attaining a Ph.D. at the Naval Post-Graduate School in Monterrey, CA.  This is not meant as a pejorative comment, merely a statement of fact.  This is a major and profound shortcoming. Not the subject of this investigation, this shortfall deserves a ‘full court press” by the M&S development community.  Team Spirit, which included a large deployment of US troops is no longer conducted. 