SIGINT and IW ModelingImprovements in MC02 / JEFX02Patrick GetchellElizabeth ParkARINC, Incorporated2551 Riva RoadAnnapolis, MD  21401410-266-4527pgetchel@arinc.combpark@arinc.comKeywords:Information Operations, Information Warfare, C4ISR, Intelligence,Distributed Simulation, Training ABSTRACT: This paper will discuss significant advances made during MC02/JEFX02 in representing Signals Intelligence and Information Warfare in a large-scale modeling environment. The ground gained during these events is paving the way for effective modeling of future combat systems. The Dynamic Communications Environment (DCE) was the core system representing the communications infrastructure for many of the OPFOR elements in MC02/JEFX02. DCE was closely tied to the C2W Analysis and Targeting Tool (CATT) and Distributed Information Warfare Constructive Environment (DICE) models which represented a large portion of the Integrated Air Defense System (IADS). The Information Warfare Effects Generator (IWEG) monitored the physical network conditions and modified the DCE database based on lethal and non-lethal attacks. IWEG generated transmitter and signal data for RF communications with realistic frequencies. Signal content was derived from the IADS models or through human input. These transmissions and signals were intercepted and exploited by the Rivet Joint Mission Trainer (RJMT). Web pages containing various views into the status of the communications infrastructure within DCE were provided to intelligence scripters supporting the experiment, including the Exercise Control Cell at NSA.  Other interested users were provided information on the status of OPFOR communications state and content in near real time.1. OverviewThe integration of Information Warfare (IW) into modern warfare strategies and processes is well underway. In order to provide the warfighter with the ability to train, assess, and develop courses of action, the modeling and simulation community must provide for the representation of IW and its effects. Past and present models and simulations allow for the insertion of sensors into the battlespace, yet there is little exploitable information. It is also possible to incorporate jamming platforms, Special Forces teams and precision guided munitions that can all target the opponent's communications infrastructure. However, there is typically no affect on the behavior of the opponent as a result of these activities since simulations typically do not rely on an effective representation of the information infrastructure.This paper will discuss in detail the components and their interactions that provided a realistic representation of offensive IW and the resulting affect on the behavior of the opponent in a large-scale, distributed simulation environment. The focus of this paper will be on the techniques employed and results achieved in order to provide a baseline for future development in this critical area.2. PurposeThe purpose of this development effort was to create a mechanism by which Information Warfare (IW) could be played out in a more realistic manner within an existing simulation architecture. This cooperative effort was an expansion on the Virtual Information Operations (IO) Range developed to support Joint Expeditionary Force Experiment (JEFX) 2000. Our goal for MC02/JEFX02 was to extend the capabilities and build on the lessons learned. The highlight extensions included: modeling cellular networks; incorporating simulated voice using a text generator; web-based distribution of BDA for reporting; and generating a Near Real-Time Data (NRTD) intelligence stream.3. The ModelsMC02 / JEFX02 was a very large-scale, distributed simulation environment made up of dozens of disparate models. This discussion is only going to focus on the primary models that were actively involved in the IW event processes. Of course, many of the other models and simulations were critical to our success, for they provided some of the objects and activities necessary for these missions to be effective. (i.e., the Air Warfare Simulation, 'AWSIM', provided the platform and 'flew' the reconnaissance and IW aircraft objects). 3.1. Dynamic Communications EnvironmentThe Dynamic Communications Environment (DCE) is the foundational element that serves to tie the various components of the Virtual IO Range together. The DCE is the interactive and dynamic database that relates the logical or abstract view of communications to the physical network infrastructure that is observable, vulnerable and exploitable.The DCE is the result of work that began prior to JEFX '00 to support the information warfare requirements of the U.S. Air Force's Blue Flag exercises. The DCE monitors and tracks the status of nodes and associated links within the modeled physical communications infrastructure based on events within the rest of the experiment. As events take place that would cause disruption to a communications path, (e.g., physical damage or jamming), the DCE makes representative changes to the communications routing. This is accomplished by monitoring damage inflicted to the physical communications infrastructure. A change within the infrastructure that results in the effective elimination of link or node causes DCE to redefine the physical communication path associated with the logical link, or link between units.3.2. Information Warfare Effects GeneratorThe Information Warfare Effects Generator (IWEG) is the control station that allows an IW Controller to disable communications links or nodes based on actions that are not adequately represented in the simulation. For example, an offensive IW mission might be to manually break into the computer hub at a communications switching facility. A virus might be inserted into the computer network, disabling it until the technicians are able to isolate the virus, remove it and reboot the systems. This scenario can not be effectively represented in the current suite of models used in major military exercises and experiments, though the need to exercise this particular effect certainly exists. With the IW Effects Generator, the communications node described above can be partially or entirely disabled for any period of time without traceablity to any given process or military capability. The IWEG system allows for the impact of such a mission to be noticeable. Reaction of the target to the loss of a link or node, such as the use of alternative radio communications will occur and be observable if the alternative route is defined within the database. Node and link disable is accomplished easily using tailored graphical user interfaces. The IWEG incorporates tools specifically designed to help controllers perform communications jamming engagement adjudication. Jamming effectiveness is predicted using geometry, and physics of a particular engagement. The controller can also keep track of tasking and protected frequencies.Another key service that the IWEG module provides is to calculate, generate and broadcast the Transmitter and Signal information for each radio frequency communication applying the appropriate external characteristics for that transmission.. In the case of a route that contains multiple RF links or hops, the transmitter data is sent out for each segment of the transmission path with unique location and frequency information. Signal data is associated with each transmission. This process enables access for any intelligence collector with the capability to intercept and exploit this type of transmission.3.3 Integrated Air DefenseThe Integrated Air Defense System or IADS that was utilized in support of this effort during MC02 / JEFX02 included the Command and Control Analysis and Training Toolkit (CATT) model and the (DICE) model. These two models represent and rely upon the communications between units for target tracking, weapons control, status reporting, etc. The communications represented in the IADS operates at the LOGICAL level. These communications links carry the instructions and information between the units (link content) but do not represent the PHYSICAL paths that would be used for communications. It is the DCE that maintains and monitors the physical path, which is correlated to the logical link. When all physical paths between two units have been destroyed or otherwise disabled, the DCE/IWEG transmits a special message to the IADS models indicating that the logical link is no longer available. The net result, is that the IADS functionality or operational capability is degraded due to the inability of the units to communicate with each other -- one of the goals of the information warfare campaign.3.3.1 Command and Control Analysis and Training ToolkitThe CATT model from the AFIWC is a semi-automated system representing a portion of the IADS. The Air Defense Operations Center (ADOC) is the main element for command and control of the lower echelon units. Early Warning (EW) targeting information is fed from the EW radar to the ADOC and then is forwarded onto the firing battalions across the logical communications paths. This communication typically takes place internally to the model, but can also be represented by DIS PDUs. CATT generates Signal PDUs to represent unit to unit communications. The IWEG system generates the associated transmitter PDUs to allow the signal PDUs to be observable by the RJMT (or any other capable simulation on the main DIS LAN) when it determines that the associated physical communications path contains RF segments.3.3.2 Distributed IW Constructive EnvironmentDistributed Information Warfare Constructive Environment (DICE) provides the individual objects included in the RED team’s IADS. Objects include a multitude of radar platforms, surface-to-air missile launchers and commanders, AAA batteries, ground targets, weapons posts, filter centers, and deception vehicles (false emitters). DICE produces a high fidelity electronic warfare environment in a distributed manner.  With this tool information such as object position, emission data, communications information, and specific ISR stimulation data are published.  This DIS or HLA broadcast of information allows exercise participants to collect collaborative or non-collaborative intelligence, perform Time Critical Targeting, collect Bomb Damage Assessment (BDA), interact with the virtual simulators, or satisfy other modeling initiatives.3.4 RJMTThe Rivet Joint Mission Trainer serves as the key intelligence platform within this cooperative effort. The RJMT training device provides mission-level training for a Rivet Joint crew, but can also interoperate within a distributed simulation environment. The RJMT is currently a DIS-based training device that can detect Emissions PDUs from radar models as well as voice and data communications (transmitter and signal) PDUs that are active in the RF spectrum. The RJMT receives Emissions PDUs from CATT when radars are activated. The RJMT also receives and exploits the voice and data communications generated by CATT and DICE and broadcast by DCE/IWEG when it is determined that there is an RF segment on the active communications path.The Rivet Joint Mission Trainer replicates the collection and processing operations, as well as the analysis and reporting processes, with the result that the intelligence consumer in the training audience receives a very realistic representation of intelligence products. The primary means of real-time and near-real-time reporting are through the Tactical Information Broadcast Service (TIBS) and the Voice Product Net (VPN).3.4.1 Tactical Information Broadcast Service TIBS is used to transmit and receive intelligence information in a broadcast format. TIBS is similar in format to TADIL (TActical Digital Information Link) but is enhanced with additional intelligence data elements not typically provided by TADIL producers. Rivet Joint models and simulations have been used in major military exercises and experiments for the last several years and the real-world TIBS product is provided to the customer in one or more of the following of four ways:Serial feed to specific TIBS displays,LAN feed to specific TIBS displays,Line of sight radio broadcast to receiver systems, orSatellite uplink and downlink to receiver systems.Since the product received at each TIBS terminal is identical to the real-world broadcast, in fact it often uses real-world live satellite channels, the exercise and test bits are set for each track that is generated. This helps to eliminate confusion on the broadcast network.3.4.2 Voice Product Net The Voice Product Net (VPN) is a secure voice channel that enables intelligence personnel to have classified discussions and share intelligence information over a voice network. For exercises and experiments, the VPN is set as a specified channel on the DIS-based radio network. Real-time tactical intelligence information can be passed between intelligence partners and to the AOC.3.5 AWSIM and JCASThe Air Warfare Simulation (AWSIM) provides the air platforms. The JCAS component of J-QUAD (a composite of models including JOISIM, Joint Operations Information SIMulation; JCAS, Joint Combat Assessment; JECEWSI, Joint Electronic Combat Electronic Warfare Simulation; and JNETS, Joint NETwork Simulation) provides weapons effects analysis. AWSIM is the cornerstone of the current confederation of models used by the Air Force in training exercises and technical experiments. AWSIM generates all air sorties, according to the Air Tasking Order (ATO) generated by the Air Operations Center (AOC). AWSIM aircraft are tasked with specific missions, and for this discussion we will focus on missions that target fixed facilities related to communications and the IADS. (During MC02/JEFX02, there were a number of models and simulations that "flew" missions. AWSIM is used here as an example). An aircraft that is tasked to engage a particular target is given very specific targeting information. This usually includes the BE (Basic Encyclopedia) reference number of the target and one or more DMPIs (Desired Mean Point of Impact). When the mission drops its payload on a target, the JCAS component of J-QUAD adjudicates the results of the strike and updates its database for that particular BE and the associated DMPIs. JCAS maintains the damage status of fixed and semi-fixed facilities on the land and some of the mobile land systems as well.4. ArchitectureThe overall architecture for MC02/JEFX02 was extensive and contained live, virtual and constructive components distributed across the United States, interconnected via leased lines, commercial systems, command and control systems, and other means. The overall infrastructure is not within the scope of this paper so we will focus on the components associated with this specific effort, as depicted in Figure 4.1.  EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure 4.1 - IO Modeling and Simulation Architecture5. ProcessesWith the overall architecture and the interactions identified, the individual processes will be described in the following paragraphs. 5.1 Database PreparationThe Integrated Communications Database maintained in the DCE is a critical element of the effort. One of the reasons for the success of this effort is the utilization of a comprehensive and coherent database that is coordinated with the other models and simulations and with the players' target sets. Failure to establish and maintain coherency between data sets defining ground truth for a simulation provides the training audience with inconsistent results resulting in meaningless feedback from the intelligence process, and potentially negative training. 5.1.1 Data ImportBecause the data typically used in scenario preparation comes from a variety of sources in a variety of formats, the tools have been designed to be able to import many different formats. The data used within the Integrated Communications Database begins with the game truth databases of facilities and infrastructure. For MC02/JEFX02 we began with the Modernized Integrated Database (MIDB). We use this baseline because those facilities have associated BE numbers and can be targeted for physical destruction. This database defined the fictional geographic scenario but was based on realistic, known threat communications and command and control network structures. We also used Adversary database inputs for guidance on communications connectivity.  The scenario preparation included the definition of the physical communications networks as described by connectivity between nodes over a variety of media. The final Integrated Communications Database for DCE used for MC02/JEFX02 was approved by NSA. 5.1.2 Route PlanningUsing the physical networks that were established for the experiment linking nodes together through a wide range of communications media, a number of specific routes were planned for each unit to communicate up-echelon and down-echelon. The route-planning tool for the DCE contains algorithms to evaluate the communications paths available between units and to select the most cost-effective means available. During route planning, it is possible to tailor the "cost" of various components of the network (such as a particular transmission medium, or even a particular link) to achieve a desirable path or to eliminate paths that are somewhat less than logical or realistic. 5.2 BDA Input and AnalysisOnce the experiment was in process, it was necessary to import Battle Damage Assessment (BDA) data for analysis. The DCE received a digital file from J-QUAD periodically that contained the current status of all selected communications nodes at the DMPI level. The DCE was able to evaluate the download and provide a list of facilities whose status had changed since the last update. This list was displayed by BE number.The analyst used a set of screens on the DCE to view the BE and associated DMPI health to evaluate the damage at each facility and make a determination as to the ability of communications components of that facility to continue to operate. When determined that a particular communication component was damaged or destroyed, the associated links would be disabled. In a similar manner, the analyst could disable an entire facility, taking the node out of service for all associated links.5.3 Integration of Information AttackThe IWEG is also a controller workstation and can be used to evaluate potential effectiveness of an IW capability and accomplish disabling a link or node within the physical communications infrastructure. The results of the non-lethal attacks on a link or node are sent to the dynamic communications environment to determine the resultant impact on the communications infrastructure and IADS communications – just as in the case of bomb damage. When the active communications route is determined to be disabled due to an IW action, and no other alternative routes are available, the IWEG system generates a unique IW Detonate PDU for the associated links which is received by the appropriate units within CATT. Many other effects of Information Warfare can be represented without specifically linking an effect with a particular capability or platform. As described earlier a computer virus, perhaps a SOF team, maybe a new electronic tool to disrupt a communications switches. With the IWEG, the controller can affect the communications flow at any given node, providing such observable effects as driving communications through a different path, perhaps onto RF, or temporarily denying the information flow. 5.4 Intelligence Reflection of IWThroughout the communications infrastructure there are segments of communications routes that will be based on radio. These might be single channel radios between two units close to each other, or they might be high capacity microwave transmitters carrying volumes of data over long distances.Whenever the DCE determines that the current path for any of the unit to unit communications in the experiment includes a RF segment, the IWEG system will generate the appropriate transmitter and signal PDUs from the transmitting node's location, based on information received from CATT. These RF emissions will be observable and exploitable by the RJMT and any other system in the network with the appropriate collection capability. This will allow for the effects of an IW campaign have to have a measurable result.In most experiments and exercises, BDA is available to assess the degree of physical damage sustained by a node or other battlefield element. The intelligence reporting of this BDA is usually derived from a simulated imagery source that was able to observe the facility and report on its physical state. However, it is not typical that the behavior of the communications infrastructure changes as a result of that damage. Now, when the node is damaged or destroyed, the actual communications path is altered and the unit is forced to transmit information in the RF spectrum (one of the goals of the initial strike packages in any major campaign). This can now be reflected through simulated intelligence capabilities, allowing for feedback in the form of meaningful simulated SIGINT.6.  MC02/JEFX02 Extensions6.1 Cellular Network Modeling The modeling of the cellular networks in this experiment was accomplished by creating a realistic network of cell tower 'objects', each of which had unique characteristics. Since this was an experiment, only a small, isolated area was defined and a limited number of towers were needed. Each tower was connected via landline to the communications infrastructure. During specific events, certain mobile units would communicate using this simulated cell phone infrastructure.Upon initiation of the event, the DCE controller would identify which unit or units were using cell phones and the DCE would determine the closest tower for access. Each transmission to and from a particular tower would be on a specific set of frequencies. The transmission from the mobile unit was sent using his coordinates at the time of transmission and the tower, of course, had its own location. As the mobile unit moved, the DCE would automatically determine when it was appropriate to switch to another tower, thus changing frequency and location for each transmission. This was very successfully demonstrated during no less than ten separate events.6.2 Simulated Voice Communications with TextAdditional support was needed to supply the Rivet Joint Mission Trainer personnel with key elements of information during specific IW events. To facilitate the expansion of data received at the RJMT, a utility was written that enabled a controller at the IWEG workstation to write conversational text and send it as part of the Signal PDU associated with a transmission. This simplistic functionality proved to be a vital link in the overall success of the IW events.We believe that extending this function to an automated capability would greatly enhance the IW and intelligence support to this type of experiment or exercise. The long term need is for creation of models and simulations that actually send information between objects that can be readily translated into English or even quasi-English text.6.3 Web-Based Distribution of InformationA major enhancement of the DCE utilized in MC02/JEFX02 was the web-server. This simple application allowed control-cell personnel and intelligence scripters from locations across the country to view the current status of the OPFOR communications systems modeled and tracked by the DCE. Additionally, a unique BDA page was developed during the execution phase that enabled more rapid and complete reporting of Battle Damage by the limited BDA cell at the JTASC.6.3.1 Battle Damage AssessmentA key indicator for a battlefield commander is BDA. During a military engagement, especially one of the magnitude represented in MC02/JEFX02, generation of meaningful BDA is very challenging.In order to compensate for this shortfall, a web-based BDA application was developed. This BDA page would display information on each BE numbered facility and would indicate in red those sites that received damage or were repaired during the last four hours. Each site could be individually queried to show the exact status of each DMPI at the facility. Additionally, a report page could be launched for any BE numbered facility. The report page would create a properly formatted and structured report, pulling the key elements out of the database for the site specified. This would be displayed in a new window and the BDA reporter could copy and paste this text into their BDA Reporting application, saving several minutes on each report generated. During the experiment, several enhancements were designed and may be incorporated in the future to make this process even more streamlined.6.3.2 Communications StatusThe status of the communications environment was of interest to nearly the entire control staff operating in the Intelligence or Information Warfare sections. Web pages with status of the communications environment were utilized by several scripting cells, including the Exercise Control Cell at NSA for generation of scripted SIGINT.    A tailored web page was also generated for national intelligence scripters containing communications signal content and radar activity, as portrayed in CATT, DICE, and DCE.Additionally, there were numerous occasions when OPFOR Naval and Coastal Defense model operators would use the status information to determine their effectiveness and behaviors. By making the communications status of the OPFOR available to the control cell, and emphasizing the importance of an accurate portrayal of enemy behavior, we were able to create a better training and experimentation environment for the target audience.6.3.3 Near Real Time DataAs a proof of concept demonstration during the constructive phase of MC02/JEFX02, a near real time data stream was generated by DCE.  This was constructed as a means to provide emulated intelligence derived from the simulated communications environment to the War Goddess intelligence tool.   Simplistic filters were provided to try to limit the amount of ground truth.  This concept has great potential for future application to other real world intelligence systems, with proper integration with sensor modeling tools.    7.0 SummaryThe implementation of these integrated technologies during MC02 / JEFX02 allowed for a much higher representation of Information Warfare effects and the real-world feel of Intelligence, though both in a limited field of view. The need to train for the planning and execution of information warfare missions within computer assisted exercises is critical to prepare the warfighter for the battlefield of the future. The demonstrated benefit of the integration of the high fidelity threat system simulations, such as CATT and DICE, the network representation capabilities of the DCE, and the IW effect injection capability of IWEG system shows that this capability has great potential toward this objective. This capability can be extended to support many exercises and can be integrated with other simulations. Continued development of the DCE / IWEG system is necessary to implement additional IW capabilities and provide for more levels of degradation. Increased behavioral fidelity of the IADS and entities other than IADS are necessary to allow for broader play of IW. Author BiographiesPATRICK GETCHELL is a Senior Systems Analyst with ARINC Engineering Services, LLC, and provides technical and operational consulting and support to a variety of Air Force and Joint Service personnel during large-scale military training exercises and experiments. His background includes 12 operational years in the Air Force intelligence community and 13 years in industry developing training devices and mentoring military personnel in the application of Intelligence and Information Warfare.ELIZABETH PARK is a Senior Manager with ARINC Engineering Services, LLC.  She received her BS in Physics from Lehigh University and her MS in Physics from the Johns-Hopkins University. She has provided systems engineering, modeling and simulation, and training and exercise support to the Intelligence and Information Warfare communities for 18 years. 