NOTE TO REVIEWERSThis paper is still very much a work in progress, but the following shows the general outline and even reveals the essential arguments and recommendations.  I will be completing the various sections according to the comments {bracketed in red} following each of the main paragraph titles.  I anticipate completing the paper in at least a full draft by the end of the month (January 2003).  I will post progressive versions of the paper on the website as significant progress is made.Thanks!   Bob Meyer.Peddling M&S for DoD Acquisition Programs:A Snollygoster's Paradise!Robert J. MeyerASC/AAJ (JMASS JPO)2145 Monahan Way, Building 28Wright Patterson AFB, OH 45433-7017937-255-3969, ext 3818Bob.Meyer@wpafb.af.milKeywords:Verification, Validation, Interoperability, Reuse, Object, Agent, Component, Composability, Accreditation, Modeling, Simulation, Acquisition, OperationsABSTRACT:  The search for capable, credible, consistent, reusable Modeling and Simulation (M&S) tools to support the DoD weapon system acquisition process is somewhat reminiscent of the legendary search for the Holy Grail, except the DoD in this case seems to be allergic to wine.  Computer software terms such as "verification," "validation," "interoperability," "reuse," "object," "agent," "component," "composability" and others seem to have suffered nearly every conceivable aberration in terms of their meaning, interpretation and application to M&S in the DOD weapon system acquisition process.  This paper attempts to lay out a rational, thorough process and (infra)structure for M&S support of DoD system acquisition and at the same time simplify what has been for too long a mish-mash of jargon, parochial interests and job security obfuscation.  The modular, object-oriented, standards-based approach to M&S taken by the Joint Modeling and Simulation System (JMASS) program is used to suggest a template for this simplified approach to DoD M&S as applied to the entire acquisition process, including Test & Evaluation (T&E) and even operational use.  The recent DoD interest in composable simulations only serves to amplify the need for a more coherent, simplified approach to the capability, credibility, consistency and reusability of system and phenomena representation throughout the acquisition (or conversely, operations) cycle.1.	In Search of the Holy Grail (of DoD M&S){Background discussion on the myriad "joint" and other more truthful M&S programs – from A to Z.  Includes JWARS, JSIMS, JMASS, JSB, JVB, JBE, DEP, JDEP, DIS, HLA, OneSAF, ModSAF, FLAMES, TACTICS, CSF, and countless others.}Lexicological roulette and the status quo{Brief discussion of difficulties in agreeing on even the most common definition of terms, much less whole M&S architectures.  Includes Ref [6] and other references.  Whole definition hierarchy simplified and terms related to each other in context of their roles in the M&S definition and development process.}The JMASS paradigm shift{Brief summary of previous papers and presentations on the nature, truths, implications, process and infrastructure, etc. of/for JMASS  Truths include the following:	JMASS is NOT a simulation	All JMASS action is player-based	JMASS is interface ignorant	Compliant is NOT interoperable	JMASS is NOT "plug and playImplications include the following:	Distributed development	Simulation integration	Software reuseProcess involves building applications by:	Identifying the necessary components	Developing these components to standards	Building the application from these components	(Includes Figures 3-1 and 3-2 from below)Infrastructure involves working groups for:	System/subsystem model development	Phenomena model development	Architecture standards and implementation	Application-specific tool developmentFigure 3-1.Brief explanation of Figures 3-1 and 3-2, noting the component nature of JMASS models and the composable nature of JMASS simulations, as well as the infrastructure necessary to support this component-based composability.  Ref [10] will provide an industry analog to JMASS.}The common nature of all DoD M&S.{How the other DoD M&S programs – JWARS, JSIMS, JSB, JVB, JBE, etc. – share a common theme with JMASS, namely the dependence on a stable, well-managed, consistent, interface-based set of system and environment models, and how this commonality can be met by an expanded infrastructure using the JMASS case as an example.  This infrastructure will take the nature of class/component-based consortia made up of academia, industry and government members, all of whom have a vested interest in some application of M&S to functional area problems within DoD.  A new figure 4-1 showing the familiar pyramid of M&S abstraction levels (engineering, engagement, mission, force, campaign) will provide the context for consortia's roles.  A new figure 4-2, similar to figure 3-2 will lay out this infrastructure's form.}Consortia's responsibilities and benefits.{Ref [7] will provide a starting point for what these consortia would be responsible for} and will include at least the following:	Ensure consistency between abstraction levels	Define requirements for components/models	Match/merge requirements among applications	Manage configuration of families of models	Document of model capabilities/limitations	Maintenance of current components/models	Develop new/modified components/modelsRef [5] will provide an example of how to best capture requirements for model development at the various abstraction levels necessary for DoD M&S support across multiple functional areas.}Figure 3-2Standards-based DoD M&S.{Put it all together by leveraging the SISO/SIW tracks and forums to form the basis of these consortia.  Many of the existing forums already match consortium lines, e.g., VWS, SNE, SENS, etc., while others may have to be formed and/or expanded from existing groups  Use new Figure 6-1 to show the DoD M&S Cube  Address one solution to the funding quandary which has plagued an earlier advocate, from Ref [8].  Effectively use the SIW format for a national DoD M&S consortia forum, meeting twice a year to begin addressing the development of a process and infrastructure for the establishment of a stable, well-managed, consistent, interface-based set of system and environment models, along with their supporting architectures.  Include ref [9] as a part of theoverall effort to establish consortia, in particular to look at M&S architectures.}Recommendations.Based on the information and observations contained in this paper, the following recommendations are offered:	DoD establish and fund a consortium-based approach to satisfy the need for a stable, well-managed, consistent, interface-based set of system/environment models, and their supporting architectures.	DoD support and fund the JMASS program as a pilot effort for implementation of this consortium-based approach to manage M&S resources in support of DoD engagement-level analysis applications.References.[1]	Robert J. Meyer: "Joint Modeling And Simulation System, What it does,…and What it doesn't," Paper 01S-SIW-117, Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO), Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW); Orlando, FL, 25-30 March 2001.[2]	Robert J. Meyer: "Joint Modeling And Simulation System, What it implies,…and What that means," Paper 01F-SIW-109, Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO), Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW); Orlando, FL, 9-14 September 2001.[3]	Robert J. Meyer: "Joint Modeling and Simulation System (JMASS): Putting Flesh on the Reuse Efficiency Bones," Presentation 02S-SIW-102, Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO), Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW); Orlando, FL, 10-15 Mar 2002.[4]	Robert J. Meyer: "Joint Modeling and Simulation System (JMASS): Tip of the DoD Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Iceberg!," Presentation 02F-SIW-089, Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO), Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW); Orlando, FL, 8-13 September 2002.[5]	Robert J. Meyer: "Requirements Templates – Harnessing the Detail Genie!," Paper 97F-SIW-115, Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO), Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW); Orlando, FL, 8-12 September 1997.[6]	Robert J. Meyer: "You Say Resolution, I Say Fidelity, You Say Accuracy, I Say Detail,… Let's NOT Call the Whole Thing Off!," Paper 98S-SIW-245, Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO), Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW); Orlando, FL, 9-13 March 1998.[7]	Robert J. Meyer: "Standard Object Interface Linkage (SOIL) – DIS/HLA for Everyone?," Paper 97S-SIW-181, Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO), Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW); Orlando, FL, 3-7 March 1997.[8]	James F. O'Bryon: "Mastering M&S in Support of Combat Survivability and Lethality," Presentation, Joint Accreditation Support Activity Workshop on "Assuring M&S Credibility for Defense Acquisition and T&E"; Reno, NV, 12-15 February 2001. [9]	Jeffrey S. Steinman: "The Standard Simulation Architecture," Paper and Presentation, Summer Computer Simulation Conference, San Diego, CA, 14-18 July 2002.[10] Russell Pavlicek: "D-Word Dissection," Column, InfoWorld, Vol 25, No 1, January 6,2003.Author BiographyROBERT J. MEYER is the Navy Senior Engineer at the JMASS Joint Program Office (JPO), located at Wright Patterson AFB, OH.  He is on long term loan from his home office at the Naval Air Warfare Center, Weapons Division (NAWCWD), China Lake, CA.  His more than decade-long association with JMASS has mostly been as a member of the Joint Technical Coordinating Group on Aircraft Survivability (JTCG/AS) engagement-level analysis community, looking for ways to ensure that JMASS meets their needs.  His current role at the JMASS JPO includes representation of this same community, with the same goal of a JMASS-based simulation capability for engagement-level analysis. EMBED Word.Picture.8  