DARWARS, A Future Training Environment Garry G. MorissetteMAK Technologies185 Alewife Brook ParkwayCambridge, MA  02138617-876-8085, 617-290-1722 HYPERLINK "mailto:gm@mak.com," gm@mak.com Brian SpauldingMAK Technologies185 Alewife Brook ParkwayCambridge, MA  02138617-876-8085, 508-889-9111 HYPERLINK "mailto:bspaulding@mak.com" bspaulding@mak.com Keywords:  training, simulation, intelligent tutors, web-based learning, HLA, LMS, ADL, DARWARSABSTRACT:  DARPA’s Training Superiority Program, also known as DARWARS, plans to invent new ways to enable low cost, effective cognitive skill training, and create an architecture that enables and motivates US military personnel anywhere to train at anytime.  After recently completing a six month Phase I effort, MÄK Technologies successfully demonstrated a “proof-of-principle” prototype system, including a web based approach for presenting, managing, and assessing learning, as a proposed architecture for the revolutionary DARWARS training system.  The demonstration simulated a limited Joint Service training exercise supported through the federation of five Commercial Off-The-Shelf (COTS) military training simulations / games linked to a mock-up of a Learning Management System (LMS).  The demonstration validated the practicality of using the High Level Architecture (HLA) standard to link disparate, stand-alone, commercial games and military tactical trainers.  This presentation describes the design, hardware / software components, and lessons learned of this prototype demonstration system.1. IntroductionDARPA seeks to transform future military training through the creation of DARPA Continuously Available Training Wars (DARWARS).  The vision for DARWARS is to: Provide a continuous, on-demand, universal, persistent, intelligent training environment that improves training performance by 2(, slashes the cost and time to develop training, and enable service members to perform engaging, cognitive training activities anytime, anywhere.DARWARS was envisioned as a network of simulations, courseware, intelligent tutors, and live instructors collaborating in a 24 / 7 online virtual world that provides engrossing, cognitive, self-paced mission-level training for all forces at all echelons.  This system would know the user, understand what the user’s proficiencies and weaknesses are, and automatically craft customized training situations to prevent cognitive skill decay as well as exercise deficiencies.  Training would be as addictive as a favorite television show or video game.  And, thanks to the ubiquity of personnel computers with acceptable performance and Internet connections, the cost to train would be reduced significantly.This ambitious vision will take years of R&D and a significant investment in funds to achieve.  However, it can be obtained through a long-term, pragmatic, evolutionary plan that describes challenging, but obtainable goals and objectives.  Initial goals include the development and testing of the technical architecture.  MÄK Technologies proposed an architecture to integrate training systems, intelligent tutors, and web-based learning presentation software by using the existing set of interoperability standards, defining new standards where none exist, and evolving the standards where required.The DARWARS Prototype System demonstrated a vision for a web-based approach for presenting, managing, and assessing learning through the use of COTS training simulations and video games, social interaction services, COTS learning content presentation services, and available standards.  The prototype demonstration validated the practicality of using HLA in a small Joint Service training exercise, using five different COTS military training simulations/video games in a networked, multi-player exercise.  In addition to demonstrating the technical feasibility of the architecture, MÄK Technologies demonstrated the DARWARS vision by linking simulations to a mock-up of individual learning objectives within a web-based system.  All training demonstrated was linked to actual individual and collective, service-specific, and Joint training tasks.  The scenario was a single Joint Task Force training scenario in which all five simulations participated in a realistic way.  The scenario was designed so each participant could train on valid, military individual or collective skills while engaged in a plausible simulated battle.  The resulting prototype clearly demonstrated a focus on satisfying learning objectives rather than just being an academic sandbox for experimenting with video game or web-based technologies.  Although there are still a number of technical challenges ahead, a number of conclusions could be drawn from the demonstration that will lead to effective implementation and fielding in Phase II of DARWARS and beyond.  This paper and associated presentation details the technical specifics of the prototype, describes the individual system components and training scenario, and finally details concrete conclusions from the development effort.2. MÄK’s Proposed ArchitectureTo achieve the DARWARS vision, the architecture proposed by the MÄK Team would support the development of a system that has the following key features:Automates learning management – To achieve the goal of continuous, on-demand, and universal training it would be necessary to automate the learning process to the greatest degree possible.  To achieve the goal of slashing the cost and time to develop training, these learning management capabilities must also support sharing and reusing learning content; and provide the tools necessary to quickly develop new, quality training content. The proposed architecture would support the use and development of automated learning tools.Automated Learning Management provides:Anytime, anywhere learning content delivery to traineesPersistent records of students progress for instructors and traineesReusable content and well defined content creation methodologies for training content authorsProvides intelligent training – To achieve the goal of 2( improvements, we need intelligent automated tutors, access to instructors and mentors, and automated, instructor/mentor led, as well as peer-based After Action Review (AAR).  The proposed architecture would not only support automated tutoring capabilities, but also provide a testbed for the development of such tutors; provide access to instructors and mentors, and promote communication between them and trainees; and support all the types of AAR discussed.Intelligent Training provides:Automated tutors to increase effectiveness of the learning experience for the traineesReachback to instructors and mentorsA distributed simulation environment that supports observers and controllersSupport for automated, instructor-provided, and peer-based AAR so that trainees always receive the best and most complete feedback availableSupports community building – To achieve the goal of engaging training, the proposed architecture would support and promote the creation of online, Web-based communities. Participation in these communities gives users a reason to want to come back to DARWARS again and again.  At the same time it brings together novices and experts alike into an environment that allows them to share tips, tactics, and strategies.  It helps users find other users to participate in team training sessions.  The presence of these communities would not only make users want to train, it would make them train better and smarter.Community Building provides:Buddy lists that allow trainees, instructors, and mentors to find each other for training sessionsChat to allow communication among all DARWARS usersForum boards to build communities of practice, discuss strategies and tactics, among all DARWARS usersWikis and blogs to allow instructors, mentors, and trainees to take leadership roles in the communities being developedNews and other information pages that support all the members of the DARWARS communityAn environment in which users become involved, which gives them a sense of community, camaraderie, and teamworkUses well-defined components and standards – To achieve all of DARWARS goals in an incremental, evolutionary manner, the proposed architecture would focus on the use of well defined components and standards within the military and industry to create a marketplace for DARWARS tools and content; and to allow the leveraging of existing components to the greatest degree possible.An architecture built on well-defined components and using military and industry standards provides:Reduced costs for training agencies and sponsorsFlexibility in design for administratorsA marketplace for tools and content development that benefits all users of DARWARSUses commercial game technology – To further the goal of providing engaging cognitive training, the proposed architecture would support the inclusion of existing game technology wherever it is appropriate.  In addition to being engaging, which in turn increases the number of training hours users would want to spend in DARWARS, modern games provide low-cost, start of the art platforms for content developers to work with.Use of commercial game technologies provides:Reduced costs for training agencies and sponsorsEngaging training for trainees, which can not only make them want to train, but also improve the efficiency of the trainingState-of-the-art platforms for content developers to work with3. MÄK’s Prototype DesignThe DARWARS Prototype System was comprised of COTS training systems and video games, social interaction services, and COTS learning content presentation services utilizing available standards.  The hardware used was typical COTS PC hardware.  The demonstration consisted of 11 Dell PCs, networked together via an Ethernet LAN and Internet.  Nine PCs, running Windows XP, serve as the individual trainee stations, while the rest were web-based servers. The following sections detail the software components used and development details and modifications required to construct the prototype system.  A scenario was developed to demonstrate a multi-user training session focused on satisfying Joint training objectives versus an approach for creating yet another multi-player gaming environment. 3.1 Learning Management SystemA learning management system (LMS) is a software application or Web-based technology used to plan, implement, and assess a specific learning process. Typically, a LMS provides an instructor with a way to create and deliver content, monitor student participation, and assess student performance. A learning management system may also provide students with the ability to use interactive features such as threaded discussions, video conferencing, and discussion forums. For the demonstration prototype, we used an LMS commercially available from mGen.  mGen's LMS is a web-based platform that enables the delivery and management of training methodologies, including the ability to manage classrooms, learning assets, instructors, schedules, learning paths and all of the necessary components to deliver training effectively.  The mGen LMS uses the Oracle DBMS to store all associated learning assets and student records.mGen's LMS can dynamically generate personalized learning environments for individuals or groups of users. When users login and enter the online environment, they are presented with a dynamically generated home page that includes their specific course listing and the privileges that have been assigned to them. The only requirement to access the online environment is an Internet browser, so users may login and access their courses and tools from any network location.  The mGen LMS supports SCORM 1.2 and AICC from any authoring environment.For the DARWARS Prototype System, specific learning objectives were laid out for several of the roles.  Only one of the links was “active” and allowed for the training path to be followed through the simulations.  However, a larger snapshot of the objectives were presented, demonstrating how a user can be presented with objectives that have been completed, course yet to be accomplished, and courses that may have been failed and remedial activities recommended3.2 Training SimulationsFive COTS simulations were federated and used as surrogate “last meter training systems” (LMTS) in the DARWARS Prototype System.  The five simulations include three constructive training simulations and two virtual training simulations.  The five simulations are:  Battle Command Trainer 2010 (BC-2010) developed by MÄK Technologies, is an HLA-compliant, brigade and below, constructive simulation of ground warfare.  The U.S. Army has used BC-2010 in a number of its training institutions to train company and field-grade level leaders in the art and science of war.MAGTF-XXI also developed by MÄK Technologies, is an HLA-compliant, constructive simulation of amphibious warfare at Marine Expeditionary Unit (MEU) level and below.  The USMC uses MAGTF-XXI in the Expeditionary Warfare School (EWS) at Quantico Marine Base to train captains in amphibious operations and doctrine.Fleet Command developed by Sonalysts, is an HLA-compliant version of the commercially available video game.  Sonalysts developed this non-commercial version of this popular naval strategy game to support military training and concept analysis for fleet operations.  It models most aspects of naval operations to include surface, sub-surface, and naval air operations.  The U.S. Naval Academy has used Fleet Command to train cadets in the art of naval warfare.Indirect Fire Trainer (IFT) developed by FATS, is a software-based Fire Support Trainer that fully supports training of non-professional entry-level and advanced forward observers/fire supporters. Training is conducted in a 3D virtual terrain database.  Students are able to view the terrains and targets from anywhere in the 3D world controlling their movement via a joystick.  Artillery, mortar, and Naval Gunfire effects accurately replicate actual gun firing data that utilize realistic ballistics in determining hit locations.  The IFT is currently in use in the USMC, U.S. Army, USAF, and the Navy. The IFT has also been fielded in 7 other NATO countries.Flight Simulator 2002 (MSFS) developed by Microsoft is a realistic, virtual simulation of single and multi-engine aircraft.  Many flying schools use it to provide students affordable simulation training prior to actual flight training.  It is very detailed and models most aspects of flying to include:  use of avionics, instrument flying, reaction to malfunctions, etc.  The U.S. Navy uses MSFS to support introductory flight training.4. DARWARS Use CaseDARWARS must support the following users:TraineesInstructorsTraining content authorsObserver/controllersAdministratorsMentorsTraining agencies/sponsorsImagine the following training session within DARWARS:  U.S. Army Captain Tom Wilson, commander of A Company, 2nd Battalion 7th Armor Battalion, starts up his browser of choice and opens www.darwars.net.  Prompted for a login name and password, he logs into the system.  He receives notification that he has a new message from his battalion commander suggesting that, since Wilson experienced some problems coordinating fires during the last battalion field training exercise, he should get some practice.  Wilson selects that learning objective link and notices that there are several scenarios that he can join to get that training. He chooses one scheduled for 2100 hours and registers for the event (it's currently 2030 hours).  As part of that registration, he has automatically reserved a slot for one of several roles that may be playable in the exercise.  Of course, some of the roles are not accessible to him, either because all the slots do not train the skills he has chosen to train on, or because he is not qualified within DARWARS for certain roles.    He opens his buddy list and notices that others from his unit are currently logged in.  He sends instant messages to each, checking to see what they will be doing tonight, and indicating the training he will be performing.  Both decide to decide to join him, bringing up their schedules and registering as well.  With 20 minutes before the scenario starts, CPT. Wilson decides to visit companycommand.com. Since tonight's scenario will be set in a desert environment, he selects an article called "Tips on Fighting in the Desert".  After reading the article, it's time to join up with the scheduled scenario.  He brings up the list of events for which he has registered, and clicks on the one that's starting.  A chat window pops up for the exercise, and he is now able to communicate with other participants in the exercise and they review the mission brief for their respective objectives.  When all the participants are ready, the session is launched.  Unknown to the players, some of the forces are being supplemented by computer generated forces (CGF).During the battle, CPT Wilson's mission is to seize hill 431 to prevent the enemy counter-attack from attacking the main effort.  In many ways, it reminds Tom of a similar battle he fought as a platoon leader during a rotation to the National Training Center five years previously.  After receiving the initial briefing, Tom quickly develops a good, simple course of action that he believes will allow him to accomplish his mission. Since the purpose of his DARWARS session is focused on fire support coordination, Tom spends the bulk of his time before the exercise begins, coordinating with 1st Lieutenant Hank Smith from Fort Hood who is participating in the session as Tom's fire support officer.  Tom is careful to provide Hank proper guidance and insists in a detailed back-brief.  Remembering his previous errors, Tom further insures that Hank has a detailed plan for isolating the objective during the assault, and plans for several smoke targets to obscure the company's maneuver across the final 800 meters of open ground.  As the simulated battle begins, Tom's company initially moves forward without any significant interference.  However, with the constant reports of enemy contact coming from his left flank unit, Tom knows it is only a matter of time before it is his turn to fight.  Six minutes later, Tom's company is attacked by an enemy tank platoon firing from a small knoll 300 meters southwest of Hill 431.  His right flank platoon leader, commanded by an avatar immediately engages the enemy platoon, destroying two tanks.  However, his mechanized platoon, commanded by some lieutenant still green from his recent graduation from the infantry basic course, bunches up and loses one Bradley.  After chastising the young officer, Tom issues him explicit instructions on what to do next.  As he directs the company fire support officer to initiate the first smoke mission, Tom makes a mental note to mentor the young officer during the AAR.  As the smoke builds, Tom orders the lead two platoons to dash across the open ground and close on the objective while the trail platoon provides overwatch from the last position.  Although the objective is defended only by a token element, a platoon of infantry equipped with large numbers of rocket-propelled grenades is observed approaching through a gully towards the objective.  If they were to close with the tanks, they could force Tom's company off the objective or make its defense costly.  Fortunately, Tom's detailed fire support plan anticipated a dismounted threat along this avenue of approach.  Within minutes, the fires of the battalion mortars wreak havoc on the enemy unit and they retreat after suffering heavy losses.   At the conclusion of the battle, all the participants return to a chat room, and discuss various aspects of the way the scenario played out.  An automated AAR is launched, which is integrated with a logged recording of the exercise and annotations indicating key decision points and performance evaluations.  CPT Wilson receives feedback on his performance during the exercise.  Although Tom accomplished his training objective during the exercise, he realizes during the AAR that the failure of the young lieutenant was as much his fault as it was the lieutenant's.  Tom focused so much during the preparation phase coordinating fires that he failed to allow adequate time to insure his inexperienced platoon leader was ready for his role in the battle.  Tom muses that in his command, the junior leaders are more experienced and do not require as much supervision.  Although Tom has passed his task, he realizes that he still needs practice in his greatest challenge in tactical operations: managing time and critical tasks.  After all, that's why he failed to adequately plan fires during the last FTX.  Having successfully completed all his tasks within the scenario, when he returns to his training list, he sees that the objectives have been checked off and marked with the date of completion.5.0 DARWARS StandardsIn order for DARWARS to be able to evolve in an affordable way, it must be architected such that incremental increases in functionality do not require global changes throughout its software base.  DARWARS must be architected into complementary modules which are designed to work together, yet be independently evolved.  To allow the leveraging of existing modules, the definition of these modules must correspond to existing practices, where such exist.  Existing standards for communication between these modules should be used as evolutionary starting points where they exist; new standards (and improvements / extensions to existing standards) must be fully supported by the DARWARS program.  Many existing standards should be leveraged by DARWARS.  New standards will be needed, and existing standards will evolve.  This section notes which current standards are candidates to be used directly and also notes where new standards should be developed.5.1 Learning Management and Administration Data StandardsThe Sharable Content Object Reference Model (SCORM) is a suite of standards for Web-based learning.  DARWARS could utilize many of these standards.  Specific standards are noted in the following sections.Learner ProfilesLearner profile information must be extensible and accessible to all DARWARS components.  It also must be portable across separate DARWARS user groups.  SCORM has adopted the IMS Learner Information Packaging standard for learner profiles.  All DARWARS users' information could be maintained in this manner.Learning ContentAll learning content in DARWARS should be SCORM compliant. Simulation Session Descriptors are special SCOs that define simulation-based learning content. This makes it possible to aggregate, distribute, manage, and deploy this content among DARWARS users.  Standards include the SCORM Content Aggregation Model, IMS Content Packaging Specification, IEEE LTSC Learning Object Meta-data standard (LOM), and the IMS Learning Resource Meta-data XML Binding SpecificationSimulation Session DescriptorsIn MÄK’s DARWARS architecture, new standards would be needed to specify the data portion (referred to as the physical file in the Content Packaging Specification) of an SSD.  This may be an XML schema.  Ontologies for describing training tasks and mission objectives, which must be communicated by an SSD, would also need to be developed.Evaluation and AssessmentIn MÄK’s DARWARS architecture, LMTSs should be able to communicate evaluation and assessment data back to the learning management systems using an API Adapter to interface to the SCORM run-time environment.  The AICC CMI Data model Standard will provide a starting point for specifying the type of information that may be transmitted.  This would need to be extended for DARWARS.Database StandardsDatabases within DARWARS could use the SQL Relational Database Standard.Community / Social Data StandardsThe various elements of the DARWARS community infrastructure could use the typical W3C standards where appropriate, such as HTTP, HTML, XML, etc. Instant messaging standards are still evolving; XMPP would also be considered.5.2 Simulation Data and Related StandardsNetwork DataIn MÄK’s architecture, simulation data would be exchanged using the High Level Architecture (HLA) standard, developed by the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO).  HLA federations must define the objects, interactions, and attributes of both that are used within that federation.  This is called a Federation Object Model, or FOM.  Multiple FOMs will likely be supported by DARWARS.  The Realtime Platform Reference (RPR) FOM, a Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) standard, would serve as a starting point for platform level simulations.  It is expected that this would need to be extended to support additional interactions between the simulation components and intelligent instructional components when those components are distributed.  A SISO Study Group was established to start the process of developing those extensions.Environment DataSimulations must share a common model of the physical environment in which they inter-operate. Although it is common for simulations, especially real-time ones, to use proprietary formats for representing this data for efficiency reasons, it is still necessary to provide interchange formats that each simulation can convert to its own format.  SEDRIS, an ISO/IEC standard, would be supported by DARWARS for exchange of environmental data. In addition, OpenFlight(tm), a widely used format within the modeling and simulation industry would also be supported.6. ConclusionsThe DARWARS Prototype System, developed by the MÄK Technologies team, successfully demonstrated a vision for a web-based approach for presenting, managing, and assessing learning objectives using commercially available training systems and video games, social interaction services, and COTS learning content presentation services utilizing available standards.  The prototype demonstration validated the practicality of using HLA in a Joint training exercise, consisting of five different military training simulations/video games in a distributed, multi-player exercise.  It clearly demonstrated a focus on satisfying learning objectives rather than just being an academic sandbox for experimenting with video game or web-based technologies.  Although there are still a number of technical challenges ahead, from the demonstration, we can draw a number of conclusions that could support DARWARS implementation and fielding in Phase II and beyond:A web-based interface provides an ideal mechanism to merge presentation of learning objectives, facilitating community interactions, providing access to simulations and video games designed to provide training value, and providing access to historical, instructional, and learning path content.Given access to appropriate video games, either based on well-defined standards or with access to source code or the primary developer, there is a clear roadmap to enable integration to support distributed, multi-player environments.  This supports the concept of a standards-based architecture design enabling multiple developers to participate in a DARWARS system rather than a closed system controlled by a single contractor.  However a potential pitfall is that many games will simply not accept the idea of anything coming from an application not recognized as another player/client of that game.The use of a SCORM-compliant LMS to manage learning content provides an ideal environment for integrating simulation-based training systems with tradition computer-based training applications.The prototype demonstrated that, because of it mandated use within the DoD community and the availability of numerous pre-existing simulations, the use of HLA as a primary simulation interoperability standard is viable within a multi-player, Internet-based environment.   However, no known RTI implementations address all issues related to operating in that environment.Although the demonstration lacked sophisticated intelligent tutoring, it still provided immediate training value via support from live instructors and group AAR.  This lends credence to an evolutionary implementation approach that fields a system in the near-term and evolves to incorporate new technologies rather than waiting until everything is perfect before allowing trainees and instructors to make use of it.To facilitate dual use, developers must be made aware of spatial representation issues (consistent coordinate systems, portal vs. non-portal, etc)It is often easier to tie together web applications if they share a common language.  By sticking with PHP for all of the prototype web applications, we were able to achieve a greater level of integration than we could have otherwise.User Authentication should be centralized and easily accessible to all of the applications.  Each web application often has its own user authentication scheme and an important part of integration is bypassing and/or replacing the applications built-in scheme with the single website login.  This can be very difficult if the authentication scheme is tied throughout the application.Always test with as many browsers as possible.  Most common browsers do not completely conform to the W3C standards and often, what works in one browser, does not work in another.Using a "helper-app" is still the only reasonably clean and simple way to launch applications from a browser if you want to support all browsers on all operating system platforms.  Unfortunately, this requires a user to configure their browser manually.7. References[1]	Spaulding, Brian: “DARWARS Prototype Design Document”, MÄK Technologies, October 2003.[2]	Katz, Warren: “DARWARS Business Plan”, MÄK Technologies, October 2003.[3]	Langevin, Tim: “DARWARS Architecture and Evolution Document”, MÄK Technologies, October 2003.Author BiographiesMR. GARRY G. MORISSETTE retired from the US Navy having served as a tactical jet pilot aboard the USS Enterprise and as a flight instructor.  He has worked for the last 20 years performing training and logistics business development activities, most recently in support of DARPA’s DARWARS program as the Director of Training Business Development for MÄK Technologies. Mr. Morissette graduated from the University of Lowell (UMASS) with a Bachelor of Science in Mathematics, and received an MBA from New Hampshire College.MR. BRIAN SPAULDING is the Director of Contract Engineering for MÄK Technologies, managing the performance and financial aspects of all engineering services contracts.  His support includes management of all MÄK engineers working on contract development, technical coordination between programs, technical direction for each project, and providing engineering support for proposal efforts.  Mr. Spaulding projects include development of MÄK’s SIMinterNET family of desktop training simulations (MAGTF-XXI, BC-2010, and others), research & development of simulation display management technologies, and is also MÄK’s DARWARS Program Manager.  Mr. Brian Spaulding holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Computer Science from the University of Maine.	