V&V in the OASISMartin A. JonesMathew J. BrownOperational Analysis TeamBAE SYSTEMSW392B Warton AerodromePrestonLancashire, PR4 1AXUnited Kingdom+44 (0)1772 852625, +44 (0)1772 854604 HYPERLINK mailto:mathew.brown@baesystems.com martin.jones@baesystems.com,  HYPERLINK mailto:mathew.brown@baesystems.com mathew.brown@baesystems.comKeywords:VV&A, OASIS, Operational AnalysisABSTRACT: Most people understand that in a modelling study or synthetic environment, hard evidence of good Verification and Validation is essential to the credibility of the modelling results. However, this does not stop project managers, engineers and even some customers consigning VV&A tasks to the low priority pile, or merely paying lip service to the whole VV&A effort.BAE SYSTEMS Operational Analysis stakeholders are becoming increasingly active in formally scrutinising the VV&A effort, to ensure that the models used are fit for purpose and provide credible results. The scrutinisers wish to review almost every single data field in a model with an accompanying explanation of where the datum came from and how the model exploits it. Also some models (e.g. spreadsheets, cost models, COTS tools) have been wrongly considered by some users to be exempt from VV&A and are used in important studies with little regard for their credibility. To meet these stringent requirements, BAE SYSTEMS Operational Analysis Team have developed VV&A rules as part of the local Quality Management System and have developed a tool for recording the input data used across the entire suite of models. This tool is known as the Operational Analysis Systems Information Store (OASIS). To encourage the adoption of VV&A good practice, the BAE SE-ATG has developed a single page SE development process with a single page VV&A overlay. This paper reports on the OASIS model and VV&A tools.1. The ProblemThe UK modelling and simulation community generally agrees on the importance of VV&A, the value and credibility it adds to projects and, unfortunately, the fact that there is often little evidence that VV&A tasks have been performed satisfactorily. Many modelling projects are still under-prioritising their VV&A effort or are providing little in the way of convincing VV&A documentation that is required to underpin the study results.While some areas have proven to be proactive in providing VV&A, some customers and project managers are often reluctant to allocate time and resources to the VV&A effort, despite its undoubted significance. In addition to this, more and more tools are cropping up in all disciplines and studies that should be subject to the appropriate level of VV&A, but are being overlooked. A classic example of the fallen-through-the-cracks-of-VV&A type of model is the ubiquitous spreadsheet model. These tools are being increasingly used for static analysis and the extraction of results. Often they rise up from the ashes of a previous study or grow exponentially as a project progresses. The results generated by these wildcat models are being used for important decision making, yet the spreadsheets themselves, since their keepers don’t consider them as models, are not being verified or validated. Another example is commercially acquired models. Since they were bought, according to the vendor “pre-verified out of the box”, the willingness to fully verify and validate the delivered system representations is usually very low. This apathy even extends to the validation of user defined systems as the Off-The-Shelf model is believed to work exactly as advertised.The OA Team understands from much experience in building, populating and running models why appropriate VV&A is required to underwrite all modelling output. It hopes to share this experience with other departments and disciplines.2. RequirementsThere are clear requirements for convincing VV&A evidence for OA models from several sources:2.1 UK CustomersThe UK Customers are the key drivers in the quest for greater, unambiguous proof that models and simulations are suitable for use on current and future studies. Help is at hand, guidelines for the level of VV&A expected from a project are now being provided by the Customers, e.g. Scrutiny and Analysis areas of BAE SYSTEMS projects or MoD.Before a modelling and simulation approach is even considered, proposals are to be im place that demonstrate how appropriate V&V will give confidence in the modelling approach and study results and show fitness for purpose of the chosen M&S suite.2.2 UK ForcesServing Forces personnel, are frequently drafted into BAE SYSTEMS projects as subjects for modelling studies or Synthetic Environment based experiments. There is often a reluctance to take such experiments seriously as the service men and women can arrive with little faith in modelling studies due to past experience.      Being able to quickly convince them that the performance of the models is good enough for the task in hand allows the experiments to progress in a more positive manner, creating more objective results.Having information to hand that clearly shows the models are fit for purpose, i.e. VV&A documentation, greatly enhances the prospects of the subjects having more respect for the modelling approach and giving the experiments a fair go.2.3 Internal CustomersOther Engineering disciplines often look down on Modelling and Simulation as being “Mickey Mouse” and “no substitute for the real thing”, choosing to ignore M&S results and rely on their own experience and judgement.Credible evidence that the M&S is an accurate representation of the real world systems under certain circumstances and assumptions improves the confidence in its application. The VV&A evidence assists in showing that there are cases where M&S can be a close substitute for the real thing and instances where M&S is the only option available, therefore has to be as close to the real thing as it is possible to be.3. VV&A ObligationsTo comply with the demanded requirements, new rules governing VV&A tasks have been written. These are in effect existing rules that are being mandated by different means.Within the Operational Analysis discipline in BAE SYSTEMS the Verification and Validation of all models and simulations used in any study is now mandated through the Quality Management System.  As part of the Audit Plan models are subject to continuous checks to ensure they are being used appropriately and V&V is being performed to the required levels.  This includes checking for current V&V log books and data validation evidence.It has been decreed that QMS rules cover ALL types of modelling, so spreadsheets, COTS models, non-traditional or non-OA models all fall under the remit of this new VV&A regime.Guidelines have been written defining the level of V&V required which is appropriate for a given study.  This is beginning to standardise V&V application and provide consistency across different simulations approaches.  To supplement the new rules, a suite of tools, techniques and document templates has been introduced to assist those involved with the completion of the VV&A tasks.If the new VV&A tools and techniques are going to be bought into, then they need to be used properly. It is therefore important to convince the users of the benefits of these tools. Completing poor quality VV&A can be more damaging than no VV&A at all.  If a model has no supporting verification or validation documents, it is easy to dismiss its results.  However, if evidence can be provided that the model is fit for purpose due to fudged VV&A, then it becomes harder to discredit the model results.4. Tools & Techniques To encourage the adoption of VV&A best practice across the extended range of model development, new tools and techniques had to be developed. The motivation for these tools was to make it quicker and easier to fulfil the required credibility tasks than is currently the case. Some examples of the tools are as follows:4.1 Processes The SE-ATG SE Process has been adopted as the standard for the development of models and simulations within the Operational Analysis Team.The top-level process fits on a single page, so has proved to be more acceptable to other engineering disciplines due to its perceived simplicity. This single page process is backed up by comprehensive documentation The SE Process comes with an associated VV&A overlay, again fitted to a single page. The VV&A tasks are defined as a continuous activity that occurs from Requirements Capture through Results Analysis.  The processes define what level of V&V occurs at these different stages.Due to Security restrictions, the complete SE Process and its overlay cannot be reported here.4.2 Log BooksA template of a Logbook had been created that is to serve as a living document for recording VV&A tasks for each identified model and simulation. An appointed Model Custodian, who is responsible for the overall VV&A of the model, maintain the Logbooks.Log Book layouts have been defined for use within the SE and M&S community within BAE SYSTEMS Air Systems.  This ensures consistency of Logbook structure and detail.Due to security restrictions, the exact format of the Logbook cannot be released here.  However, the general sections used are:Model Custodian and Points of ContactDescription of the ModelHardware and Software RequirementsHistory of UseLevels of Expertise for the modelAvailable SupportList of platforms / systems modelledComparison of System Performance:Template for comparing known trails data of system performance with the output of a model or simulation.Templates for aircraft manoeuvres, weapon fly-out, sensor detection, warhead detonation.Natural Environment SpecificationsCode Management SystemExtended Code verificationInteroperability detailsFitness for Purpose AssessmentDependencies4.3 Data ValidationEnsuring data consistency across models used to support a study is a large task, particularly when covering modelling form high-level scenarios models, through real-time simulations to system models.  Tracking the data, its source, classification and relationship to other data-points in other models is complex.  It was recognised that in large studies many thousand, inter-related data-points may be used and all needed to be efficiently handled and referenced.  With this in mind a data repository was developed to facilitate this operation.  The rest of this paper concentrates on that aspect of V&V and gives an overview of the OASIS tool.5. Operational Analysis Systems Information Store 5.1 OASIS RequirementsA few years ago a gap was identified in the SE tool set with regard to recording input data history and usage. It was thought such a tool would help articulate to the customer that the data is the best available, that the modelled systems are appropriate and that the model is fit for purposeThe requirements for OASIS were captured in 2002 and included the following key considerations.A data storage and validation tool to cover major Warton OA Models & Simulations.To record the source of dataTo record the amendment history of dataTo record Subject Matter Expert opinionsTo ensure correlation and consistency between models & simulations.To provide access control to sensitive dataTo have a user friendly GUI to encourage V&VTo output data-sets in a form usable by OA Models & SimulationsThese requirements have now been met and OASIS is at the engineering release stage. This year we plan to fully use OASIS to support SE & OA project work.5.2 Overview of FunctionalityOASIS is underpinned by its conceptual model. This defines the way in which data is stored and how different datasets may relate to each other. The conceptual model is crucial to the successful implementation of OASIS and is complicated by the fact that it must correlate with the conceptual models of many OA models & simulations. Each of these models & simulations has different emphasis and different nomenclature. The current conceptual model has a strong OA influence and therefore represents domains of interest to our department. The conceptual model could easily be extended (in all directions) allowing the proper correlation of data-sets from wider domains.OASIS is an MS Access database with an extensive GUI driven by Visual Basic. The database stores modelling data-sets in a secure and configuration controlled manner. The GUI facilitates finding, filtering, adding and editing and most importantly validating and sharing of the data-sets.Figure 1 The Conceptual ModelThe GUI was constructed using the familiar windows interface and is separated into major themes under tab headings.Selection of entities is achieved via the 3 drop-down lists at the top of the screen.The user first selects an “Entity Type” such as ‘Sensor’ then selects a “Real World Entity” such as ‘ECR-90’. Finally the user selects the version of “Modelled Entity”.Figure 2 The GUI – “Entities”The right of the screen incorporates the hierarchy functionality. This allows Modelled Entities to be related to each other in pre-defined ways, for example, a sensor may be defined as the child of a Weapon System. A weapon may be fitted in the same way. When the Weapon System definition is complete it can be deployed by defining a route and targets and tactics and making them all the children of a platform entity (which is the OASIS naming convention for a deployed weapon system).In this fashion a complete hierarchy of entities can be defined and linked. At each level the entities are issued and the data is frozen.The data is then tested in the simulated environment and if it is found to be compliant it will be marked as validated in OASIS with appropriate comments. A non-compliant data-set may be up-issued. This gives the user a fresh copy of their data in an editable form with the next version number in the series. Meanwhile the original non-compliant data-set is kept in OASIS to provide traceability of the iterative process of data collection and use (*and re-use).Once a  Modelled Entity version has been identified the usr may proceed to the second tab where the data-set is laid out. All parameters for models & simulations known to OASIS relating to the current Entity Type (e.g. Sensor) are listed on this tab.Figure 3 The GUI – “Data”For each parameter the required units are noted along with the classification of the data, any project restrictions on the data, a reference for the source of the data be it Subject Matter Expert or a literary source, when the individual data point was last edited, by whom (see below) and in which previous version it was edited. Figure 4 User IdentificationHyperlinks can be attached, as can rich text to include graphics.Figure 5 Meta-dataIf the parameter requires a single datum (data point) in is entered in the data column. If the parameter requires a table of data values then the name of the attached table shows in the data point box and a table button appears beside it. Clicking the table button takes the user to the Tabular data window.Figure 6 Tabular DataThe tabular data page gives the user a choice for data storage: it can either be stored unchanged as rich text (which preserves tab delimited table formatting) or a table type can be defined which allows the data to be stored in an access table (appears similar to  spreadsheet) and allows the data to be manipulated e.g. RCS +10dBsm and also to be plotted using MS Chart.Figure 7 graph plottingFurther functionality allows the easy comparison of two versions of the same Entity, highlighting matching values and different values and cases where both parameters data are blank in different colours.Figure 8 DifferencingStoring all of this data is all very well but the data is really needed in the models and simulations. Transferral of data can be time-consuming and problematic and is prone to typographical errors hence the need for the following functionality:Data can be outputted from OASIS in three ways.1) MS Access Reports which provide well formatted and easily configurable hard copy. Excel spreadsheets which are portable and familiar to all computer users. Finally the data may be exported in the textual form required by the model or simulation. A template is defined and the data values pass into a MS Word mail merge document and by performing a “Save As… Text”. This method makes the process of creating model specific input files with all their peculiar punctuation and structure and lack of tags a quick and pain free task.Figure 9 Export OptionsOASIS currently stores and shares data for EADSIM, Strive, OPUS and SAMOCLES.5.3 Way AheadThe intention with OASIS is to expand its use to new models & simulations and capture data-sets for more entities. Meanwhile time-saving and useful features based on SQL queries and improvements to the GUI will be implemented. We would also value input from new users…6. ConclusionsThe new Management System procedures are being rolled out across all types of models to ensure reasonable VV&A is performed on those models that had previously considered themselves exempt.The Logbooks Template is being accepted and completed by all participants in collective Synthetic Environments and by departments that previously never recorded such data.OASIS fills the gap in the OA VV&A tool set to formally record the origin, timeliness and relevance of all data used to populate models and to demonstrate graphically how data are implemented in a suite of overlapping models. OASIS is being used to co-ordinate data sets across OA modelling suite and for the rapid generation of data sets and inputs for these models.By clearly demonstrating the benefits of VV&A and by simplifying the level of effort involved, hard evidence that sufficient VV&A tasks have been completed is emerging from the projects. 7. References[1]	SE-ATG SE Development Process, SE-ATG004, Colin Petford, AMS, August 2003[2]	V&V Logbook Templates, IDAT, BAE SYSTEMS, 2002[3]	OASIS User Guide, Martin Jones, BAE SYSTEMS, 2003Author BiographiesMARTIN JONES is a Senior Operational Analyst at BAE SYSTEMS in Warton, Lancashire. He holds an MPhys in Physics and Space Science from Leicester University. He is the prime developer of OASIS .MATHEW BROWN is a Senior Operational Analyst at BAE SYSTEMS in Warton, Lancashire.  He is responsible for model development and V&V. He holds an MSc in Advanced Systems Engineering from Loughborough University