SISO Paper Reference 04E-SIW-083Due to SISO in Word or PDF format by 1st March 2004Upload tohttp://www.sisostds.org/siw/04Euro/index.htmPassword to upload is: ZYE2B.Operational Analysis and Synthetic EnvironmentsNoel HinchliffHead of Operational Analysis TeamBAE SYSTEMSW392B Warton AerodromePrestonLancashire, PR4 1AXUnited Kingdom+44 (0)1772 852625, +44 (0)1772 852513noel.hinchliff@baesystems.com Keywords:Synthetic Environments, Operational AnalysisABSTRACT: The Operational Analysis department at Warton has been involved in Synthetic Environment activities for the past 10 years.  This paper gives an overview of the OA departments modelling suite, accounts of how these models have been used to support Synthetic Environments and the benefits and lessons learnt from this approach.   BAE SYSTEMS Operational Analysis have a hierarchy of models and simulations ranging from high level Campaign models, Multi-mission and Mission level models through to more detailed Engagements level tools.  These are used as an integrated modelling capability both internal to the OA department (usually in a faster than real-time mode) and externally linking with other Simulation or higher level Command and Control tools (in real-time mode). It has often been the case that the application of OA experiences into SE’s have brought about a greater sense of reality and hence more credibility in the overall SE performance. In return, the OA department gains information on operational issues form the SE community.The OA department has been involved in a variety of SE activities over the years. This paper describes some of the novel solutions the Operational Analysts have developed to SE problems, the lessons learnt and benefits gained from these activities.1. IntroductionThe Operational Analysis discipline has the capability to undertake studies covering all types and aspects of military operations, such as:Scenario studiesDatabase generationCompetitor comparisonsThreat system performance assessmentsGeneration of new conceptsTrade-off studies to make equipment choices or identify design features and required performance levelsEquipment comparisonsMarket analysisLife cycle costingSurvivability studiesMathematical modelling & methods developmentThe Operational Analysis discipline emphasises the multidisciplinary approach both internally and in conjunction with other areas of BAE SYSTEMS.  However, the activities of the discipline can be divided into the following broad areas:Air-Air combat	e.g. 1v1 & m v n within & beyond visual range combat Air-Surface warfare	e.g. weapon lethality, kill chain analysisElectronic Systems e.g.  sensors, countermeasures, Mission Analysis	e.g. scenarios, mission & campaign modelling, Costs & Operations	e.g. support concepts, basing strategies, sortie rates Outside of our core OA activities, we also have responsibility for overseeing the Air Systems Vulnerability team.  This group of engineers are responsible for guiding design activity to provide BAE SYSTEMS air vehicles with an appropriate level of robustness to ensure crew survival and the safe return of the vehicle to base should it incur battle damage.  In conjunction with OA work, this allows the correct balance between vulnerability reduction and other weapon system design features to be maintained. Figure 1 shows a simplified Conflict hierarchy definition.  Within the Operational Analysis area, the modelling and simulation suite of tools is aimed at covering the full conflict hierarchy, The modelling hierarchy and strategy is defined to reflect that.  A variety of model types are developed to support quick look analysis (spread sheet type models) through to the detailed and complex simulations.  Verification and Validation across the models is considered to be a continuous process and is mandated through the departmental Quality Management System.6. ConclusionsFigure 1: Conflict Hierarchy Definition 2. Operational Analysis Modelling & SimulationFigure 2 shows the scope of Synthetic Environments as adopted by the company.  The Operational Analysis level of modelling is placed in the Battle Modelling/ Warfare tomorrow domains shown below.Figure 2: SE ScopeWithin the OA modelling domain the following modelling hierarchy is used.  A modelling and simulation suite is maintained covering that scope, ranging from quick look spreadsheet type models to the more detailed complex simulations.Figure 3: OA Modelling HierarchyThe modelling hierarchy is divided up into distinct levels of modelling, increasing the level of detail the further down the hierarchy and increasing the level of abstraction the further up the hierarchy.  The levels modelled in the Operational Analysis discipline are the campaign level, the mission and multi-mission level and the engagement level.The Campaign level models the platform representation and tend typically to be aggregated.  The models look at typical Measures of Outcome (did we win the war, how long did it take to regain territory, how many assets did we lose).  The models tend to operate stand-alone and look at the “how do we use it?” type questions in the context of the overall Force.  The models look at typically many days of conflictThe mission and multi-mission models used are now representing things at the platform level of detail.  They look at generally a few hours worth or mission(s) looking at representing the threat environment in terms of an integrated / co-ordinated IADS (Integrated Air Defence System) and the related mission package and associated support.  Various mission elements are investigated from survivability of the force packages, lethality, time criticality issues and CONOPS development.  Measures of effectiveness are defined to reflect this.The Engagement level of modelling looks at small elements of the mission and represents assets down to the next level of detail.  Particular system / weapon variations can be represented here and effectiveness trades performed between them.  The emphasis with this level of modelling is far more on “what can the system do” rather than “how can I use the system”.  Measures of effectiveness at this level tend to be study specific measures.Of the three main modelling types outlined above the Campaign modelling tends to be a stand-alone activity whereas the other two can be used either stand alone or as part of an integrated federation.Figure 4 gives a very top level view of the modelling strategy and process used.  Two main streams of activity are defined the “Analysis” and the “Synthesis”.  The Analysis activities are aimed at Requirements exploration, scenario development, problem space exploration etc.  The Synthesis activity pulls all the individual activities together and looks at links to other models / studies.  Within all this activity there are underlying V&V processes.  Some of the aspects of that are defined in more detail in 04E-SIW-082.  The V&V of models throughout the study process and project lifecycle are mandated through the Operational Analysis departmental Quality Management System and appropriate Model audits performed at regular intervals.  V&V is seen as a continuous process.Figure 4: Modelling StrategyThe aim is to provide not only consistency across the modelling layers for particular project studies (leveraging re-use where possible) but also to look at through life consistency, enabling the modelling to support the project throughout its lifecycle. 3. Links to higher level modelling / Networking Enabled CapabilityIn the past, procurement was primarily performance based and platform centric.  This has evolved to be capability based. The consequence of this is that military capability is being considered in terms of Systems of Systems.  To enable this to be adequately evaluated, higher level command architectures and interactions are required.  Linking the OA mission / multi-mission level modelling to the “commander-in-the-loop” / “network enabled” type facilities enables these top level trades and evaluations to occur.Lessons learnt from these kind of links / interactions are then used to update any assumptions in the OA stand alone models and as one potential validation route.4. Links to more detailed Systems ModellingSimilarly within an engineering company there are many more detailed systems modelling areas.  They evaluate the system performance of individual systems or sets of systems.  Much of the system modelling at this level is validated against trials or physics based data.  Much or this work, has in the past, been technology driven.  Within the OA mission/ engagement level models systems capabilities are evaluated within an operational context.  However the level of representation of these systems is fairly high level. Validation of this representation has previously been an off line task involving data abstraction.  The ability to use the OA models and systems based models in a far more integrated manner has many benefits.  Earlier de-risking of systems integration type issuesBetter understanding of system requirements within an operational context.Better consistency of model assumptions and representations across the layers of modellingProvision of a consistent operational environment across the modelling layersThe Operational Analysis models used at Warton have been integrated for use on studies with flight simulation models, sensors and communications models, and detailed rigs (avionics etc).  This has enabled studies to be performed on topics such as Time Critical Targetting, looking at the full kill chain from Sensor to shooter to a far greater fidelity than previously.  Use of the systems in a variety of complex operational environments has raised issues on image interpretation,  data fusion etc that would not have been raised otherwise.  Linking this with the higher level modelling has also enabled trades to be considered  between improvements in operational command chain/ mission planning processes and detailed system complexity.  The OA modelling has provided common threats and scenarios for these evaluations.5. Benefits of combined use of OA and SEThe Operational Analysis department at Warton has been closely involved with the SE activities since the early 1990’s.  This has been seen as a synergistic relationship, with the OA gaining better understanding and validation of its modelling by closer integration with the more detailed systems modelling and the higher level C4I modelling.  In return, the OA modelling provides consistent Operational environments across the simulation areas.  Both internal and external customers have recognised benefits to be gained from this activity and hopefully this will develop and strengthen over the years to come.A close relationship between the OA modelling and the other simulation areas also supports the drive towards a more capability defined acquisition process and the use of Simulation Based Acquisition.   The ability to relate technologies to capabilities proves key in this. Figure 5 below shows how some of the technologies can be mapped onto Weapon System Capabilities.  These Weapon System Capabilities can then be mapped onto Operational Capabilities.  Standard agreed definitions of those between the customer and industry and metrics for them would be a great benefit.Whilst the individual Modelling and Simulation areas could act independently (as has happened in the past) passing information via reports and data between themselves; a more coherent, integrated process provides better efficiency and consistency.  It also facilitates a far more efficient iteration through the different levels of modelling, giving the ability to drill down where required and relate back to operational capability at any point.Figure 5: Technologies to CapabilitiesAuthor BiographiesNOEL HINCHLIFF:  On leaving university with an Aeronautical Engineering degree I joined Hunting Engineering in Bedford. After 4 years at Huntings I moved into the C3I organisation at BAESYSTEMS Warton, supporting work that was being done on behalf of the NATO Technical centre in the Hague. This was analysing an affordable migration path to achieve the best capability at the lowest cost for the NATO Air Command and Control System (ACCS). I then moved into the Systems and Services organisation in the early 90's to work on modelling support for the survivability of Royal Saudi Air Force bases. I spent a year in Saudi Arabia on the Force Structure Study Team. Following  this I developed a Campaign Level Analysis capability to support Marketing activities in a number of potential customer countries, which included the Philippines/Qatar/Oman/UAE/Saudi. In 1999 I moved into the Operational Analysis Department of what was the Military Aircraft Division of BAESYSTEMS, upon where I took over the role as discipline Chief of OA.  EMBED Word.Picture.8   EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8   EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8   EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  