SEDRIS - A Collaborative International Infrastructure TechnologyFarid MamaghaniSEDRIS Organization19223 SE 45th CtIssaquah, WA USA 98027 HYPERLINK "mailto:farid@sedris.org" farid@sedris.orgPaul FoleyQuantum Research InternationalContractor to the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office1901 No. Beauregard St., Suite 500Alexandria, VA USA 22311(703) 824-3453 HYPERLINK "mailto:pfoley@dmso.mil" pfoley@dmso.mil or pfoley@quantum-intl.comKeywords:SEDRIS, Environmental Representation, InteroperabilityABSTRACT: This paper discusses the state of SEDRIS technical capabilities and its open development approach through examples of international use and collaboration from several application perspectives.  They include command and control, multi-dimensional spatial analysis, telecommunications, location-based services, entertainment, geomatics, and the use of modeling and simulation (M&S) technology to support analysis, systems acquisition, test and evaluation, development, and training used in a broad range of applications.  The use of SEDRIS technology in several on-going international applications is highlighted.  Lastly, the SEDRIS standards development through the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) / International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), and as Standardization Agreements (STANAGs) through the NATO M&S Group, is reviewed.Introduction --Trends impacting environmental representationAs the information technology market’s reliance on environmental data and its needs to use and share such data increases, the cost to acquire, tailor, and use environmental data will decrease.  This trend, augmented with the continual improvements in acquisition methods of raw data, which also reduce the cost of preparing such data, will create rapid growth markets where environmental data will be an integral part of the applications that serve such markets.These trends have already been observed in the modeling and simulation sector for some time.  And the infusion of networking into the traditional modeling and simulation (M&S) has dramatically increased the rate of change.  Although, in contrast to the total IT market, the scale and the size of the modeling and simulation sector are smaller, the leading indicators are nevertheless prominent.We have seen the shift from standalone to networked simulation based on the value and the promise that distributed interoperable systems bring forth.  The demand to implement and conduct joint (environmental) simulation-based applications and enterprises is being realized.  And the value of interconnecting multiple, sometimes rather diverse, applications such as visualization, analysis, virtual, computer generated entities, and others not only have been demonstrated, but are now integral to operation of many M&S systems.  This in turn has given rise to demands for better, more detailed, and well integrated environmental data across multiple domains.As a result the need for a common environmental architecture that can bring multiple domains together and close the gap has become more apparent.  And as the trends continue, representation and sharing of environmental data, through common and practical standards, will play an important role in fulfilling the market demands.SEDRIS fills this gap.  SEDRIS technologies are about the representation and interchange of environmental data.  The environmental data representation in SEDRIS is not limited to visual or modeling & simulation systems.  Therefore, system developers interested in describing, interchanging, and making their data available, or needing access to others' data through a uniform mechanism, are increasingly becoming interested in what SEDRIS has to offer.  This includes a variety of markets that deal with environmental data, including the meteorological and oceanographic community, the communication sector, the simulation sector, environmental planning and management, the geographical information systems community, the military operational community (i.e. C4I), emergency response systems, entertainment-related applications, and others.Open standards for commercial growthAn important factor in ensuring growth in emerging markets is to allow for innovation and competitive advantages, and at the same time retain the importance of common, standard, and open interfaces.  This is especially critical when infrastructure technologies are involved.Often a common tendency in some business organizations is to compete for, and establish, (and eventually permeate) infrastructure technologies so the organization’s commercial success can be assured by dominating the market.  Yet it is interesting to note that most successful organizations, especially in the IT market, generate the majority of their revenues from the value-added applications that rely on those infrastructure technologies, and not from the development of the infrastructure technologies themselves.Open standards, when done correctly and in a timely manner, are a strong catalyst in promoting growth and innovation while protecting the proprietary nature of value-added applications.  In and of themselves infrastructure technologies, and the open standards supporting them, are not a growth-market.  But the applications that are built upon them can be.When business organizations have recognized this in the IT sector, they have shifted their focus from competing to dominate based on infrastructure technology to competing to provide the best value-added content and/or the most cost-effective applications. Take HTML as an example.  Very few run a profitable business from directly working on HTML itself as a standard or enabling technology.  The significant business potential (and growth) on the web is based on second or third order effects of HTML.  This is done by building content based on HTML, or by using the content to achieve a business objective in a manner more efficient than before.  Making this distinction is critical.The SEDRIS project recognized this from the onset, and has reflected this in its approach and development.  Open standards and an open development process is an integral part of the approach.  Systems and users that rely on SEDRIS have already seen the value and benefits of this approach.  SEDRIS technology makes them more competitive in the marketplace.  Once the impediments of representation and sharing are removed by taking advantage of tools, implementations, or standards provided by SEDRIS, the focus and energy shifts to value-adding to the data content and quality.  For example, the tools built on top of SEDRIS technologies have paid significant dividends, by allowing examination of the syntax, content, and quality of data sets.  In addition, the approach of a common representation, therefore a common method of interchange, does have significant cost savings by eliminating the maintenance and/or development of multiple conversion (interchange) software investments.The promotion of open and non-proprietary standards, common interfaces, and the development of practical tools based on these technologies is a hallmark of the SEDRIS project.Interoperability enhanced through interchangeOpen and common standards and interfaces for interchange of data are necessary, but insufficient to ensure interoperability.  Interoperability and interchange are sometimes assumed to be synonymous.  They are not.  Interchange of data, successful or not, does not guarantee interoperability.  Too often the ability to move data between two systems is equated to interoperation of those systems.  This is analogous to expecting two individuals to understand each other simply because they have conversed!  Daily experiences show that such things as language barriers, use of domain-specific words or phrases, and the medium used to conduct a conversation (e.g. noisy rooms or noisy communication channels) can all impede a true mutual understanding.  Interchange of data between any two IT applications is no different.A robust and successful interchange mechanism, however, is a critical factor in ensuring interoperability.  Good interchange means using a mechanism that does not introduce noise in the medium, employs clear and unambiguous syntax and semantics, and does not resort to cumbersome or unwieldy formats.Even after a good and robust interchange has been utilized, there is still no guarantee of interoperability.  Using the natural language analogy as an example, even if two individuals use the same language, are not impeded by noisy mediums, and use understandable words and phrases to form clear sentences does not mean they have understood each other.  One may be speaking about a subject that requires considerable background and context for it to be understood by the other.  We recognize that with poor interchange mechanisms such exchanges would be even more difficult to comprehend.  But similarly we also recognize that having a good interchange mechanism still does not guarantee interoperability.Good interchange is about understanding the data clearly.  Interoperability is about understanding the information that such data carries, and being able to act on it.Therefore, a good interchange mechanism becomes a pre-condition and a critical step to interoperability.  This is the other gap that SEDRIS fills for the interchange of environmental data.The SEDRIS componentsAn overview of the make up and characteristics of the SEDRIS technology components will better frame the key role that SEDRIS plays in enabling interoperability.  SEDRIS is fundamentally about two key objectives: (1) to represent environmental data, and (2) to interchange environmental data sets.The core of SEDRIS is based on five technology components.  These are the SEDRIS Data Representation Model (DRM), the Environmental Data Coding Specification (EDCS), the Spatial Reference Model (SRM), the SEDRIS interface specification (Application Program Interface (API)), and the SEDRIS Transmittal Format (STF). Three of these core technology components (DRM, EDCS, and SRM) are used to achieve the first objective. The combination of these three components provides the means for describing environmental data.  The combination of the DRM, the EDCS, and the SRM is the technical equivalent of a language for describing data about the environment.  These components enable the expression and communication of meaning and semantics about environmental data.The second SEDRIS technology objective builds upon the first, and provides the ability to interchange and share environmental data.  We know from practice that it is not enough to only be able to clearly represent or describe the data.  We must also be able to share such data with others in an efficient manner. The SEDRIS API and the STF are the technology components that fulfill this objective.4.1 SEDRIS Data Representation ModelThe SEDRIS DRM uses a single, object-oriented schema that not only allows for a clear description of data from all environmental domains - atmosphere, ocean, space, terrain, as well as data needed for 3-D model description - but also includes the logical relationships between those data elements.  The DRM includes more than 300 classes that together provide the common framework for the expression of any environmental data, independent of any particular application or domain, data schema, or data resolution. This allows for the polymorphic representation of the same data, which means the same environmental “thing” can be expressed through various representations.  In addition, the DRM permits the “association” of these various representations, which can indicate geometric relationships and/or functional connectivity between environmental objects. The DRM also provides the syntax and the structural semantics so data can be fully expressed and correctly understood by users.The combination of these classes and their relationships provide an expressive schema that acts as the grammar of a language for describing environmental data.  This technique allows the separation of the semantics of the data from its representation.  The representation of the data is handled by the DRM.  The semantics of what an environmental object means, regardless of how it may be represented, is factored out into a separate and independent dictionary, the EDCS.4.2 Environmental Data Coding SpecificationThe EDCS unifies the characterization of environmental “things” regardless of the means by which such “things” are represented (e.g., as surfaces, features, point samples, or others) or whether they are cast as individual primitives or structured collections.This allows a clear separation between the DRM and EDCS, where EDCS can act as the dictionary to the language, and complement the grammar (the DRM).The EDCS provides the means for identifying (labeling of) environmental objects, as well as articulating their attributes (characteristics) based on a known, broad, and agreed upon convention. The nature and the types of data that SEDRIS is designed to represent are broad and include terrain, cartographic, atmospheric, ocean, space, and urban domains.  As a result, the design of EDCS has drawn from the strengths of the work done on dictionaries or catalogues found in other domains.Fundamentally, EDCS provides answers to three types of questions.  What something is, what are its characteristics, and what units are used to measure those characteristics?  These questions are independent of any data model or representation scheme.  As a result EDCS is designed as a standalone technology and can be utilized, independent of other SEDRIS technologies, any time the semantics of identification and characteristics of environmental data are called for.4.3 Spatial Reference ModelThe most basic representation of anything environmental is its location.  Without the ability to clearly specify the position of an object in reference to a designated origin, and in reference to other objects, very little else can be said about the whole environment that can be meaningfully shared with others.To represent a location in space an infinite number of coordinate systems and reference frames can be described.  And each of these would be a valid representation.  In practice, spatial reference frames are designed to meet specific goals or needs.  Some are best tailored for use in specific applications, or have properties that are of value to specific users.  There is no rationale that dictates everyone must use one, or a limited set of, spatial reference frames.  Different communities use a variety of systems in order to maximize efficiency, ease of use, mathematical properties, reduction in cost, or any number of domain-specific objectives.  Prior to the development of the SRM, what had been lacking was a model that could unify these different location representations, and allow for clear mapping and transformation of one to others.The mathematical and scientific foundation of the SRM captures and unifies the spatial models used in a variety of applications.  This same unifying framework allows for the easy extension or addition of new spatial models or coordinate systems.  The support for spatial reference models includes inertial, quasi-inertial, geo-based, and non-geo-based (including purely arbitrary Cartesian) systems.  Through its coordinate conversion library (a component of the SEDRIS API libraries), the associated SRM software provides a fast, accurate, and efficient utility to transform coordinates from one frame of reference to another.  And the SRM algorithms, and their software implementations, are designed to retain a high degree of accuracy during transformation and conversion operations (which is 1mm or better accuracy for nearly all transformation and conversions).Coordinate conversions and transformations must not only be accurate, but also fast.  When dealing with millions of objects within even small environmental data sets, it is critical that operations during data extraction or insertion be very efficient without introducing any errors or loss in the data stream.  For these reasons the implementation of the SRM is highly optimized and achieves very high performance measures, without compromising accuracy in its algorithms.  These implementations are provided in C, C++, and Java to meet a variety of application needs.Currently, the SRM supports some 151 spatial reference frames, in addition to a large set of object reference models (e.g. Earth reference models).Since the transformation or conversion of location data is not unique to environmental data, the SRM is designed as a standalone technology, and can be used in a variety of other domains and applications.4.4 SEDRIS Interface Specification and SEDRIS Transmittal FormatThe interchange of data must take into account platform independence, practical efficiency (both in storage and processing), and ease in software development (lowering the barrier to entry).The SEDRIS interface specification (commonly known as the SEDRIS API) and the SEDRIS Transmittal Format (STF) are designed to achieve these goals.  The API and STF, along with supporting tools and utilities, play a primary role in data interchange, while being semantically coupled to the data representation model. The API is the encapsulation of the functionality needed to produce and consume SEDRIS transmittals.  It does this by de-coupling the user application from the transmittal data structures, and by providing a consistent interface between a user application and the SEDRIS transmittals.  Its interface is bound by using ISO C and C++ languages, and is implemented in C++.  The SEDRIS reference implementation of the interface specification is designed to be portable and runs on multiple platforms and operating system combinations including Unix (SUN, SGI, IBM), Windows, and Linux.The STF is a platform-independent, file-based, and space efficient format designed to support the full capabilities of the SEDRIS DRM, while decoupling the media-based format requirements from the API or the DRM.  The supporting STF software (included in the API implementation) adapts to the platform’s word order (little or big endian), and frees the user from worries regarding platform dependencies.All five SEDRIS technology components comprise the total system and are currently employed in a number of applications addressing for example, data conversion, data analysis, and visualization, and operate on very large data sets used in the oceanographic, atmospheric, space, and terrain domains.  These technology components do not judge, state a preference, or separate how various domains use environmental data.  Instead SEDRIS provides a unifying mechanism for all of them to describe (and subsequently share) such data, without detracting from one or the other.  SEDRIS technologies have made it possible to achieve a cost effective interchange mechanism among systems, and to enable interoperability.International collaboration and activitiesA number of organizations across the globe have been utilizing the SEDRIS technologies in a variety of applications.  In this section, we highlight a sample of users by region.  Many of these organizations are SEDRIS Associates, or have been actively involved in the development of the technology and/or the standards.Australia:  Tenix Defence Pty Limited through Tenix Defence develops, supplies and installs systems involved in surveillance, reconnaissance, electronic warfare, simulation, hydrography and information and computer security.Tenix Defence Simulation Group is currently directly involved in a number of SEDRIS activities.Tenix has used commercial database toolsets to convert existing OpenFlight databases to SEDRIS and to provide new terrain databases in SEDRIS format for its Australian and international customers.A more significant, SEDRIS-related activity revolves around the Joint Synthetic Environment (JSE) project for the Australian Defence Simulation Office (ADSO). Tenix has the lead role in the specification of the Australian JSE and is actively promoting the use of SEDRIS as the interchange format for simulator environmental and geospatial data. In another area, Tenix on behalf of ADSO, has undertaken the consultancy on Geospatial Requirements for Defence Simulation.  The project aims to specify the product, coverage and attribution requirements for geospatial data that may be used in simulation applications. The SEDRIS EDCS has proved useful in the specification of attribute requirements. The Simulation Group also works closely with the Australian Government Defence Science and Technology Organisation (DSTO) and many other Australian defense offices.  Many of their contracts have a need for a transmittal format, and the promotion of the use of SEDRIS within the Australian defense community is expected to benefit all stakeholders.Canada:CAE provides simulation and control technologies for training and optimization solutions in the Aerospace, Defense and Forestry sectors.  The company is headquartered in Canada and operates globally in Europe, Australia, and the United States. . CAE's work in the field of real-time visual systems includes the development of the MAXVUE family of image generators, the Medallion image generator currently being developed jointly with Sogitec Industries, the Personal Computer Image Generator (PC-IG), as well as the Integrated Visual Database Environment (IVDE), a software package that offers easy access to a suite of fast, user-friendly database development tools that allow users to generate and update databases for CAE's MAXVUE image generators more quickly and efficiently.  Using Windows NT as the operating system, the Integrated Visual Database Environment makes it possible for database builders to create detailed databases using cost-effective, off-the-shelf PC's. In collaboration with Sogitec, CAE is providing data translation capabilities to and from STF for use in the EuroFighter program.Object Raku Technology, Inc. brings expertise in the area of visualization for urban mission planning.. The Sextant Virtual Warfighting Tool (VWT) is a Windows platform application, and has been used in the automated construction of dense urban environments from standard U.S. National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency  (NGA) and commercial GIS data, as well as environments covering larger areas, for lower echelon military mission planning, and individual and small unit rehearsal and training.  The rapid terrain generation and modification capabilities of the current Sextant VWT software will be enhanced by the ability to output to an interchange format, making the visual and non-visual attributes of the scenes available for a wide variety of other simulation and command/control products. . Object Raku will infuse its urban modeling expertise and the accompanying use of SEDRIS technology to represent a detailed model of the urban environment, reinforcing the strength of the SEDRIS-based representation.  Using SEDRIS to describe an urban environment may also point out areas for improvement in SEDRIS technology to more effectively represent aspects of the urban environment useful in mission planning and battle-tracking application, as well as in command and control, where SEDRIS technology has been used in limited areas yet it has been shown to be of value..Object Raku's corporate plans include a long-term commitment to a full SEDRIS standards compliant output module from Sextant VWT.  Additional SEDRIS-related activities include the creation of support files for use by the SEDRIS to Compact Terrain Database (CTDB) / Multi-Elevation Structures (MES) converter, to support rapid generation of terrain databases from standard GIS data for use in immersive and mobile simulations..In addition, Object Raku plans to include a SEDRIS transmittal read capability for VWT, so a user could start from a database defined elsewhere, and modify it within VWT, to support the mission planning cycle.  Also of interest to Object Raku is the use of SEDRIS technology in the C4ISR domain, as a mechanism for sharing information about the environmental data required in 'real time' systems.  Sextant VWT bridges the modeling and simulation and C4ISR domains, since it is used for mission planning and mission execution (the battle tracking function) in the ground based arena.  In support of this, investigating XML in the context of SEDRIS is also of interest, since the C4ISR community is interested in using an XML-based encoding for the interchange of their data, as is the geo-spatial community with the Geography Markup Language. France:Sogitec Industries S.A., a subsidiary of the Dassault Aviation Group, is the producer of the APOGEE / MEDALLION real-time image generators, and of the database generation software SINDBAD..Over the years, Sogitec has been very active in fully interfacing SINDBAD with the Standard Simulator Data Base (SSDB) Interchange Format (SIF) and promoting the use of SIF in France..Due to the capabilities of SEDRIS technology, Sogitec is now studying the mapping of its SINDBAD proprietary formats to and from SEDRIS.  In addition, as part of their involvement in the EuroFighter program, Sogitec has been working with CAE in the production and consumption of STF data. OKTAL has been involved in the SEDRIS project since February 1999, when the French Ministry of Defense assigned OKTAL the responsibility to develop an interface between their current data base format used in training simulation (the French variation of SIF) and SEDRIS.  The software implementation of the Interface is now under development based on a mapping document between SIF and SEDRIS. Since then, OKTAL has extended its work in the SEDRIS technology, and is involved in the following projects, research subjects, or internal developments.OKTAL is overseeing the collection of all the needs of the French M&S community in terms of sensors and atmosphere modeling systems, and analyzing how SEDRIS can respond to these particular needs.OKTAL has developed a partnership with Aerospatiale that consists of analyzing their needs of database interoperability and correlation on their different training simulators, and analyzing the SEDRIS capabilities in response to these types of problems.OKTAL is completing the mapping between SDM (the OKTAL native data base format) and SEDRIS.OKTAL is involved in road traffic simulation, and therefore is analyzing the possibilities of using SEDRIS technology in this field, especially from a topology point of view.OKTAL is also involved in the development of a set of software tools with the aim to solve the problem of interoperability of source data in France between the different technical centers.Thales Training & Simulation (TT&S) – see UK.Germany:Rheinmetall Defence Electronics GmbH (formerly STN ATLAS Elektronik GmbH) has been involved and participated in SEDRIS development for many years.  In 2003 Rheinmetall Defence Electronics performed a contract from the Bundeswehr Geographic Information Service to analyze the data handling process for terrain data in simulation systems.  The study was based on the premise that the official data sets used in the diverse simulators are not sharable between systems.  These data sets, in general, have to be preprocessed (corrected, enhanced and modified, standardized) to a great extent.  The result is that the necessary “improvements” make the data sets unusable, for example by another simulation system.  This, of course, leads to higher cost and delay in projects.The task was to analyze the data needs of the different simulators, more precisely their database generation processes, and to mirror this against the available data sets.  Based on this analysis, the task was to find the gaps and then to provide a concept for improving the data quality such that different systems that need enriched data sets would only have to correct, add, or modify a small fraction.  These improved data sets will be established, stored and made available at a centralized system in the German Army.  This will be done to enable multiple use of improved data sets and to reduce parallel work done previously in the different simulation systems.One major task was the analysis to find a “data container” usable for all data customers to hold the overlapping data requirements.  The data model chosen for this was the SEDRIS DRM and EDCS, as these definitions proved to be outstanding in all aspects in comparison with existing military standards like DIGEST or new developments such as GML.  After the preprocessing workflow, the data is kept in the SSDB, the source simulation database.  The improved data sets will be made available as transformed database, TDB, to all target systems via the format of SEDRIS STF.  Out of this TDB the diverse database generation systems of the different simulators produce the final real time databases, RTDB.The proposed system, called SGDZ-H (Simulationsgeländezentrum–Heer) will be established in two phases.  The Geographic Information Service has already started the development of a new GeoInfo database with a new object catalogue, and resolutions up to 1:25k.  In phase one the primary core system of the SGDZ-H will provide the improved data sets for all simulation customers.  This process will be handled for constructive and for virtual reality data sets grouped separately as a result of the analysis of the workflows.  To improve the overall efficiency, in Phase 2 the generation of the target system databases will be included in the whole process.  This will lead to a more effective use of similar know-how in the data preparation part, before the STF distribution and the specific data treatment in the target system database generation systems.In addition to these activities, Rheinmetall Defence Electronics has also participated on the German standardization team (DIN) for the international standardization of SEDRIS. Israel:BVR Systems is an established Israeli high-tech company founded in 1986.  The company develops, manufactures, and markets an extended product line of off-the-shelf simulation and training systems.  BVR provides a quick response to unique solution requests for air, naval or ground military simulation systems to a diversified worldwide customer base.  BVR has utilized the SEDRIS technologies and converters to meet their customer needs in data translation.Italy:DATAMAT is specialized in the development and supply of mission critical projects and solutions, and is involved in the following markets:Bank Finance & Insurances Telecommunication Defence Aerospace & Environment Public Administration & Healthcare Industry & Technologies DATAMAT is currently engaged in several European projects in the field of M&S, funded by the European Ministries of Defense (MoD), in particular:EUCLID RTP 11.13 - Realizing the Potential of Synthetics Environments in Europe EUCLID 11.21 - SYNFUL - Giving intelligence to the Computer Generated Forces (CGF) EUCLID 11.18 - STRATOS - Investigating how the Joint Theater Level Simulation (JTLS) product can be used for the exigencies of the European MoDs In each of these projects the benefits of having a common interoperable format for Federation Scenario and Conceptual Model design has revealed a crucial technology gap, and a need for SEDRIS.Korea:Korean Game Development Institute (KGDI), Electronic and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI), and Korea Culture and Contents Agency (KOCCA), have worked together with industry and academic partners to establish a Korea SEDRIS Forum.  The objectives of the forum are to use SEDRIS technology in (1) applications to technical areas represented by computer online games, geographic information systems, 3-D animation, and computer-aided design; (2) adopting SEDRIS standards as Korean National Standards; (3) education and training; and (4) applied technology development for related industry sectors.  Specifically, the Korea SEDRIS Forum is sponsored by the Korean Standards Association and KGDI.Toward achieving the above objectives the Forum is working to host the 1st Asia SEDRIS Conference, form relationships with other domestic technical forums – initially by hosting a joint 3-D Technology Seminar, offer a SEDRIS technology education course, and provide free 3-D data translation services on the Forum’s website.The Forum’s projects currently include the following developments:  A technical reference model and standard profile for the game industry (KGDI); An online game data interchange format plan (ETRI); A SEDRIS 3-D war game engine (Agency for Defense Development); A direct STF production tool (Inha University); A 3-D virtual factory (Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology); and 3-D data translation tools (CoDIC – a leading Forum industry partner).Netherlands:TNO Physics and Electronics Laboratory (TNO-FEL) is part of the Netherlands Organisation of Applied Scientific Research (TNO) - the independent knowledge organization that builds a bridge between fundamental know-how and the everyday practices of government authorities and the business community.TNO-FEL envisages a strategic relationship with government authorities and the business community.  The institute's products and services cover the entire societal “information chain”, from the collection of information (image, audio and data), through the transportation and processing of information, to its use and security.Within the operations of TNO-FEL four main technology fields can be distinguished:Operations Research and Business Management Command & Control and Simulation Smart Sensor Solutions Observation Systems These main fields are addressed by their corresponding research departments of the same name.  Currently, one important TNO-FEL activity is a research project that is evaluating how data from a variety of sources (such as imagery, GIS, sensors, 3D models) can be fused together to provide a common database.  This database will then be used by a number of applications dealing with visualization, analysis, forward observer, and sensor simulation.  The evaluation and use of SEDRIS technologies, in particular the EDCS and the DRM, as well as providing translations to and from STF, is a key part of the project.Spain:Indra is interested in using spatial data standards, specifically to respond to acquisition requirements from M&S Programs.  Indra, as participant in the EuroFighter2000 - ASTA (Aircrew Synthetic Training Aid) program, provides the Data Base Generation System (DBGS). . The DBGS is used to import appropriate source data, process it, and generate the necessary databases and object modeling for the ASTA.  Moreover, it will be able to reuse existing databases supplied in SIF to minimize database generation costs.  The respective national mapping agencies, commercial data suppliers, national EW-support units, and intelligence agencies supply the source data for the databases.  The DBGS concept requires interchange mechanisms to be defined for the four types of reference data, namely source data set, ground truth database, model library, and image library.  The interchange mechanism needs to be appropriate to the type of data to which it is applied.  In all cases, the data interchange format or mechanism must be an open standard, such as SEDRIS.Sweden:Swedish Defence Research Agency, FOI, Swedish Defence Materiel Administration, FM: The use of an international and established system for environment description is being examined as part of studies to transform the Swedish Geographic Information (GeoInfo) infrastructure.  SEDRIS technology is part of that evaluation.  The initial focus is on the method of capturing geographic and environmental information in “mapping specification” supported by complete and unambiguous coding mechanisms.Currently the GSD (Geografiska Sverigedata) system is used for environmental data representation.  A study is underway to develop a mapping from GSD to EDCS, along with supporting tool development, and to investigate the use of the emerging EDCS international standard.  This effort is being evaluated against the results of a recent environmental data survey that showed the need for more and “better” data.  Use of new data sources must also support distributed simulation applications across international exercise and cooperation.United Kingdom:DSTL (Defence Science and Technology Laboratory) is a new scientific organization within the MoD, and focuses on the needs of the Ministry of Defense and the Government.  One of the early adopters of the SEDRIS technologies, DTSL (and its predecessor DERA, the Defence Evaluation & Research Agency) has conducted and supported the analysis and evaluation of using SEDRIS technologies in various applications, including a common database development and repository system.Thales Training & Simulation (TT&S): The degree to which SEDRIS has been used in the production of multi-sensor databases for Thales Training & Simulation simulators is influenced by two factors.  One is whether SEDRIS has been specified for the contract, and the other is the types of image generator on which the database has to run.  To date, SEDRIS has been specified for the following simulators contracts awarded to TT&S:Tornado GR4 fast jetNimrod maritime reconnaissance aircraftEurofighter Typhoon fast jetTACTIS armoured infantry/Leopard 2 tank battalionsThe visual systems for these programs consist of E&S Harmony for Tornado and Nimrod, CAE Medallion for Eurofighter Typhoon and ThalesView for TACTIS.  For Tornado and Nimrod, the SEDRIS requirement is to provide an import/export capability to enable the database to be re-used on other simulators.For Eurofighter Typhoon, the contractual requirement is similar to Tornado and Nimrod, namely import/export to enable the reuse of databases.  SEDRIS technology, however, is also being applied to coordinate conversion and database verification.  The SRM API has been found suitable for converting an array of Local Tangent Space Euclidean (LTSE, sometimes called LTP) database files (similar in concept to GCS) to a single LTSE database with a common origin.  TT&S is not responsible for the coordinate conversion task, but has proposed the SRM API solution to the organization in the consortium that is responsible.  For database verification, it is planned to use SEE-IT and other SEDRIS tools to verify the STF.  Also related to the Eurofighter program, CAE has released a version of their SINDBAD tool that exports geographic level data to a SEDRIS transmittal.  This is currently under evaluation.The Tactical Indoors Simulation System (TACTIS) for the Royal Netherlands Army also requires that terrain databases be delivered in SEDRIS to enable database reuse on comparable training systems.  Thales software is being developed to enable the delivery of databases to the customer.  This software development is an extension of the prototype BBD3/SEDRIS software that was developed in 2000 as part of a UK MoD’s SEDRIS evaluation work.  The tools themselves will also be provided.TT&S and the BSI (British Standards Institute) have been very active in the development of the SEDRIS standards through ISO/IEC.United States:3D Pipeline performs product design and production of games, drivers, image processing tools, specialty applications and contract research.In addition, 3D Pipeline Corporation has been doing software and art development work for the Institute of Creative Technology, Air Force Research Laboratories, Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command, and the Army Research Institute.  They are interested in using and promoting the use of open standards, since most of the data they currently receive is a mixture of abnormal formats..SEDRIS allows attention to be focused on their visual-simulation problems at hand, rather than the support of a large variety of disparate formats.  This allows 3D Pipeline to deliver solutions to their government customers faster and more cost effectively. Accent Geographic. has been involved with SEDRIS technologies for more than five years, and has been instrumental in the successful development and implementation of the SEDRIS software development kits and their releases.  In addition, Accent Geographic has produced sample data sets, 3D models, databases, and documents that demonstrate the use and applicability of SEDRIS.Accent Geographic specializes in the application of its extensive visualization expertise to such areas as geographic information systems, human animation, 3D modeling, disaster routing and dispatching services, mapping and navigation systems, environmental database conversion, and GPS data processing and integration with desktop and PDA systems.AcuSoft, Inc. specializes in the design and implementation of software systems within the distributed simulation environment.  Its primary areas of proficiency include real time visual systems, after action review systems, distributed simulation applications, and scenario design tools.  AcuSoft has developed a number of powerful tools and utilities that are widely used in the simulation market.  An inherent part of AcuSoft tools is the reliance and use of environmental data.  As a result, AcuSoft has been actively involved with SEDRIS technologies since 1997, and provides import and export capabilities for SEDRIS transmittals through its well-known application, the Side-by-Side Viewer.AcuSoft has also been involved in the development, implementation, and testing of the core SEDRIS technologies, including the implementation of the SEDRIS API.  In addition, AcuSoft has been involved in the development of several SEDRIS tools and utilities, such as the SEDRIS Transmittal Browser and the CTDB to STF converter.Evans and Sutherland Computer Corporation (E&S) was one of the earliest SEDRIS associates (May 1996).  E&S involvement includes enhancing and testing the SEDRIS Data Representation Model and Environmental Data Coding Specification.  E&S supports the notion that the SEDRIS Data Representation Model is now the most robust definition of environmental representation available.  E&S continues to support the SEDRIS strategy, and continues as an industry leader in SEDRIS technologies.  E&S plans include being a content added provider as well as a consumer of SEDRIS databases for virtual as well as constructive simulations.  Evans & Sutherland is already a primary producer and consumer of SEDRIS databases for the US-CATT and UK-CATT programs.JRM Technologies, Inc. (JRM) is an industry leader in advanced sensor simulation and modeling technologies, and has been providing modeling and simulation design support to SEDRIS in the area of signature synthesis, atmospherics, and sensor effects.  The company has helped improve the SEDRIS DRM and EDCS to expand the capture of sensor-related natural environment attribution and properties, so that SEDRIS transmittals can better support sensor simulation.  JRM also completed a mapping document that maps the Night Vision & Electronic Sensors Directorate (NVESD) "Paint the Night" (PTN) IR simulation database classes and objects to SEDRIS.  Their SigSim and Material Property-based modeling rely on EDCS and SEDRIS-based concepts.Lockheed Martin Simulation, Training & Support has been a SEDRIS associate since 1996, and has been actively involved in data model development and landmass data sets interchange.  Data sets consumed include: U.S. Close Combat Tactical Trainer Primary 1, S1000, and Special Operations Forces (SOF) Synthetic Theater of War (STOW).  Datasets produced include: Salisbury Plain, Alaska, and SOF STOW.  The SEDRIS production / consumption work was initially prototyped with the TARGET database generation system (DBGS).  The current SEDRIS work is enhancing the production / consumption to work with the next generation DBGS called STARGen.Lockheed Martin Tactical Defense Systems (LMTDS) has been participating in the SEDRIS project since July of 1996.  LMTDS has supported the SEDRIS goals in the establishment of an improved simulation / spatial data model, and a data interchange standard that can be used to express terrain, feature, texture, atmosphere, and ocean data between government, contractor, and commercial applications.  LMTDS's specific SEDRIS task has been to develop a SEDRIS API for LMTDS' database structure, as used in the Special Operations Forces Aircrew Training System (SOFATS) at Hurlburt Field.ProLogic Inc. has expertise in enterprise information technology, visualization, and systems engineering, and has been involved in developing SEDRIS-based value-added applications since 2000.  Through their expertise in the use of geographic information systems, ProLogic developed SAGE, which produces SEDRIS transmittals from ESRI’s Arc-based products.SAGE is an ArcGIS extension that exports feature layers, triangulated irregular networks (TINs), elevation grids, thematic rasters, and image rasters into an STF file.  SAGE has an intuitive user interface, supports EDCS classification and attribution through extensible modules, and maps ArcGIS coordinate systems into the SRM’s spatial reference frames.  With SAGE, SEDRIS producers can use ArcGIS's extensive data import, editing and analysis functionality to prepare GIS data, and then easily create SEDRIS transmittals.Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC) has been involved with SEDRIS since its inception.  Now, as a member of the SEDRIS Core Technology Team, SAIC assists in the direct implementation and maintenance of core SEDRIS products.  SAIC has been involved in the development, implementation, update, and maintenance of the SEDRIS API, the STF, and several utilities that assist SEDRIS users in their applications.  Examples of these utility applications include the EDCS Query Tool, the STF to CTDB converter, the DTED to STF converter, and the Focus application.Silicon Graphics, Inc. (SGI) provided hardware and software support during critical demonstrations and SEDRIS interchange experiments.Terrain Experts Inc. (TERREX) is a privately held software company that develops, markets, and supports software for real-time 3D terrain generation.  Through their Terra Vista toolset’s DART™ (Database Automatic Re-use Technology), TERREX provides import and export capabilities for SEDRIS transmittals.  TERREX has several high profile customers using SEDRIS at the present time. TerraSim, Inc. has been a SEDRIS Associate since 1999.  Their corporate commitment to a full SEDRIS output capability has been evident for all versions of TerraTools 1.2 and above.  Their SEDRIS Mapping Document for TerraSim's Tiled Scene Graph (TSG) database format has been continuously updated to support modifications to TSG and their impact on SEDRIS transmittals produced by TerraTools.Default values for EDCS attributes and classifications are provided for a large number of common cartographic features and source data files including those produced by the United States Geological Survey (USGS) and the National Geospatial Intelligence Agency (NGA).  TerraTools users can build their own custom feature mappings using the TerraTools Appearance Editor, TAEdit..Veridian, Inc. has worked on a project named SEDRIS Oceanographic and Atmospheric Products for the Naval Air Warfare Center - Training Systems Division.  In the first phase of this project Veridian has been developing a SEDRIS interface for two existing applications, Vis5d and FeyRay.  Data from the Tactical Ocean Wide Area Network (TOWAN) will be stored in STF using existing tools.  Veridian will be developing a recompiler to accept data from STF and produce data for Vis5d / FeyRay to use in generation of Sound Velocity Profiles.In the next phase of the project, Veridian plans to integrate the system to provide for automated conversion of the TOWAN data (using the latest version of STF and EDCS). The long-term goal of the effort is to provide additional sources of oceanographic and atmospheric data via STF.International standardization Having a standard mechanism to accomplish something considered an infrastructure technology serves two very useful roles.  First, it frees the user to concentrate on the more important application-level development, since there is no need to devote time and resources to designing the infrastructure.  Second, it makes it possible for the users to communicate effectively and unambiguously through a standard mechanism.  This, in turn, makes interoperability possible.Another important role of standards, and particularly international standards, is to subject the technology to scrutiny by a wider, more diverse audience.  This was the primary reason that SEDRIS elected to pursue the development of international standards.  The review by the international community has been invaluable and has made a significant contribution to the way the technologies are documented in the specifications.Finally, there are many in the community who look for the “badge of approval”, when it comes to embracing infrastructure technologies.  This is another reason the standardization of SEDRIS technologies were sought.ISO / IEC: In October 1999, SEDRIS began the process of establishing international standards through the combined International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC).  SEDRIS technologies have been assembled into the following specification and language binding standard development efforts, and are currently in development through the ISO / IEC:SEDRIS Multi-Part Specification ISO/IEC 18023Part 1: Functional Specification ISO/IEC 18023-1Part 2: Abstract Transmittal Format ISO/IEC 18023-2Part 3: Transmittal Format Binary Encoding ISO/IEC 18023-3SEDRIS Language Bindings ISO/IEC 18024Part 4: ISO C ISO/IEC 18024-4Environmental Data Coding Specification (EDCS) ISO/IEC 18025EDCS Language Bindings ISO/IEC 18041Part 4: ISO C ISO/IEC 18041-4Spatial Reference Model (SRM) ISO/IEC 18026SRM Language Bindings ISO/IEC 18042Part 4: ISO C ISO/IEC 18042-4ISO / IEC Joint Technical Committee (JTC) 1 (Information Technology) assigned the standards development work to its Subcommittee (SC) 24 (Computer Graphics and Image Processing), which created a new Working Group 8 (Environmental Representation) to be the focal point for SEDRIS standardization.The development of ISO / IEC standards is a formal, structured, and thorough process.  There are several routes to becoming an International Standard.  It is not the purpose of this paper to describe these.  In the case of the SEDRIS-based standards, each has gone through a series of working drafts, then committee draft(s) resulting in a final committee draft, final draft international standard, and, ultimately become an international standard.  Once a document reaches the committee draft stage, it is subjected to balloting by the national body organizations.  A document is then balloted at each successive stage, with each national body casting one vote.  Currently, all eight SEDRIS standards are at or one stage away from the final draft international standard stage.SISO: The ISO / IEC role is to develop and establish standards.  It does not involve itself in implementations.  One of main goals of the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) is to promote interoperability.  SISO accomplishes this by promoting and providing standard implementations such as coordinate conversion and transformation modules (the SRM conversions software), environmental data codes and dictionaries (the EDCS data base and interfaces).  It also provides reports, mapping documents, or information important to the SISO membership and its activities.SISO established two product development groups (PDGs) to review, promote, and provide SEDRIS-developed technologies as SISO products.  The PDGs have made input into the ISO / IEC process through comments on the subject standards, which were forwarded through the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) International Committee for Information Technology Standardization (INCITS) Committee H3.NATO 034Standards: The NATO M&S Group has established a technology project area to process the SEDRIS technology standards for adoption as NATO Standardization Agreements (STANAGS).   This process will begin for each of the SEDRIS ISO/IEC standards when they reach the approved Final Draft International Standard (FDIS) phase with only final processing remaining to achieve International Standard status.  The EDCS and its C Language Binding should begin this process this summer (2004).  The other SEDRIS technical components will follow in early 2005.  SummaryThe development and evolution of SEDRIS technologies have been conducted through an open process in which the international community has actively participated.  The use of open and common standards, the freely available and open implementations, and the development of practical tools has proven to be of significant value to the organizations that deal with environmental data.  The SEDRIS technologies, and the corresponding international standards, are the culmination of many collaborative efforts in the international community.  The utility and application of SEDRIS technologies and the work being done with them across the globe is a strong indication that the development and promotion of these technologies continues to provide opportunities to improve the state of the art and to pay dividends to all participants.About the authorsFARID MAMAGHANI is project manager and technical director of the SEDRIS project.  He has been involved in modeling, simulation, and systems engineering for more than 20 years.PAUL G. FOLEY is an Information Systems Engineer with Quantum Research International and is currently the DMSO Environmental Representation Technology Area Lead.  A retired U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Officer, he has over 30 years experience in Army topographic and digital geospatial system operations.  He holds advanced degrees in Photogrammetry from Purdue University and R&D Systems Management from the University of Southern California.  He is a graduate of the U.S. Army War College.