Distributed Simulation in Total Ship Design for Naval VesselsDavide Tozzi, Aldo Zini, Riccardo Necrisi, Andrea LommiCetena S.p.A. – Italian Ship Research CentreVia Ippolito d’Aste, 516121 Genova - ItalyE-mail: aldo.zini@cetena.itFrancesco Perra, Aldo GuagnanoOrizzonte Sistemi Navali S.p.A.Piazza della Vittoria, 816129 Genova - ItalyE-mail: francesco.perra@orizzontesn.itKeywords:Total Ship Design, Virtual Reality Based Simulations, HLAABSTRACT: Simulation activities are useful for a wide range of purposes; they can be used as an instrument to assist the design of new systems, to better understand the behaviour of an existing system, for training and so on. In this framework, distributed simulations become particularly useful, especially if the purpose consists in reproducing the behaviour of a complex system composed by a great number of devices.The VISION project (VIrtual Ship SimulatION) is based on a distributed simulation performed using High Level Architecture (HLA), a standard framework that gives different simulators the possibility of working jointly in a fully synthetic environment. This project represents an innovative approach for Italian Naval shipyard in the design and construction of new warships. The main target of VISION project is to use a Federation composed by different Federates representing the ship's behaviour as a tool for a Total Ship Design approach.For this purpose, pre-existing simulations featuring ship motion, manoeuvrability, propulsion control, radar and combat systems as well as vulnerability simulation components have been networked using HLA architecture.At present, a simulation scenario called Early Prototype has been set up in order to perform the test and integration phase of the Federation.In this paper a description of the Federation developed for the Early Prototype scenario is given, focusing the attention on the Federates characteristics, performance and implementation strategies. 1. IntroductionIn the naval field, simulation is widely used for the design of a great number of components and systems in order to test their behaviour when they still have to be built [1]. A single simulation can be used to test the performance and limits of a particular component applying external world-like input. This aspect represents a limitation, deriving from an excessive simplification of the interaction with external entities. In order to avoid errors in evaluating  the systems under test, it is strictly mandatory to consider as many components of the environment as possible, for giving a meaningful representation of the scenario the system shall work into. From the simulation point of view, this consideration usually reflects into the use of distributed and accurate simulators representing these entities working together in a common simulation scenario.Very often, simulators of these components already exist, potentially developed for different tasks or as stand-alone modules, but their structure does not allow to use them as part of a network of simulators, unless modifications are taken for allowing interoperability capabilities.Unfortunately, the modifications necessary to use them in joint cooperation with other modules (thus building up a simulation) are often pretty much expensive, both in terms of cost and time. In some cases it may be easier to implement a completely new simulator rather than modifying an existing one.In other words, traditional simulation models often lack of two desirable properties: reusability and interoperability.The High Level Architecture (HLA) is a standard framework that supports simulations composed of different simulation components.Nowadays, this architecture, is being used by all NATO Partners: IEEE standards and rules are well established in the NATO community (HLA rules, Interface Specification, Object Model Template, etc.) [2] and are used for building up standardized simulations. HLA was implemented for satisfying the two previously mentioned properties: reusability and interoperability. Reusability, as the name suggests, means that the simulation model component can be reused in different simulation scenarios and applications. Interoperability implies the ability to mix up simulation models (often on a geographically distributed network) for delivering a complex and often real-time based simulation. When a simulator is designed in compliance to HLA rules, it is called Federate; a set of Federates working together exchanging data through the Run-Time Infrastructure (RTI) is called Federation.Thanks to this architecture it is possible to insert the simulation inside the design phase of the ship and related systems in order to study a wide range of problematics prior to ship's construction. The VISION project aims at exploiting the Total Ship Design approach in the design of new warships. This approach is based on the integration of all the main components of the ship in order to study the Overall Effectiveness, rather than the single subsystems performance [3].2. VISION projectThe naval platform design, Surveillance system, Combat System, C4I and logistic, request many investments in terms of money and time. In particular, during the feasibility study the goal is to optimise the relationship between vessel cost and performance.This approach analyses the scenarios the ship shall cope with and the missions the ship will be involved in. In this context the simulation is of paramount importance for devising the design variables that better address the critical aspects of the project, in order to estimate the MOP-Measurements Of Performance and the Operative effectiveness into several contexts.The integration of all systems by means of HLA and the developing of an environment representing the external world guarantees interoperability and reusability. This simulation architecture is called Synthetic Environment and provides a support for the ship design, from initial specifications to planned maintenance.The goals of this simulation project are to:Reduce risks owing to a military exercise.Reduce costs for a military exercise.Optimize the ship project for a particular mission Evaluate the ship's systems performanceIn our case, the VISION Project will be used to define the impact of the platform's features on:Combat SystemRadar – Sonar – Missiles – Guns – ECM –Helicopter – UAV – UUV – TorpedoC4ISRCommand & Control – Communication – Computer – Intelligence - Surveillance & ReconnaissanceRules, Doctrines and mission plannedHuman interface3. VISION's main targetThe main goal of VISION project is to evaluate ship's performance by means of an architecture using an infrastructure where simulation models, representing Naval systems and functions, can work together.The simulation requirements are the following:HLA compliant, COTS and GOTS based to integrate a total range of Naval Applications.Real time and "As Fast As Possible" simulations.2D visualization and maps: object animation, geographical data and sensor tracks.3D visualization: object animation (ship Model, Missiles, etc.), from different points of view.The final federation (Figure 1) shall be composed by the following set of federates:C4I system, HCISurface, Underwater, Aircraft, Seaskimmer missiles, Ground based, HMI.External WorldCooperative unitsChaff, Jammer, DecoysExecution ManagerEnvironmentRadar, ESM, Sonar, IRVisualization&Maps, 3D VisualizationReport systemShipAntenna Farm, CommunicationsDamage AssessmentHelicopter, U.A.V., U.U.V., Small ShipsASCM, Torpedos, SAM, GUN medium calicer, GUN larger caliber. Figure 1 - Final VISION FederationThe task of the VISION project is to simulate the naval functions and performance related to the defence against air missiles (sea skimmer) and sub surface missiles (torpedos). In particular VISION objectives can be organized into three main groups:Analysis of the impact of the platform over Combact System (CS) & C4ISR.Evaluation of Surveillance Systems and Combact System.Estimation and verification of doctrines, tactics and procedures.In this context, in order to reach these targets, it's possible to consider the following case studies:AAW - Anti Air WarfarASW - Anti Submarine WarfareESPRO - EScort and PROtectionSLOP - Support Land OperationThe first phase consists in the realization of a federation called Early Prototype, whose target shall be the assessment and verification of HLA approach for AAW mission.4. Early PrototypeThe Early Prototype is the first release of VISION project. It shall be used for sudying the first of the four previously described missions, i.e. AAW (Anti Air Warfare). The scenario shall be the following:The Ship shall operate in open sea (in a first case the ship shall be simulated statically, then the Ship Motion shall be introduced together with Ship Maneuverability).The ship shall be attacked by one or more Sea-Skimmers coming from different directions. The missiles shall be launched at different times.The Air Surveillance shall be performed by means of a multifunctional radar on the ship and by ESM sensors.Hard Kill reaction shall consist in SAM launch and GUN activation.Soft kill reaction shall consist in the activation of CHAFF (distraction and seduction) and JAMMING (barrage noise, range gate pull off).The Project scope shall be to examine all of the critical features about ship's defense systems integrated with naval platform. Performance of Hard Kill and Soft Kill engagement on seaskimmers attacks shall be analysed.The Federates composing this simulation scenario shall be the following:ShipThis Federate simulates the ship phisical behavior: 3D Ship Model (platform) , Ship Maneuverability, Ship Navigation and Ship Motion. Ship Motion module calculates the ship's degrees of freedom from the RAOs (Response Amplitude Operators) according to: EMBED Equation.3     (1)where EMBED Equation.3 is the Jonswap spectrum height corresponding to the i-th considered sea frequencyEMBED Equation.3 and EMBED Equation.3 are the i-th frequency RAO amplitude and phase coefficients of the X degree of freedom, respectively, determined by the sea state (provided by the Environment Federate) and the ship’s heading with respect to the wavefront angle and finally EMBED Equation.3 is a random phase coefficient.Weapons : GUN and SAMWeapons System Federates model the behaviour of a particular weapon system. The two Federates include Missile systems (SAM Missile) and Gun (Medium Caliber).Sensors : Radar EMPAR & ESMThe Sensors System Federates represent the behaviour of two corresponding sensors systems. These two Federates include Radar EMPAR (a model of a multifunctional radar whose tasks are surface and air surveillance and hostile anti ship missile engagement) and Electronic Support Measure that represents an on board passive sensor system.Countermeasure System Federates : Chaff & JammerA countermeasure system federate models the behaviour of a countermeasure system, including Chaff System and Jammer System.Own-Ship Damage Assessment FederateA damage federate simulates the effects of weapon impact and detonation upon a platform and its systems and provides damage notification messages to the other federates. The Damage Assessment Federate also performs collision detection calculation, for providing the necessary information to the damage module in terms of collision point, weapon's velocity and weapon's orientation.Command and Control System FederateA command and control system federate models the behaviour of command and control system components, including data fusion, threat evaluation, weapon assignment and fire control. A command and control system federate may represent the complete functionality of a combat system, or a subset of it. The principal role of the command and control system federate is to provide the way a human operator exercises control over the many systems composing a complex entity, such as a maritime combatant. To give effect to operator intentions, the command and control system federate issues system control messages and launch messages.Environment FederateIt contains geographical information (Sea surface and Air) of the simulated mission scenario. These data shall influence the ship platform motion, the surveillance system, the weapon system performance and the 3D visualization of the simulation scenario.Sea Skimmer FederateSea Skimmer Federate has been introduced to simulate both a sea skimmer missile and the own seeker. The latter shall not be switched on immediately after the launch to avoid it being quickly detected by the ship ESM. Once activated, the environmental conditions assume a relevant role in the target detection process.Antenna Farm FederateThe role of the Antenna Farm federate within the Virtual Ship Simulator is to provide information about the EM interference of the antennas installed on the Naval Platform.Visualization 2D&Maps and 3D Federates.Visualization Federates will display a two and three-dimensional view of the scenario. For the 3D visualization, a commercial software for Virtual Reality simulations, has been used in order to guarantee a representation of the whole scenario as similar as possible to the reality, including environmental conditions and sea effects  (Figure 2).Figure 2 - 3D visualization of the VISION scenarioExecution ManagerThis Federate provides all the initialization parameters to the federates composing the federation, in order to set the simulation scenario of interest. Initialization phase is performed using HLA interactions; in this way Execution Manager Federate can send and receive interactions of  specific classes containing the initial data used by the federates for their initializazion and synchronization phases.4.1  VISLABThe Early Prototype Federation has been set up in the CETENA Virtual Reality Laboratory, called VisLab. The purpose of the VisLab is carrying out virtual prototyping and simulation with high integration facilities between local but also remote simulations. In order to realize an environment similar to the bridge of a ship, a phisical mock-up of the control deck has been integrated in the Ship Federate (Figure 3). In this way, Ship Federate performs its calculations directly from the input generated by the control deck, that provides an efficient interface for the operator who has to manoeuvre the ship. EMBED Imaging.Document  Figure 3 – Ship Control Deck physical mock-up     In front of the physical mock-up, a half-cylindrical 5-meters wide screen has been placed, thus boosting the immersivity of the simulation. The screen allows a wide angle visualisation of the world outside the bridge, giving the sensation of being really on board. A picture of screen and deck mock-up is reported in Figure 4.Figure 4 – A virtual ship in navigationThis visualization system has been used for the realization of the VISION's 3D Visualization Federate.Figure 5 – Visualization of an harbour from the bridge5. ResultsThe Early Prototype's results of interest can be divided in two different groups: Integration of all Federates into the federation and verification of their behaviour with respect to the technical specifications.Examination of all critical features about ship defence system integrated with naval platform.The first objective has been reached by testing the federates in growing groups; a set of classes composed by different groups of federates has been designed in order to perform tests increasing the federation complexity. This structure has allowed to solve integration problems step by step, focusing on different sets of tests.The second goal of the Early Prototype Federation will be using this federation to perform an extensive defence systems' performance evaluation. A more detailed list of results the simulation shall provide is represented by the following:HK defence power: average number of SS destroyed by HK (SAMs & GUNs)SK Distraction Power: average number of SS neutralized by SK (chaff, jammer)Neutralization Power: average number of SS destroyed or neutralized by HK & SKSusceptibility: Probability of enduring at least one hitHits: avarage number of SS hitting the ship5.1 Dead Reckoning AlgoritmsThe execution of the Federation has shown some problems concerning the great number of kinematic attributes updated at each simulation loop. Since the federation is conservatively synchronized, this mechanism causes a decrease in the time advancing of all the federates. This means that a real-time simulation becomes difficult to realize. For this reason a strategy based on Dead Reckoning Algorithms (DRA) has been used in order to reduce the update rate. DRA are simple algorithms that tipically represent kinematics relationship. Their use is the following:Both the publisher and subscriber federates contain a specific DRA for the attributes of interestThe publisher federate updates the kinematic attributes only if the difference between the new simulated value and the predicted one (using DRA) is less than a defined delta.If the subscribing federate does not receive any data, it uses the DRA predicted attributes as new value.This mechanism allows a great reduction of the updated and reflected data and therefore a faster time advancing of the whole federation. In the Early Prototype Federation, this methodology has been used for the realization of a slightly slower than real-time simulation. Thanks to this strategy, the 3D Visualization Federate has rendered the 3D scenario with a frame rate close to 20 frame/sec.6. Conclusions and future workThe use of HLA is an innovative methodology for Total Ship Design approach. This architecture gives the possibility to develop each simulator using accurate mathematical models, keeping safe confidential informations.Another area where this kind of architecture could be useful is training; in fact VISION Federation is ready for man-in-the-loop insertion, and therefore it is possible to analyse different situations also considering the human factor and allowing very interesting studies to be carried out.  Future work in this project will consist on the analysis of the performance issues. Defence systems' performance shall be evaluated using initially the Early Prototype Federation and therefore the final release of the VISION Federation.An interesting point is to study how much the federation slows down as the number of object instances increases and how much of the slow down can be attributed to network latencies or the Run-Time Infrastructure. Moreover, an optimization phase of the whole Federation shall be necessary to obtain a faster visualization for the real-time simulation.Finally a verification, validation and accreditation (VV&A) process is in progress in order to validate each federate and the whole federation. 7. References[1] Nilsson, Per-Olof. 2000. “The digital product model – a valuable tool for shipbuilders and shipowners”. Scandinavian Yearbook of Maritime Technology, 37-38.[2] Department of Defense, 1988. High Level Architecture. Available at  HYPERLINK "http://hla.dmso.mil/" http://hla.dmso.mil/.[3] E.P. Andert Jr. and D. Morgan, Collaborative Virtual Prototyping and Test, Naval Engineers Journal, November 1998, 17 – 23.[4] Kanerva, M. “Virtual Reality – 4D Product Modelling Tool for Efficient Shipbuilding Process”.Author BiographiesALDO ZINI graduated in Electronic Engineering at Genoa University in 1990. Since 1991 he has been working in CETENA dealing with information technologies problems. In particular, he was involved in several projects dealing with I.T. applications in shipbuilding and shipping areas: CAD systems, Neural Networks, Ship Survivability Analysis, Virtual Prototyping, Expert Systems, Database, dynamic WEB sites, technical computational code, graphical interfaces.He is participating to the NATO NG6 Specialist Team on Simulation Based Design and Virtual Prototyping and to the NIAG Sub Group 60 on SBD & VP.He was involved as scientific responsible in several European research Projects, among which HYDROSES and MATSTRUTSES. His present position is Head of the Information Technology Department of CETENA. ANDREA LOMMI received the Laurea Degree in Telecommunications Engineering in 2001 from the University of Genova, discussing a Degree Thesis entitled "Sidelobe Reduction in Sparse Linear Arrays by Genetic Algorithms".Currently, he works for CETENA S.p.A., Information Technologies Department, where he applies Virtual Prototyping and stochastic optimizers to ship design, optimization and performance assessment.His main research interests are Virtual Prototyping, Virtual Reality based Simulations, Adaptive Antenna Arrays, Antenna Arrays Synthesis and Genetic Algorithms.RICCARDO NECRISI graduated in Electrical Engineering in 1999 at University of Genova discussing a Degree Thesis “Electromechanical simulator of Hybrid Vehicle”. He has been working for CETENA since September 2000 in the Information Technology Department. He is now involved in carrying out virtual prototyping and in researching technologies for vrtual reality application.DAVIDE TOZZI graduated in Electronic Engineering in 2001 at the University of Genova, discussing a Degree Thesis entitled “Design and Realization of an intelligent system for ship motion prediction for Landing Period Designator” (D. Sterpi, D. Tozzi). At present he works for CETENA S.p.A., Information Technology Department, where he is working on the application of Virtual Prototyping in ship design and Virtual Reality based Simulations.FRANCESCO PERRA graduated in Electronic Engineering in 1994 at the University of Genova. He worked for 5 years for a communication company called ITALTEL S.p.a in Milan. Since 2001, he has been working for ORIZZONTE S.N. S.p.A., where he is involved on the application of Virtual Prototyping in ship design and Virtual Reality based Simulations.ALDO GUAGNANO graduated in Electronic Engineering in 2002 at the University of Genova, discussing a Degree Thesis entitled "Automatic Speech Recognition based on DSP Motorola ".At present he works for Orizzonte Sistemi Navali S.p.A. - System Simulation Warship Architecture - and he is involved in the implementation of HLA simulators.