Simulation Interoperability in Product DevelopmentAndreas E. RielAVL LIST GmbHHans-List-Platz 1A-8020 Graz, Austria+43-316-787-R944andreas.riel@avl.com Prof. Eugen BrennerInstitute for Technical InformaticsGraz University of TechnologyInffeldgasse 16/IA-8010 Graz, Austria+43-316-873-6402eugen.brenner@tugraz.atKeywords:Virtual Development, Virtual Engineering, Frontloading, Digital Mock-Up, Behavioural Mock-Up, Simulation Interoperability, Meta-Modelling. ABSTRACT: Product Development is going virtual. Industries are facing increasing pressure on product development time and costs. Customers demand for ever more product variants and perfect quality. This situation is particularly present in markets for complex high-tech products like in the automotive area. Automobiles are mechatronic systems whose development process is highly interdisciplinary and innovative. Expensive prototypes have to be built to verify the product’s functions and behaviour. The ultimate aim is to have only one prototype and use it just to verify the results of the simulations. Aside from close-to-reality simulation models, a consistent development environment is needed to drive an effective simulation-based process. Today, the DMU plays this central role in the automotive and aerospace industries. It is, however, only used for design and production, and it contains only the geometric product data. For the target of full product simulation modelling the product’s geometry AND behaviour is essential. The BMU (Behavioural Mock-Up) extends the DMU with the required information using a meta-modelling approach.IntroductionProduct development is facing a fundamental challenge. Most companies are under pressure to bring new products to market in constantly increasing speed, and companies in many sectors must work harder to ensure that they address the needs of narrowing customer segments. These pressures are particularly acute in fast-paced markets, such as those for high-tech, medical, and consumer goods, and in competitive markets for complex products that require large investments and long development times, such as automobiles and airplanes.This paper deals primarily with the two latter mentioned industries, and their simulation-based approach to cut development times and costs while maintaining product quality and serving the market with increasing product variety. It discusses the fundamental technical, political, and social difficulties these industries are facing on their ways to making simulation tools and techniques the core backbone of local and global collaboration in design, calculation, test, and production. Thereby it tries to underline the urgent demand for interface and protocol standards between individual development tools towards the creation of seamless development tool chains and platforms within the typically highly heterogeneous development environments of manufacturers and suppliers. This high need of seamless tool interoperability originates in the fact that the development tasks in both the automotive and the aerospace industries are getting increasingly multi-disciplinary. The strict borderlines between different engineering profiles (like mechanics and electronics) within organizations are no longer applicable, especially when it comes to bringing simulation models into life with the required data and implementation.Moreover, simulation models provide a means to realize the demand for distributed collaboration within an enterprise as well as between manufacturers and suppliers. Also here, standards for the description and the exchange of product and development data turn out to be the most fundamental prerequisites.In this contribution we suggest an approach to a concept for a seamless integration platform that is based on the extension of the Digital Mock-Up (DMU) technique to also cover all the development stages beyond the design. Within such an environment, the DMU of a product serves as the “Digital Master” that provides access to all the related product data, models and dependencies and thus helps project engineers and managers to keep the development process consistent and verifiable. The paper concludes with a discussion and an outlook on both the opportunities and difficulties in bringing the suggested concept to life in existing environments.Front-Loading the Development Process2.1 MotivationAccording to the study “Digital Engineering” of the Fraunhofer IAO [1] the share of virtual prototypes within the aerospace and automotive sector (OEM and suppliers) will increase up to 40% within the next five years, assuming the needed tools and methods for efficient use are available. It is thus required that the modelling and simulation of products based on virtual prototypes will advance in order to effectively enable the insights, optimisation and refinement that is gained from physical prototypes. The target of using virtual prototypes very early in the product creation process is both the reduction and the optimised use of physical prototypes, which are usually very expensive and are manufactured late in the process.  In this context, front-loading denotes the transfer of activities and decisions to the early phases of development by the use of close-to-reality simulation models [2].Additionally, product creation is increasingly globally distributed and the development is highly networked. This fact demands for innovative simulation-centric methods and tools for virtual product creation that make simultaneous distributed engineering possible. One important key to hitting the market is the early integration of customer demands. By using a simulation-based approach, product functions and features can be evaluated and optimised at a very early stage. The flexibility to implement modifications or additions to customer requirements until very late in the product creation process is maximized. Moreover, improved services can be designed and offered which additionally increases the customer satisfaction.2.2 ObjectiveThe key objectives of bringing simulation into all phases of product development are related to the effective use of knowledge in product design and engineering in globally distributed and networked organisations in order to resolve complexity and ambiguity within engineering processes. Moreover, they are concerned with modelling, simulation and test of products regarding their functional and physical behaviours. This allows the anticipation of product performance in a real environment and the preparation of production in the earliest possible stage of the product creation process. Their aim is to advance from pure data exchange to (distributed) engineering collaboration [3].2.3 Current Situation and Relevant StandardsOver the last few years, significant progress has been made in the use of simulation throughout the very early phases of product development. This particularly applies to the automotive and aerospace industries, where the Digital-Mock-Up (DMU) has become state-of-the art [4,5,6]. Representing the geometric shapes of individual parts and assemblies, the DMU typically supports the design and production phases of the product creation process. For the computer-interpretable representation and the exchange of product model data STEP (Standard for the Exchange of Product model data [7,8,9]) has grown to be an established and living standard. To meet the specific needs of the automotive industry, the AP 214 Core Data for Automotive Mechanical Design Processes has been defined [10]. STEP AP 214 describes a data model for the process chain of automotive development from product definition, styling, engineering design, prototyping, production planning etc. to quality control.The parametric data model is usually specified in the UML (Unified Modelling Language, [11]). There are some commonly used systems available for the integration of different CAx data, like ANICA CAx Object Bus (ANalysis of access Interfaces of various CAx Systems) or COLIBRI (COnstraint LInk BRIdge).Facing the need to exchange data of mechatronic products and systems, manufacturers and suppliers are currently driving the mechaSTEP [12] approach, which shall extend STEP to also cover the standardized and tool-independent description of mechanical properties of parts and assemblies. A very complete treatment of this research issue can be found in [13]. An approach to use the DMU as Progress-Mock-Up for knowledge sharing is presented in [14]. In the PDM and PLM areas, standards are still missing. PDM Enabler [15] was one attempt to define a unified external access point to PDM systems, which should make PDM services available to external tools. It has been implemented in selected products and research prototypes, but its real breakthrough is unlikely to happen. An extensive overview over further current and emerging related standards like PDM-Schema, PDTnet and PLM Services can be found in [13].There is one fundamental problem that is inherent to interface standards: Their successful implementation requires the commitment of all the parties that are involved in connecting the relevant tools. Very often, tool manufacturers explicitly deny standards that open their tools for communication with tools from any other manufacturer. Primarily due to cost savings and the high complexities of the individual tools, however, customers are increasingly forced to demand for heterogeneous mixed-manufacturer tool environments.2.5 Relevant ResearchIn the German speaking area there are several institutes and working groups that work on the virtual product engineering with the focus on the integration of heterogeneous CAx- and PDM systems (e.g. the Research Group for Computer Application in Engineering Design at the University of Kaiserslautern, the ITM at the Ruhr-University in Bochum, the Fraunhofer Gesellschaft in Berlin, the DIK at the University of Darmstadt, the Competence Centre “Virtual Vehicle” (Vif) in Graz). World-wide, some well-known relevant institutes are: The Department of Computation at the University of the West of England, Bristol; the IPACT Laboratory at the University of  Southern California; Machine and Vehicle Design at the Chalmers University of Technology in Göteborg.The applications that have been realized until now, can be divided into two groups:The collaboration between different departments of the same company (or between manufacturer and suppliers) that work on different parts of the same product using different CAD-systems (Pro/Engineer, Unigraphics, CATIA or others). Typically, one CAD system is used for developing all parts of the engine compartment while another one is especially optimised for car body development. With the help of CAx integration systems and standards it is possible to e.g carry out DMU examinations with models originating from both CAD systems.The data exchange between software tools of different domains, e.g. CAD-data, Multi Body Simulation-data (e.g. from Matlab-Simulink) or FEM-data (e.g. from NASTRAN) at an early stage of the product development process.The use of DMU and PDM-systems is quite well established in today’s automotive and aerospace industries. Research is being done in the field of a closer integration of CAD-systems into PDM-systems with the target of establishing a platform that paves the way for DMUs to be seamlessly used throughout the processes of vehicle design, development and production. The German iViP project has set some remarkable milestones in this area [16]. Multi-disciplinary modelling and simulation for mechatronic systems have also become major areas of research. We already mentioned mechaSTEP in this context. The Modelica modelling language [17] and the Dymola simulation environment [18] are already today playing key roles in the field of multi-disciplinary simulation.Further projects and organisations that we consider highly relevant for this research are ARTWORK [19], EVEN [20], FIPER [21] and VisiCADE [22].Key Challenges3.1 Knowledge ManagementA tremendous amount of engineering knowledge that is required to create suitable simulation models is empirical and is thus not explicitly available. An effective knowledge management is required to capture this knowledge to make it available within development networks and tools. Very often knowledge management is degraded to information management. However, capturing information and using it to create and represent knowledge are two totally different things.The integration of engineering applications with knowledge management systems still needs to be developed. Present IT-systems do not support tight interoperability and exchange of knowledge and standards between the Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) and its suppliers [23]. 3.2 Integration between CAD/CAE/CATThroughout the product creation process, CAE tools already simulate both the product performance and the processes involved in its fabrication. But the integration of CAD and CAE tools still lack a strong link that would enable the assessment of selected economic and environmental impacts of a product. Today, simulation methods still have limited ability to do full system level simulation where the actually targeted end-user is entirely considered. There is thus a huge dependency on physical prototypes to gain the final product insights and do its refinements.Moreover, a much closer link between CAE and CAT (Computer Aided Testing and Calibration) than exists today is required to use detailed and complex CAE simulation tools and models to create lean models for use in real-time testing environments, which will be the subject of the following subsection. Vice versa, measurement data acquired from such systems can be used to verify and refine CAE models [24].3.3 Simulating MechatronicsIn mechatronic systems like cars and aeroplanes the share of electronics parts is still growing rapidly. Prototype tests with electronic control units involved have to be done in real-time, which means that the systems under control either have to be built in hardware, or have to be simulated in real-time. The latter requires that the involved models can be executed within the time step that is dictated by the fastest electronic control unit in the assembly. With today’s hardware platforms, this requirement disqualifies complex and detailed CAE-models to be used in such test and calibration environments. Instead, dedicated “reduced” models have to be created that both mimic the system under consideration in sufficient detail, and can be executed fast enough for the whole simulation to be done in real-time. Here, the challenge is to keep simulation results reproducible at any time by maintaining the relationships and dependencies among the individual models, their parameters, and the actual simulation data.3.4 Requirements ManagementRequirements management is still dominated by manual and redundant work in company networks. According to the experiences in the software business, however, a consistent requirements management from the earliest phases of the product creation process until its very end is fundamental to the quality of the result. Since they directly influence the final product, requirements coming from both the market and the manufacturer’s strategy are the only assets that are imminent to every single phase of the whole process. Regarding tools, DOORS [25] has the most established position in the automotive and aerospace business.3.5 CollaborationThe aerospace and automotive industries in particular have to deal with the requirement of parallel structures in product creation and manufacturing processes. Huge company networks with up to 1000 members for building a car and up to 2000 members for building an aircraft have to be established and managed. These structures lead to an increasing demand of communication to coordinate and synchronize the different activities.Tools for supporting the performance of collaboration do exist, but they have not been designed to fulfil the requirements of cross-enterprise environments. Moreover, these tools support only a small portion of the collaborative processes during the collaboration lifecycle. As a consequence, collaborative processes between OEM and suppliers are still characterized by redundancy, information gaps and processes that are not synchronized where needed.3.6 Information-Driven DevelopmentParticularly in the automotive business, the art for successful companies to learn is to keep their product options open as long as possible, since this makes them able to react quickly upon new demands from their customers and suppliers. Decisions should be made when all the options have been entirely understood, and when all the required information is available. This enables companies to make better and more consistent decisions at each step than they can at rigidly scheduled meetings that open the gate to the next stage.Companies are thus faced with the need to move from process-oriented development to goal-oriented development [26].3.7 Function-Oriented DevelopmentTraditional CAx practices especially throughout the 1970’s and 1980’s focused on a concept referred to as “art-to-part”, which denotes that the major engineering software activity was oriented towards the design, development and manufacturing of higher quality parts. Automotive suppliers reported a 40% reduction in part defects over a recent five-year period, which was attained through successful implementation of better CAx tools and processes.During the same five-year period, however, the OEM’s who were using these parts to assemble and market full vehicles experienced only a 20% reduction in warranty costs, which was not at all compliant with their widely adopted expectation of a one-to-one correspondence between part defects and warranty costs. In retrospect, however, it seems perfectly sensible that optimal part design does not necessarily lead to optimal system design. We may expect a huge yet unexplored potential for increasing quality and reducing time and cost at the system level [27].In order to be able to specify the whole system in another than a per-part-view we need a means to describe and structure it. Within such a structure, the user-perceivable system functions should play a central role.3.7 Federation vs. IntegrationBoth manufacturers and suppliers have invested a lot in their tool- and IT-infrastructure. Especially CAD-, CAE- and PDM systems have more or less fixed positions in these environments, since their introduction requires huge investments for installation, training and maintenance [28]. Switching to other systems is thus a difficult and costly task. With a lack of standardized interfaces and protocols this fact stands in contradiction to the move towards better-integrated development environments. We see the key to solving this problem in federating the heterogeneous “tool-spaces” rather than trying to integrate their individual elements.In our view, realizing federation in such environments requires building a layer on top of the individual systems and data repositories that provides access to all of them in a way that is defined by the requirements of the targeted seamless product creation process.3.8 Social InfluencesChanging processes never goes without changing the ways people work, cooperate and communicate. Such changes require utmost care and support from the management. Very often today, companies are taking a strongly technology-driven approach to process optimisation by tool and data integration. They do not respect the differences in their employee’s educations and experiences, and thus they lack these people’s support and willingness to accept and implement changes: “Everybody believes the test results except the test engineer, and nobody believes the analysis results except the analyst” (Mike Racicot) characterizes this situation very well.Furthermore, front-loading the development process implies a shift in responsibilities among all the involved engineering teams. It is obvious that the more decisions are based on simulation results, the more responsibility lies with the CAE-teams.From DMU to BMU4.1 ObjectiveThe predominant objective of our research is to establish concepts and software tools that leverage a seamless virtual product creation process with a particular focus on virtual product development and testing. It thereby assumes a completely heterogeneous development environment at the customer, and aims at applying sophisticated federation methods as the key to bridge the gaps between the various stages of development. The leading concept that shall be pursued to achieve this goal is the extension of the DMU-concept to also support modelling product functions, which we perceive as the product’s behaviour. We will thus denote the resulting concept as the BMU (Behavioural Mock-Up).The general approach to be taken when designing and implementing the BMU is to always consider both processes and tools involved for clearly defined practical use-cases. This will assure that the results will be practically relevant in regard of both technical and social issues.4.2 Definition of the BMUCurrent and near-term research and development projects in the virtual product creation environment mainly address issues related to the geometry, materials and—strongly connected to those—the ways to produce the product [29]. The stages of testing both the virtual and real product and its individual components and the implications of the testing results on the corresponding CAD/CAE-simulation models have only rarely been addressed up to now [30].Our research shall bridge this gap by aiming at the development of methods, tools and technologies that leverage the seamless application of multi-disciplinary calculation and simulation in the computer environment throughout the whole product creation process. Beyond the geometry, which is represented in the DMU, the so-called BMU shall logically link all data and models that are required to simulate the physical behaviour and properties of a single component or an assembly of components. These include mechanics, hydraulics, electronics, and whatever other disciplines are relevant.4.3 Scope of the BMUThe particular focus of the BMU concept is on all stages of product development. It thus aims at leveraging the frontloading of the “late” CAT (Computer-Aided Testing) phase by enabling the seamless federation of data and tools from the early phase of CAD/CAE throughout the whole development process.The key innovation here lies in linking geometrical and functional simulation and making them available to all stages of product development, in particular the testing stage. In the above context, CAT denotes all the measuring and testing activities in the development process that can be based both on simulation models and real physical prototypes. The key issue here is to investigate concepts and create tools that leverage the use of CAD/CAE data and models for test planning and definition, and to establish a seamless feedback loop from the testing environment.  This is indicated in  REF _Ref66448386 \h Fig. 4.1 using automotive development as a stereotype example. INCLUDEPICTURE "JPGs\\INSITE 1.jpg" \* MERGEFORMAT Fig.  STYLEREF 1 \s 4. SEQ Fig. \* ARABIC \s 1 1: Integration of Simulation and TestThis definition of CAT in particular involves all the aspects of mixed real-time and non-real-time environments. With the exponentially increasing share of electronics capabilities of mechatronic systems particularly in the automotive and the aerospace industries, simulating products in real-time environments with the control electronic modules coupled as “hardware-in-the-loop” (HIL) is gaining significant importance [31]. As of today, real-time simulation is still a domain of its own, and current HIL environments and models are highly cumbersome to use, and not at all integrated. The integration of these instruments especially into the early phases of development, however, is seen as the key to managing the increasing complexity of electronics modules and their link to the mechanical systems they control. It is also a prerequisite to being able to tackle the problem of the extremely differing speeds of innovation cycles of mechanics and electronics hardware and software [32]. REF _Ref66448435 \h Fig. 5.1 shows a rough sketch of the powertrain development process, which is the core of vehicle development [31]. Actually this process consists of two main parallel sub-processes, one of which is concerned with engine development and the other with transmission development. Both are linked by certain activities in the individual phases that require the availability of both components, engine and transmission—either as real hardware or as simulation models. The BMU shall provide an environment that helps to keep all the assets and activities involved in this process consistent. The project managers shall be able to derive a holistic and up-to-date image of the current development status within the BMU environment.4.4 Positioning in the IT-EnvironmentProbably the most fundamental requirement to the BMU is its ability to neatly integrate into existing IT infrastructures. Only then will organizations be ready and willing to build their processes on it. CAD, ERP and PDM systems are the three IT “pillars” within an enterprise.  REF _Ref66450354 \h Fig. 5.2 shows how the BMU shall communicate with these systems.Since the BMU shall act as a layer above all the different modelling tools, it will have to have interfaces to all of them. This can be a major problem in an area where there are no interface standards available (like in CAE). Using federation has the advantage that it demands for much leaner interfaces than integration. BMU Architecture5.1 BMU Meta Model INCLUDEPICTURE "JPGs\\Process 2.jpg" \* MERGEFORMAT Fig.  STYLEREF 1 \s 5. SEQ Fig. \* ARABIC \s 1 1: The BMU in Powertrain Development INCLUDEPICTURE "JPGs\\bmu 2.jpg" \* MERGEFORMAT Fig.  STYLEREF 1 \s 5. SEQ Fig. \* ARABIC \s 1 2: Positioning of the BMU in the IT-EnvironmentAiming at the creation of a seamless BMU-based general modelling environment, the concept of meta-models shall be introduced. The meta-model of a certain physical part shall provide a generic means of description of all the models available for this part. These meta-models may contain references to mechanical models, thermodynamics models as well as several other types of models that are required to simulate this part’s function and behaviour.Executable models are special instances of a common meta-model. Although the models may differ in terms of implementation, the characteristics modelled and the modelling depths, they all share a common description of their behaviours and parameters via the meta-model. Thus, meta-models have a relationship to models that is very similar to the relationship between classes and objects in the object-oriented programming paradigm.There shall be exactly one meta-model for every part and every assembly of parts. The meta-model of a part or an assembly shall containall descriptive and defining data;data needed for visualisation;all information linking the descriptive data to the visualisation;implementations of models that imitate all relevant characteristics;conditions and constraints for the execution of the models;data which describe the level of quality and the grade of trust and validation of each model;interfaces of parts, assemblies and their respective models.Thus, the meta-models define the BMUs by providing information on parameters, interfaces, links, available model implementations, and limitations and conditions for model execution. Complex models shall be created by the composition of simple, basic meta-models. This process shall provide sufficient information on the relationship between models for the BMU modelling environment to be able to determine parameter dependencies. This knowledge is in turn crucial for the modelling environment to be able to automatically predict the quantitative and qualitative consequences of parameter modifications entirely within the virtual modelling space. INCLUDEPICTURE "JPGs\\bmu 1.jpg" \* MERGEFORMAT Fig.  STYLEREF 1 \s 5. SEQ Fig. \* ARABIC \s 1 3: BMU and Meta-ModellingOne central target of this research is to establish the whole infrastructure that is required to put the concept of modular meta-models into practice. A suitable model description language that fulfils the requirements for interdisciplinary multi-domain modelling with a clear separation of specification and implementation will provide the foundation. From the current point of view, Modelica is a very good candidate.In order to help identify practical requirements and to provide a means of concept verification, the BMU modelling environment shall be specified in a use-case driven approach. Practical representative use cases shall be defined very early, and shall accompany the whole specification, development and verification work.5.2 BMU Data ModelFundamental to the BMU is a data model that is powerful enough to account for all the BMU requirements. The data model will specify the layout of data and their relationships in a way that allows the model to be applied both in relational and object-oriented databases.The central part of such a data model will be the logical link between meta-models and their data to model implementations and simulation results. Security mechanisms to shield implementations and data from unauthorized accesses need to be taken into account in the design of the data model.A very essential issue in terms of support for a continuous workflow is the integration of interfaces required in the design and calculation stages with software products used in other areas, such as production. This implies the need for the organization of BMUs in so-called multifunctional structures that mimic all the different views on the vehicle in the development and production phases. The data model to be specified in this research shall account for these multi-functional structures and enable the implementation of all the mechanisms required to keep these structures consistent throughout all the different views that might be used by software tools of the modelling and production environments.5.3 BMU InterfacingThe key enabler for achieving the target of extending the concept of the established CAD-based DMU to the behavioural model-based BMU is to find a bi-directional interfacing concept between the BMU and its associated DMU. The BMU shall use all the DMU-data it needs for model calculation, and all relevant BMU calculation results shall be made available and physically accessed via the DMU. Within this relationship, the DMU shall serve as the key link between the BMU and the PDM-system. INCLUDEPICTURE "JPGs\\bmu 3.jpg" \* MERGEFORMAT Fig.  STYLEREF 1 \s 5. SEQ Fig. \* ARABIC \s 1 4: BMU - Linking Testing with EngineeringThese requirements demand a concept to handle the structural information that is necessary to determine the relationships among components and to map DMU parameters to BMU data and parameters.5.4 Multi-Level ModellingVirtual testing and optimisation applications pose stringent demands on the contradictory model characteristics of modelling depth and simulation speed. The modelling environment to be created within this proposed research shall support the mathematical transformation of complex models to simpler models by providing—ideally automatically applicable—facilities that allow the reduction of the scope of simulation according to the modelling requirements. Measures shall be researched that make multiple different models for the same physical object comparable. One typical application is the reduction of a complex gearbox model which calculates gear forces, material stresses, temperatures, oil pressures, etc. to a simpler model which delivers only gear ratios and figures of elasticity and damping [33].5.5 BMU Modelling EnvironmentThe conceptual results of all the VMU-related research projects shall be implemented in a seamless modelling environment. The central issues to be addressed in this research are the mechanisms needed to create, use and maintain BMUs based on their meta-model descriptions and to monitor all these activities throughout the whole development process in terms of time, costs and efforts.Since simulated vehicles are composed of individual simulation models and hardware items, it is important to research ways that allow models of vehicle components to be coupled with other models as well as with real hardware components. The concept to be delivered has to support arbitrary “x-in-the-loop” scenarios, and shall for this purpose address key issues like data and parameter exchange via interfaces, event triggering, differing time bases and integration step widths and real-time requirements.The environment specification shall also deal with adaptability issues. It is a highly crucial requirement to the whole environment to be flexible and configurable enough to support the very special development processes in the automotive industry. To cover as many practical aspects as possible, the requirements analysis shall be built upon the real-world use cases. Another item that needs particular attention is security. The practical applicability of a modular and flexible modelling environment, where component models from different suppliers need to interact under the control of very different users with widely varying qualifications will depend to a large extent on clear rules and guidelines imposed by the involved tools and processes.The implementation of a meta-model concept in a multi-disciplinary modelling environment is seen as the key-enabler for virtual testing and optimisation that is based on an arbitrary mixture of physical and virtual model components.5.6 BMU Federation ConceptThe concept builds on what we call access classes to artefacts that are stored in different systems. These artefacts comprise all kinds of data from measurement and calculation, simulation models, their parameters and context information. Control classes are used to communicate with different tools via their external programming interfaces. Fig.  STYLEREF 1 \s 5. SEQ Fig. \* ARABIC \s 1 5: BMU Federation ConceptAccording to the envisaged general workflow, the BMU Environment first collects all the meta-information that is needed to locate the models for a particular simulation task. Adhering to the federation principle, the environment does not store these models itself. Neither does it replicate the model parameters. It rather collects all the required artefacts from the underlying specialized systems via dedicated control and access objects, which are special tool-specific class implementations.Target ApproachIn the following sections we present the outline of a research programme that shall deliver the results we envisage. Of course this is only a representative guideline in the form of a checklist of issues that will have to be addressed in a concrete research6.1 Problem DefinitionCreation of a detailed glossary to establish a common language and understanding (CAx, simulation, calculation, testing, measuring, DMU, PMU, BMU, Real-Time, HIL, MIL, SIL, etc.).Definition of a rough target scope in terms of thematic areas to be covered, and industries to be addressed.6.2 User and Use Case DefinitionDefinition of primary target groups within the process and selection of pilot users.Definition of practical use cases for which the workflows, methodologies, involved personnel and tools shall be analysed.Detailed description of the development process, the related data and the methodology and tools used.Identification of missing links in the tool-chain.Definition of constraints resulting from the company specific IT infrastructure, organization and strategy.Identification of problems in current enterprise and project organizations that hinder communication and seamless development efforts.6.3 System AnalysisIdentification of typical integration needs and scenarios with a focus on established CAD, CAE, CAT and PDM systems (e.g. CATIA, MSC.Software, LMS Virtual.Lab/Test.Lab, Axalant, etc.).Investigation of integration means and artefacts provided with those systems.6.4 Research of Development MethodologiesResearch of basic issues related to model-driven development throughout the whole CAD-CAE-CAT process. The focal problem areas are model and data management (creation, procurement, maintenance, versioning, etc.),current technical scopes and capabilities of the involved software tools versus scopes and features required for new methodologies,communication and cooperation between people with different engineering backgrounds,management and organisation.6.5 Technology DevelopmentResearch of concepts for linking the non-real-time (CAD/CAE) world to real-time (CAT) environments.Specification of concepts that support the stepwise approach to physical prototypes via simulation models, starting from Model-in-the-Loop (MIL) via Software-in-the-Loop (SIL) to Hardware-in-the-Loop (HIL).Mapping the various DMU structures to the available functional structures of the product.Definition of a vendor-independent meta-model that describes the BMU and all its elements.Prototype implementation of the BMU concept within the most dominant CAD, CAE and CAT environments.6.6 Deployment and VerificationContinuous involvement of the pilot user groups in the development of the new technology. Set up of examples for the use cases and testing of those using the new technology. Test and quantification of effects of changes in the development processes at the pilot users.Summary and OutlookWe presented a concept to integrate multidisciplinary engineering data and simulation models into existing DMU-based IT-infrastructures. Our concept is general enough to be applied to numerous different environments and industries. We believe that it can be implemented with reasonable effort, provided that the involved specialised tools are open enough for federation.We have shown the need for frontloading the product creation process by means of an intensified use of simulation. From this pressure, the need arises for an environment that helps to keep the process consistent and manageable.Regarding its implementation, we expect the major technical difficulty in finding a suitable meta-model that is general enough to cover all the important aspects of simulation models and their relationships. There is also a major challenge in mapping geometric product structures to the corresponding functional ones. According to our experience however, it is mostly rather the non-technical problems that endanger a project’s success than the technical ones. In this context, we see at least the following three highly critical issues:Willingness of tools vendors to open interfaces to their software tools for federation or integration and to accept standards.Willingness of OEMs and suppliers to give sufficient information on their development practices and processes.User acceptance and willingness of different engineering departments to collaborate intensively.8. References[1]	Fraunhofer IAO: Virtual Engineering, study, 2003.[2]	Bielohlawek, D.: „Business meets IT – Gemeinsame Zielsetzung für die virtuelle Fahrzeugentwikklung“, Virtual Product Creation Symposium 2002; Berlin; 2002.[3]	Katzenbach, A.: „Auf dem Weg zum kollaborativen Produktentstehungsprozess“, ProduktDatenJournal Nr. 2/2002. [4]	Knott, T.; Hopf, M.; Hennig, H.: „Der Audi A2 - Wegbereiter des virtuellen Prototypenaufbaus“. In: ATZ/MTZ Special Issue 3/00 – Der neue Audi A2; pp. 36-42.[5]	Koytek, T.; Gaube, O.: „Digital Mockup im weltweiten Entwicklungsverbund zwischen Zulieferer und Hersteller“. VDI Tagung „Virtuelle Produktentstehung“, 1999.[6]	Moebius, T.; Spies,.R.: Produktentwicklung mit Digital Mock-Up – Der neue Audi A4. In: ATZ/MTZ Special Issue 11/00 – „Der neue Audi A4“, pp. 33-35. [7]	ISO 10303-1, Product data representation and exchange, part 1: Overview and fundamental principles, 1995.[8]	 HYPERLINK "http://www.nist.gov/sc4/www/stepdocs.htm" www.nist.gov/sc4/www/stepdocs.htm[9]	Anderl, R.; Trippner, D.: „STEP“, B.G. Teubner Stuttgart, 1999.[10]	ISO 10303-214: Application Protocol: Core Data for Automotive Mechanical Design Processes, 2001.[11]	OMG: Unified Modeling Language. Specification; Version 1.3, 2000.[12]	Mössner-Beigl, M.; Ammon, D.; Rauh, J.; Rühle, R.: „Datenintegration in Berechnung und Simulation mittels MechaSTEP“, VDI-Berichte R755 (Conference on Measurement and Testing Techniques in Vehicle Simulation), Würzburg, 2003.[13]	Krastel, M.: Integration multidisziplinärer Simulations- und Berechnungsmodelle in PDM-Systeme, PhD Dissertation, DiK Darmstadt University of Technology, Shaker, Aachen, 2003.[14]	Anderl, R.; Pfeifer-Silberbach, U.: “Knowledge Sharing Using Progress Mock Up”. PDTdays Europe 2002, Proceedings, 2002.[15]	OMG: PDM Enablers V2.0 – Request for Proposal. mfg 2000-01-02.[16]	Krause, F.L.; Tang, T.; Ahle, U.: „Integrierte Virtuelle Produktentwicklung“; BMBF 2002.[17]	Elmqvist, H., Mattsson, S.E., Otter, M.: “Object-Oriented and Hybrid Modeling in Modelica”, Jour-nal Européen des systèmes automatisés, 35, 1/2001, pp. 1 à X.[18]	Elmqvist, H.; Mattsson, S.E.; Olsson, H.; Andreasson, J.; Otter, M.; Schweiger, C.; Brueck, D.: Real-time simulation of detailed vehicle and powertrain dynamics”, SAE 2004 World Congress and Exhibition, paper no. 2004-01-0768; 2004.[19]	artwork.in.tum.de[20]	www.even.org [21]	 HYPERLINK "http://www.fiperproject.com" www.fiperproject.com[22]	Benölken, P.; Bossong, U.; Graf, H.: „ViSiCADE – interaktive Simulationen in integrierten Prozessen“, ProduktDatenJournal Nr. 2/2002.[23]	Kluge, J.; Knupfer, S.; Abele, E.: “HAWK – Knowledge-based changes in the automotive value chain”, joint survey by McKinsey, PTW Darmstadt, VDA, OESA; 2003.[24]	Düsterwald, H-G.; Schwarz, O.; Spott, M.; Krause,  L.; Malorny, C.; Wunram, J.: “Designing a New Product Development ‘DNA-Code’”; McKinsey; 2002.[25]	Braun, P.; von der Beeck, M.; Rappl, M.; Schröder, C.: “Model-Based Requirements Engineering for Embedded Systems”, IEEE Joint International Requirements Engineering Conference, 2002.[26]	Holman, R.; Kaas, H-W.; Keeling, D.: “The Future of Product Development”,  The McKinsey Quarterly, Number 3; 2003.[27]	Ryan, R.; “Functional Virtual Prototyping”; Mechanical Dynamics; Ann Arbor, MI, USA; 2000.[28]	Urbanus, S.; Schreiber, A.: „Zwei Welten wachsen zusammen: PDM/CAD-Integration in der Automobilindustrie“, ProSTEP iViP Symposium 2003, Rüsselsheim, 2003.[29]	Anderl, R.; Beuthel, R.; Pfeifer-Silberbach, U.: „DMU-Prozesse in der Produktentwicklung – ihre Einbindung in die industriellen Prozesse“, ProduktDatenJournal Nr. 1/2003.[30]	Riel, A.; Hasewend, W.; Bogner, E.; Fischer, R.: „Modellierung des Fahrzeugs und des Antriebsstrangs im gesamten Entwicklungsprozess“. In: ATZ 106 (2004), Nr. 6.[31]	Fischer, R.: Powertrain ist mehr als Motor. 9. Internationale AVL Tagung Motor & Umwelt, Graz, 2003.[32]	Katzenbach, A.: “Process Integration in Product Creation”, ProSTEP iViP Symposium 2003; Rüsselsheim, 2003.[33]	Rinderknecht, S.; Blankenbach, B.; Müller, S.: „Simulation von Schaltvorgängen bei automatisierten Schaltgetrieben“, Systemanalyse in der Kfz-Antriebstechnik“, expert Verlag, 2001.Author BiographiesANDREAS RIEL is project manager in the innovations coordination department at AVL LIST GmbH in Graz, Austria.  His focus is on processes and tools for virtual development in the automotive area.EUGEN BRENNER is Professor for real time data processing at the Institute for Technical Informatics at the Graz University of Technology, Austria. His main focus is on process simulation in heterogeneous and distributed environments and on computer architecture.