Full Spectrum Training Through The Combat Trauma Patient Simulation (CTPS) System And Computer Generated ForcesMichelle MayoJack NorfleetU.S. Army RDECOM-STTCOrlando, FL 32826407-384-5407, 407-384-3897michelle.l.mayo@us.army.mil, jack.norfleet@us.army.mil Keywords:Computer Generated Forces, DISAF, JMedSAF, Joint Interoperability, Full Spectrum TrainingABSTRACT: Medical simulation has progressed greatly over the last few years but still lacks a clear solution to train Soldiers in a full spectrum environment.  Some patient simulators are integrated with computer generated forces applications, yet others still lack this interoperability.  The Simulation and Training Technology Center (STTC), part of the Research, Development and Engineering Command (RDECOM), has used the Army’s legacy One Semi-Automated Forces application derivative called Dismounted Infantry Semi-Automated Forces (DISAF) to generate casualties and then transfer to the CTPS system for treatment.  The patient may be treated via the Human Patient Simulator (HPS) mannequin and be examined with a Triage controller application.  The triage controller provides for a transfer of the selected patient’s physiological information to the HPS.  The HPS mannequin simulates some of the patient’s biological systems, and exhibits the physiological effects of the trauma, responding appropriately and in real time to medical treatment.  Although the effort was effective in proving the concept of CTPS linking with SAF, DISAF was not effective in providing robust casualties and medical capabilities in the constructive environment.In an effort to increase the realism and interoperability in the joint arena, RDECOM-STTC has started an effort to link Joint Medical Semi-Automated Forces (JMedSAF) to CTPS.  The objective of this effort is to provide a distributed, interactive, simulation driven training environment to provide the capability for integrated training across all military organizations and personnel, from the first responders, through the various levels of care, to the Joint Task Force (JTF) staff.  Emergency response teams and medical planners/staffs do not typically receive regular full spectrum training in military or civilian exercises.  “Train like we fight (work)” has brought on a new meaning in this shifting paradigm. We typically can train like we fight in limited scenarios and exercises, but never the full spectrum of a typical emergency response environment that requires massive coordination and communication across many disparate organizations at a time of crisis.  To chip away at resolving this training issue, the effort will integrate the existing Joint Medical Semi Automated Forces (JMedSAF) entity level simulation with the also existing Combat Trauma Patient Simulation (CTPS) system to provide training at all levels of care without having all of the real assets available. This paper describes the background of the DISAF and CTPS effort and also the proposed connection between JMedSAF and CTPS.  Furthermore, the paper addresses the future of medical simulation.  Is a link between JMedSAF and CTPS enough to satisfy medical training?  Should a federate also exist between OneSAF and JMedSAF to then link to CTPS?  What is the best approach to full spectrum training for the warfighter?  1. IntroductionToday’s military forces are smaller with enhanced lethality, mobility, and survivability.  They operate under more dispersed conditions in a larger area of operations.  Not only are military forces facing additional challenges on the battlefield, but the need to train in a full spectrum environment has increased greatly.  Training in military branch specific operations is no longer an option.  Joint training is the future of military simulation.  With these changing conditions and needs, medical simulation, as a whole, faces additional challenges.  RDECOM-STTC has developed the Combat Trauma Patient Simulation (CTPS) system and currently there are two installments at Ft. Gordon, GA and Ft. Sam Houston, TX.  CTPS is a physiologically accurate, distributed, and interactive simulation system that has proven successful in training over 3000 medics.  RDECOM-STTC has linked CTPS with the Army’s computer generated forces application called Dismounted Infantry Semi-Automated Forces (DISAF), a derivative of One Semi-Automated Forces (OneSAF).  The effort was a proof of principal and did not provide a robust medical constructive environment.  Currently, RDECOM-STTC is developing efforts to link CTPS with Joint Medical Semi-Automated Forces (JMedSAF).  The effort plans to leverage the multiple years of medical specific work in JMedSAF.  The link between JMedSAF and CTPS will produce a joint warfighter training simulation that connects virtual and constructive large-scale simulations.  The proposed solution will be capable of training the joint warfighter community in a full spectrum environment.  2. DISAF OverviewIn the effort to create an interface to CTPS, a set of capabilities to provide Individual Combatant (IC) casualties to the CTPS system via the DISAF system were developed.  The interface between the constructive and virtual environment consists of the following:A DIS interface to the CTPS application to pass casualty data between DISAF and CTPS.A mapping between the casualty profile in the CTPS application and the DISAF IC, whose health will be handled by the CTPS.2.1 Casualty Handling in DISAFCasualty handling on the battlefield is not represented in DISAF.  In fact, changes were needed to even permit wounding of Individual Combatants (ICs), which are transferred from DISAF to CTPS for treatment.  Current SAF models were replaced with a damage assessment model.  The wounding is based on munition-hit location on the IC’s body which is different from the probalistic model currently used by tanks and previously used by ICs.  This damage assessment model was used to more accurately model battlefield injuries.  The previous probability models mostly resulted in catastrophic kills.  The body hit location is encoded within a Distributed Interactive System (DIS) Detonation Protocol Data Unit (PDU) and is used by the target for damage assessment.  The legacy direct-fire damage model uses a data table that relates “distance of hit from body center” to probability of damage.  The legacy damage model does not take into account multiple hits via different DIS Detonation PDUs.  Damage results are based upon the hit zone and number of hits within that zone.  All hit values are parameterized and read in from a data file which is similar to Table 1.  Changes are executed by recompiling portions of the code.  Casualty examples are shown in Table 2.Hit Zone:#Hits:IC Damage ResultHead>=1Catastrophic KillLeft Arm<=3Firepower KillLeft Arm>3Catastrophic KillRight Arm<=3Firepower KillRight Arm>3Catastrophic KillTorso<=2Mobility and Firepower KillTorso>2Catastrophic KillLegs<=3Mobility KillLegs>3Catastrophic KillTable 1:  Damage Result DataIC Damage ResultIC Damage ResultFirepower KillBlunt Abdominal Injury (ruptured spleen)Firepower KillBlunt Chest Injury (pericardial tamponade)Mobility KillCompound Fracture of the Left Leg (tibia)Mobility KillGunshot wound to the Right Thigh (Femoral artery bleed)Mobility and Firepower KillClosed Head InjuryMobility and Firepower KillGunshot wound to the Left ChestTable 2:  Casualty Examples2.2 Technical ApproachDISAF IC’s are injured with direct-fire, indirect-fire, or exposure to chemical or biological contamination in the constructive environment.  After the injury occurs, the health of the Soldier is transferred to and modeled as patients in the CTPS system.  However, after the patient is treated, the entity never returns to the battlefield, thereby limiting the persistent training environment for medical training and mission rehearsal.The architecture of the connection consists of a DIS network for DISAF and a HLA network for CTPS.  The DIS and HLA networks are implemented on the same physical network but have unique logical network ports.  DISAF sends and receives DIS PDUs using one network port while CTPS sends and receives HLA information using a different network port that is associated with the Run-Time Infrastructure application’s communications.  This architecture ensures CTPS only receives HLA information and DISAF only receives DIS information.2.3 Applicability of DISAF-CTPS InterfaceThe DISAF to CTPS interface was a proof of principal effort that showed the capability to link the Army’s legacy SAF to the CTPS system.  However, the training value for joint warfighter scenarios and persistent mission rehearsal is not that great.  Also, the casualty generation capabilities do not allow for accurate disease modeling, which has become a needed factor in today’s medical training.  Overall, the effort was a good start for robust medical training.  By linking to the Army’s OneSAF, the complete immersion of the military medic into the warfighter simulation environment is plausible, especially with the capability to link to other Army simulations such as the Virtual Emergency Responder Training System (VERTS) and the Virtual Integrated MOUT Training System (VI-MTS).3. JMedSAF OverviewJMedSAF, originally developed under the Joint Medical Operations Telemedicine (JMO-T) Advanced Concept Technology Demonstration (ACTD), is the expansion of the Joint Semi-Automated Forces (JSAF) simulation to include combatant injuries, disease non battle injuries (DNBI), medical treatment, and patient movement.  JSAF is an entity level simulation developed from the ModSAF baseline and is a High Level Architecture (HLA) compliant federate.  JMedSAF utilizes a modified version of the Millennium Challenge Federation Object Model.JMedSAF can generate casualties either through combat or background DNBI.  These casualties are admitted to and treated at Medical Treatment Facilities.  If necessary, patients are moved to other facilities or evacuated out of theater.  The Medical Treatment Facilities are represented in the constructive environment and simulate operating rooms with proper treatments.The primary method for background injection of patients is the DNBI object.  The object generates patients using an external database called Deployable Medical System (DEPMEDS).  The DEPMEDS is a database that is based on accurate data from the battlefield and models a frequency distribution for each disease patient condition.  The Joint Requirements Clinical Advisory Board (JRCAB) has defined over 300 patient condition codes that are incorporated in JMedSAF.JMedSAF has a logistic support capability that is the main source of training.  SAF operators can modify resource levels associated with the Medical Treatment Facilities including staff number and type, supply and blood level, number and type of beds, and operating rooms.  The user controls these resources using a configuration editor in the SAF software.3.1 Casualty Handling in JMedSAFJMedSAF creates wounded in action (WIA) patients from engagements in the battlefield, from other federated simulations, or are generated in the background via the DNBI.  When the entity becomes wounded or sick, it enters the Medical Treatment Facility (MTF).  The MTF determines requirements to treat the patient condition, determines the facility that meets the requirements, and determines the patient’s disposition.3.2 Applications of JMedSAFMission rehearsal and training is the best application of JMedSAF.  Multiple scenarios are developed using the simulation-based tools which enables the warfighter to be better prepared for his/her mission.  Also, a logistical aspect of mission rehearsal is introduced since tasks of positioning and repositioning facilities and evacuation routes in response to changes in requirements.  3.3 Future Connection of JMedSAF-CTPSDue to the need for joint mission training and full spectrum training, RDECOM-STTC has proposed an effort to link JMedSAF to the CTPS system.  The architecture will consist of a federate between the two HLA networks.  The linked system will keep much of JMedSAF the same.  The casualties are generated and then moved to the MTFs within the constructive simulation.  Currently, the CTPS system allows for distributed training through the different levels of care on the battlefield.  Figure 1 shows the different levels of care that the CTPS system simulates.  These same levels of care can correspond to the MTFs of JMedSAF.  CTPS already has the capability to move patients through the levels of care, and JMedSAF has the ability to move patients off the battlefield to the MTFs, which simulate the levels of care.  The two systems should complement very well since once the patient is moved to the facility in the constructive environment, the CTPS system will allow the trainee to assess and treat the patient.  The wounded or sick patient is transferred to CTPS, which essentially loads a corresponding, already-built scenario.  Once treated in the virtual environment, the patient will either be able to return to duty, evacuated out of theater, or in some cases succumb to death. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 1: CTPS Treatment Levels of Care4.  ConclusionThe future of medical simulation is in large-scale warfighter exercises that link constructive and virtual simulations.  Systems need to operate and be capable of training in a joint military environment.  Why does the Army use the CTPS system for training and the Navy use the JMedSAF application for medical training?  The future of medical simulation is evolving into the joint arena.  Services need to work together to accomplish the same goal of keeping the warfighter alive.  Much research and development still needs to be accomplished to create the full spectrum, joint interoperable medical simulation system, but the solution is not far from here.  The solution may be simply federating JMedSAF and CTPS, or it could evolve from DISAF and CTPS.  The answer is not clear without more research, development and user testing, but the road to success is mapped and ready to be explored.5. References[1]   G. Burmester, J. Cisneros, M. Krauss, and B. Pettitt: “Casualty Generation For The Combat Trauma Patient Simulator (CTPS) With The Dismounted Infantry Semi-Automated Forces (DISAF)” Proceedings of the 2001 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando FL.[2]	W. Buchanan, M. Healy, B. Walter: “Joint Semi-Automated Forces- A Medical Entity Level Simulation”.Author BiographiesMICHELLE MAYO is currently a Principal Investigator on the Medical Simulation Technologies Team for RDECOM-STTC.  She ise manager of the CTPS Interoperability effort and assists the Lead Principal Investigator with managing the Advanced Medic Training Technologies (AMTT) Science and Technology Objective (STO).  She has over four years experience in military simulation and training programs.  In addition to managing medical efforts, Ms. Mayo has had additional experience as a Principal Investigator for the Virtual Emergency Response Training System (VERTS) and Individual Combatant STO, which included work with Dismounted Infantry Semi-Automated Forces.  Ms. Mayo has a Bachelor of Science Degree in Computer Engineering.JACK NORFLEET is the Medical Simulation Technologies Team Lead for RDECOM-STTC.  He manages RDECOM’s medical simulation research efforts which include the Combat Trauma Patient Simulation Program and the Advanced Medic Training Technologies Science and Technology Objective.  He has been actively involved in medical modeling and simulation for over four years and has been the lead principal investigator for the last two.  Mr. Norfleet has twenty years experience in military modeling and simulation.  He has worked extensively in live, virtual, and constructive simulation arenas as principal investigator, program manager, project engineer, and test engineer.  Programs he has worked on include the Army’s Multiple Integrated Laser Engagement System 2000 (MILES2000), the Combat Maneuver Training Center’s Range Data Management System, and the Frequency Surveillance System at White Sands Missile Range.  Mr. Norfleet has a Bachelor of Science Degree in Electrical Engineering and a Masters Degree in Business Administration.  He is also a nationally registered Emergency Medical Technician.Air AmbulanceForwardSurgical TeamCombat SupportHospitalBattalion Aid StationGround EvacuationCasualty Collection PointPoint of Injury