Combat Trauma Patient Simulation InteroperabilityWith Warfighter SimulationsJack NorfleetMichelle MayoU.S. Army RDECOM-STTC12423 Research ParkwayOrlando, FL 32826407-384-3897, 407-384-5407jack.norfleet@us.army.mil, michelle.l.mayo@us.army.mil Keywords:Medical Simulation Interoperability, DISAF, MILES, live, virtual, constructive medical simulation, HLA.ABSTRACT:  Historically, warfighter training simulations have not allowed casualties, other than dead, for individual combatants. By not modeling injuries, the simulations are simpler and the missions are cleaner.  Lessons learned, however, show that injuries outnumber deaths by almost 3 to 1.  In an effort to engage military medical personnel in warfighter training exercises, the Simulation and Training Technology Center (STTC), part of the Research, Development and Engineering Command (RDECOM), has been researching and developing technologies to integrate medical casualties in various live, virtual and constructive training systems.  Using the Combat Trauma Patient Simulation (CTPS), the only HLA compliant medical simulation system,  as a center for receiving casualties, the STTC has begun the task of realistically simulating injuries and their effect on the battlefield..  Past efforts included creating medical behaviors in the Dismounted Infantry Semi-Automated Forces (DISAF) which is the dismounted component of the One Semi-Automated Forces (ONESAF) which is the Army’s premier constructive battlefield simulation.  Beyond creating these behaviors, research into the transfer of these casualties back and forth between CTPS has begun.  The Multiple Integrated Laser Engagement System XXI (MILES XXI) is the Army’s primary live force on force training system. Research using MILES XXI resulted in a PDA based medical simulation with the capability of downloading casualties generated by the live training system.  The casualty generation capability was also developed in the course of the PDA research. In the virtual world, the STTC has created a casualty generation capability in the Virtual Emergency Response Training System (VERTS).  The goal was to provide the medic the same training opportunities as the trigger pullers, while at the same time introducing commanders to the impact of casualties on the mission. Future interoperability efforts have been started in the areas of Joint SAFs, One Tactical Engagement Simulation System (ONETESS) the successor to MILES, and in the medical simulation realm where surgical simulators will be integrated into currently available mannequin based simulations. This paper describes the lessons learned in past efforts, as well as future courses.  It will describe some of the trade-offs that were made and the reasoning behind them.  1. IntroductionThe Combat Trauma Patient Simulation (CTPS) is the first High Level Architecture (HLA) compliant distributed medical simulation system.  It is the result of over 6 years of research by the U.S. Army’s Research Development and Engineering Command Simulation and Training Technology Center (RDECOM-STTC) based in Orlando, Florida.  CTPS has served as the core technology for the STTC’s medical research efforts.CTPS consists of a series of simulation nodes, each representing a different echelon of care in the military medical hierarchy as outlined in Figure 1.  Each node consists of one or more commercial off the shelf (COTS) medical mannequin based simulators produced by Medical Education Technologies, Inc (METI).     SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 1.  CTPS Echelons of CareWith the evolution of CTPS as a maturing technology for training individual and collective medical skills, the STTC has been working towards changing the way warfighter training simulations generate and handle casualties while integrating a clinically accurate medical capability into these simulations.Typically, warfighter simulations have incorporated two health states into their individual combatant entities; alive and dead.  Since medical care is a Combat Service Support function, and combat arms organizations control the simulation requirements, accurately simulating casualties in combat training systems has not been a priority.  By not including injuries, the simulations are much cleaner and the military objectives of the simulations are more readily achievable.History, however, has shown that more than twice as many soldiers are wounded in action, than are killed in action on the battlefield.  Injuries also generate incredible impacts on both the mission and on the unit’s effectiveness.  A seriously wounded soldier requires at least two soldiers to protect and treat him, thus reducing the combat power of the unit by three.  In addition to losing the combat power, injuries significantly reduce the mobility of the unit if the casualties cannot be immediately evacuated.  A classic example of this phenomenon can be seen in the ill fated raid in Mogadishu that is described by Philadelphia Inquirer reporter Mark Bowden in his series of articles that eventually resulted in the novel Blackhawk Down.   When Ranger Pvt. Todd Blackburn fell 70 feet from a Blackhawk helicopter and was seriously injured, a tragic but well documented series of events was unleashed that led to 18 brave American soldiers dead, 73 wounded and hundreds of Somali casualties.The Medical Simulation Technologies (MST) team at  RDECOM-STTC has been working diligently to add medical casualties to warfighter simulations not only to give medics the opportunity to hone their medical skills while performing their soldiers skills, but to give combat commanders a realistic view of the impact that casualties have on their missions.  The ultimate goal of these research efforts is to increase the effectiveness of both the medics and their commanders in the field.  An increase in effectiveness is directly measured by Soldiers, Sailors, Airmen and Marines going home alive.2.  Research Efforts The MST team uses science and technology objectives (STOs), Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) programs, congressionally funded programs, Defense Acquisition Challenge Programs (DACP) and user funded programs to meet their research goals. MST took advantage of all of these resources in an attempt to link CTPS with training systems in all three simulation domains; live, virtual and constructive2.1 Live Medical Simulation Efforts In the live simulation domain, the research was focused on the Army’s premier force on force training system, the Multiple Integrated Laser Engagement System XXI (MILES XXI).  MILES XXI uses eye safe lasers to “shoot” encoded data messages that include hit messages, near miss messages, weapon type, ammunition type, and player identification numbers.  When detectors on the target receive the messages, a probability of kill is generated based on the ammunition type and on the target type.  Typical of warfighter simulations, the two possible outcomes of an engagement with a dismounted soldier are kill and near miss.  At the end of a typical MILES engagement, the trainees were presented with a casualty card about the size of a playing card that described an injury.  This card was presented to the medic who verbalized the care that he would provide.  Through the Advanced Trauma Patient Simulation (ATPS) STO, a MILES XXI man worn vest was modified to generate less than lethal casualties.  Once instantiated, these casualties started a timer in the vest that would produce a kill if proper medical attention was not provided.  Once the vest was informed that medical care was provided, it increased the time to kill based on a database that was developed under an ACT II research effort conducted several years ago.The next challenge in this research was to develop a clinically accurate way of treating the patients.  Due to real time nature of the training exercise, and the randomness of the casualty being generated, moulaging the soldier and treating his simulated injuries was impractical.  Simulating the casualty in the vest to any usable fidelity was also impractical because of processor, memory, and battery limitations.  Additionally, the treatment capability had to minimally impact the load that the medic had to carry during the exercise. To meet these challenges, a Personal Digital Assistant (PDA) based simulation called STATCARE was created.  The PDA “talked” to the vest via an existing Radio Frequency data link that connected the vest to the laser transmitter.  The vest provided the general area of the injury, and the timer data to the PDA and a medical scenario was started.  A graphical interface forced the medic to perform a rapid trauma assessment and then forced him to select the appropriate procedures.  The patient’s condition degraded with time so there was a real chance of death if the medic took too long to address the life threatening injuries.  Once treated, the PDA informed the vest of the medical outcome by either reset the clock to indicate a successful treatment, or by killing the vest.Additional research goals included downloading the casualties into the CTPS system and allowing the patient to travel through the battlefield medical system.  Unfortunately, the technical challenges of modifying a COTS item and using an existing data link in a manner for which it was never designed, delayed delivery of the prototype to the end of the STO.  In effect, the program just ran out of time and money.On a more positive note, the One Tactical Engagement Simulation System (OneTESS) program, the next generation of live force on force trainer, has a requirement to generate medical casualties from the onset.  This requirement was influenced by the work described above.  Coordination is taking place between the MST team and the OneTESS team to transition the developed technology to the OneTESS program.  Plans are being developed to complete the link between the PDA based simulation   and CTPS.  The vision is to simulate casualties in live exercises and to feed those casualties into the CTPS system in order to engage the military medical personnel who are usually training everything but their field medical skills.  It is also desirable to impress on the young field commanders, the impact that casualties will have on their missions, their men and on their confidence.2.2 Virtual Medical Simulation EffortsThe Virtual Emergency Response Training System (VERTS) is a simulation system that allows the trainee to walk the ground in a virtual environment.  It consists of a rear projection screen that provides the visual scene, an acoustic position tracking system that controls the point of view and the location within the scene, and various tools for the trainee to interact with.  Three dimensional visual databases produce the terrain, while other players and semi-automated forces manipulate the behavior of avatars within the virtual environment.   Again, the simulation allowed for two health states, alive and dead.  The MST made it a goal to introduce medical behaviors in the VERTS environment.VERTS is a very powerful training tool, but it does have its weaknesses.  For instance, the ability to touch objects in the virtual world is not of a high enough fidelity to be usable, especially in a medical mission.  To overcome this weakness, the use of a CTPS mannequin was a natural solution as a high fidelity haptic device.   In order to integrate CTPS with VERTS, efforts were conducted which leveraged the resources and the expertise of both research teams.  The VERTS team created the casualty generation capabilities, the avatars and the injury graphics.  The CTPS team created the casualty scenarios for the mannequins and the interface specifications.  When the trainee arrives at the location of the casualty in the virtual world, he sends a command through his interface to transfer the casualty to a CTPS mannequin for hands on treatment.  The VERTS system informs CTPS about the area of the injury and about the time the injury occurred.  The CTPS system starts a medical scenario and fast forwards to the correct point in the scenario based on the elapsed time.  From that point on, the trainee must assess and treat the patient by interacting with a live training device (CTPS) in a virtual world (VERTS).  Should the patient die, VERTS is notified and the avatar is updated to show the dead entity.The vision for this domain of medical simulation is for hands on patient simulations to be available in virtual exercises when the training requirements warrant it.  Most of the early scenarios in the VERTS system dealt with Civil Support Teams (CSTs), and with MOUT training.  Both of these training areas have huge medical requirements which are not currently being met. 2.3 Constructive Medical Simulation EffortsConstructive simulations such as One Semi-Automated Forces (OneSAF), the Army’s standard, have also failed to implement wounding in their scenarios.  In fact, OneSAF was originally developed to simulate the behaviors of vehicles on the battlefield with no way to simulated individual dismounted players.  It wasn’t until Dismounted Infantry Semi-Automated Forces (DISAF) was integrated into OneSAF that dismounted infantry play was available.  Even with DISAF, the individual entity was modeled after a vehicle.  DISAF has five available health states; alive, firepower kill, mobility kill, firepower/mobility kill, and catastrophic kill.The STTC’s research efforts in this area of simulation consisted of creating medical behaviors in DISAF, creating medical specific entities, mapping the five health states to medical scenarios in CTPS, and translating between DISAF’s Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) interface and CTPS’s HLA interface.  The medical behaviors that were developed included air and ground evacuation, the one man carry, the two man litter carry, and the loading and unloading of casualties onto evacuation vehicles.  The entities that were created included the combat medic, the licensed practical nurse, the doctor, the battalion aid station, the combat support hospital, the ground ambulance and the air ambulance.  The health state mapping was rather crude, but it was effective given the limitations of the five available health states.  Firepower kills translated into arm injuries, mobility kills translated into leg and lower torso injuries, and firepower/mobility kills translated into more upper torso and head injuries.  As with the other research domains, the medical simulation managed the physiological modeling, and the warfighter simulation monitored updates to health status.  By creating updates to DISAF, the medical behaviors and entities are available in the current baseline of OneSAF. Current efforts in medical modeling in SAF have altered course to look at integrating Joint Semi-Automated Forces (JSAF) with CTPS.  This decision was made because a major section of JSAF is its JMEDSAF module which has a much more robust structure for simulating health states.  The vision for constructive medical modeling and simulation is to be able to create the full footprint of military battlefield medicine in the constructive domain and replacing individual nodes of that footprint with CTPS assets to provide hands on medical trainers tied to constructive warfighter training exercises.  If properly validated, these models could be used for mission rehearsal and planning as well as for prediction of outcomes for patients on the battlefield.3. Lessons Learned Several consistent lessons emerged during these research efforts.  First, it is hugely more difficult to add a medical simulation capability to an existing system then it is to plan for it during the design of the warfighter simulation.  By creating the capability as an add-on, the medical simulation is severely constrained by the processing power, the memory, the bandwidth, the power constraints, and by the database structures of the existing entities.Second, the medical simulation should be segregated from the warfighter simulation to prevent the overloading of the warfighter network.  Imagine the overhead required if every entity on a brigaded level simulation had to run a physiological model.  That is thousands of complex models taking up bandwidth and computing power, while adding nothing to the exercise unless they are injured.  By separating the two models, the medical simulation does what it does best, and the warfighter simulation can concentrate on its mission while displaying medical state changes when they occur.Third, fully interactive, physiologically based medical simulations, while initially more complex, are clearly superior to those medical simulations that rely on user inputs to change states.  Once the physiological models are validated, the number and types of medical scenarios are virtually endless.  This makes the medical exercises more realistic and more robust while offloading the patient condition management tasks to the physiological models.Finally, the current architecture of CTPS is difficult to connect to warfighter simulations, in spite of its HLA certification.  Similar to the first lesson learned, CTPS was not designed with outside connectivity in mind.  It was developed as an integration of COTS equipment with modified or developed software tying everything together.4. The Future of CTPS and Warfighter SimulationsThe current phase of CTPS is addressing the architecture issue mentioned above.  CTPS will become much more flexible and much more robust once this task is completed.  The Government is requiring the development of an Interface Control Document (ICD) which will significantly simplify the process for transferring casualties to CTPS while at the same time protecting the intellectual property of the CTPS developer.The MST team will continue to coordinate and partner with the developers of warfighter simulations to make sure that medical capabilities are addressed early in the design process.  Even if the capabilities can be turned off when they are not needed, having them in the initial design will provide tangible benefits to the Army.5. References[1]	Bowden, Mark: “Blackhawk Down: An American War Story” The original newspaper series online.  http://inquirer.philly.com/packages/somalia/.[2]	Medical Education Technologies, INC: CTPS Phase 6 Final Report. [3]	Medical Education Technologies, INC: Phase 7 Kick-off Briefing.Author BiographiesJACK NORFLEET is the Medical Simulation Technologies Team Lead for RDECOM-STTC.  He manages RDECOM’s medical simulation research efforts which include the Combat Trauma Patient Simulation Program and the Advanced Medic Training Technologies Science and Technology Objective.  He has been actively involved in medical modeling and simulation for over four years and has been the lead principal investigator for the last two.  Mr. Norfleet has twenty years experience in military modeling and simulation.  He has worked extensively in live, virtual, and constructive simulation arenas as principal investigator, program manager, project engineer, and test engineer.  Programs he has worked on include the Army’s Multiple Integrated Laser Engagement System 2000 (MILES2000), the Combat Maneuver Training Center’s Range Data Management System, and the Frequency Surveillance System at White Sands Missile Range.  Mr. Norfleet has a Bachelor of Science Degree in Electrical Engineering and a Masters Degree in Business Administration.  He is also a nationally registered Emergency Medical Technician.MICHELLE MAYO is currently a Principal Investigator on the Medical Simulation Technologies Team for RDECOM-STTC.  She is the manager of the CTPS Interoperability effort and assists the Lead Principal Investigator with managing the Advanced Medic Training Technologies (AMTT) Science and Technology Objective (STO).  She has over four years experience in military simulation and training programs.  In addition to managing medical efforts, Ms. Mayo has had additional experience as a Principal Investigator for the Virtual Emergency Response Training System (VERTS) and Individual Combatant STO, which included work with Dismounted Infantry Semi-Automated Forces.  Ms. Mayo has a Bachelor of Science Degree in Computer Engineering..ForwardSurgical TeamAir AmbulanceCombat SupportHospitalBattalion Aid StationGround EvacuationCasualty Collection PointPoint of Injury