Training ForumChairScott JohnstonVice ChairMike NivenSecretaryMichael WoodmanLeslie WintersGarry MorissetteSteve ThalmannMark WilliamsLarry ClarkAnthony HughesObjectives for this Workshop:Provide an interface between User requirements and standards development.Provide a forum for Users to describe M&S interoperability shortfalls.Provide a linkage between the User and the Technical Communities.Provide a forum for the Technical Community to present potential solutions to Users.Comments and Recommendations:Several papers/presentations addressed a growing interest in adapting commercial PC gaming concepts, heuristics, and technologies into traditional DoD military simulations.  Paper 04S-SIW-144 “Using Computer Game Techniques to Support Asymmetric Warfare Simulation” (one of the TRAIN Forum recommended reading list members) detailed existing PC game technologies that could be leveraged by military simulations to aid in the training of asymmetric warfare issues, including:  swarm level group interactions, massive multiplayer interactions, open ended simulation, non-lethal interactions, tactics, and mission planning/execution.  Given the SIW audience interest in this topic, the TRAIN Forum intends to host and facilitate a PC Gaming Technologies panel session at the Fall 04 SIW event.Several papers/presentations generated a great deal of interest and discussion regarding what makes a simulation or game an effective training system.  An example of how to measure training effectiveness was discussed in paper 04S-SIW-143 “Using PETS Software to Capture Complex Objective Measurement Data from Distributed Mission Operations (DMO) Environments”.  The TRAIN Forum intends to solicit additional papers in this area in future workshops.Paper 04S-SIW-033 “Distributed Simulation Synchronization Replay Tool (DSSRT)” recommended that SISO form a Study Group to define and standardize the synchronization protocol.  This would facilitate debriefing systems to participate in a distributed debriefing session that included the synchronized replay of different event log files.  We will contact the paper author to follow up on Study Group leadership interest.One paper presentation, 04S-SIW-138 “SIW: Commercial Game Co-opted for Use as Attitude Trainer”, highlighted the potential training value of integrating Intelligent Tutoring System (ITS) technology with commercial games and training simulations.  The TRAIN Forum strongly supports the work of SISO's ITS Interoperability Study Group in their attempt to identify reusable components and eventually define standards to better support this integration.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)40Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)50Peak attendance (including joint sessions)63Total papers presented17“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions0Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):04S-SIW-072 Developing a Crowd Federate for Military Simulation, Dr. Mikel D. Petty04S-SIW-144 Using Computer Game Techniques to Support Asymmetric Warfare Simulation, Dr. Charles J. Cohen