Developing an Integration Framework to Support JSB-AFLt. Col. Emily B. AndrewUnited States Air Force Electronic Systems CenterSimulation Engineering Branch (ESC/CXES)45 Arnold Street, Building 1600Hanscom AFB, MA 01731781-377-6556 HYPERLINK "mailto:Emily.Andrew@hanscom.af.mil" Emily.Andrew@hanscom.af.milDr. Rohit AgarwalDigital Harbor1851 Alexander Bell Drive, Suite 200Reston, VA  20191703-476-7345 HYPERLINK "mailto:Emily.Andrew@hanscom.af.mil" rohit.agarwal@digitalharbor.comGeoffrey M. BaumUSAF ESC/CXES (PTI)45 Arnold Street, Building 1600Hanscom AFB, MA 01731781-377-8002 HYPERLINK "mailto:Emily.Andrew@hanscom.af.mil" Geoff.Baum@hanscom.af.milKeywords:framework, federation, integration, ontology, XMLABSTRACT: The Joint Synthetic Battlespace (JSB) is an Air Force transformation initiative to improve the acquisition, employment, and maintenance of weapons and other systems by providing users a common framework and set of components for preparing, executing, and analyzing the results of system simulations.  Key to the development of this kind of environment is the development of an integrationing framework (IF) that will accommodate the inclusion of any number of disparate simulation and non-simulation (e.g., C4ISR) systems with speed and flexibility.  The JSB IF will allow for rapid simulation integration without modifying simulation components. In the near-term JSB intends to demonstrate a near-real-time adaptive integration of simulations to meet newly added requirements to an existing simulation environment such as the Distributed Mission Operations Center.  This IF will allow for a Web/IT/ontology technology based simulation federation and provide for the graphical manipulation of the ontology.  This presentation will address the engineering analysis of simulation and non-simulation standards as well as initial prototyping efforts in this area.Simulation Framework DevelopmentPast approachesHistorically, most efforts aimed at developing simulation frameworks and tools for the United States Department of Defense (DoD) have been conducted within the department itself, by its various defense Services and research laboratories. While such efforts have clearly advanced the state of simulation practice and generated such valuable standards as the High Level Architecture (HLA), these efforts have been largely dissociated from each other and often duplicative. The result has been a set of disparate approaches and products, many of which lack sufficient user base to determine their value or usefulness. Whether particular products continue is determined more by the funding at their disposal than by their value to the DoD user community. Also, many good solutions tend to remain within their original development community, with limited access from outside that community.Commercial effortsIn contrast, commercial products are developed within a competitive marketplace, usually with a large user base. Ideally, competition ensures that those products perceived as having value will survive, while those having less value will fail. Also, commercial vendors have a clear incentive to find as many users as possible across as broad a market as possible. This ensures the solution is made available to those who need it, not just the originally intended user community. Recent advances in commercial technology in the areas of web services and application integration provide opportunities for DoD users to employ commercial products and practices, in the area of integration framework development, now that DoD is heading toward these same technologies and approaches in that area. In particular, recent advances in command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (C4ISR) systems use web services and integrative technologies originally developed in the commercial sector.New approachAs part of ongoing DoD efforts to use commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) technology wherever possible, the Joint Synthetic Battlespace (JSB) program has been investigating the applicability of commercial products to its integration framework (IF) development challenge. A number of innovative commercial products were evaluated by the JSB program office, which then selected one as the subject of a limited scope proof-of-concept effort to determine whether commercial application integration products could meet DoD requirements for simulation integration. If successful, the JSB program office will then work with the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) and other standards groups to develop appropriate standards for establishing a commercial marketplace for integration frameworks. This approach has the potential to bring commercial competitive advantage into the domain of defense system integration framework development.The JSB Integration ChallengeLegacy simulationsJSB has been tasked with providing tools and methods to speed the integration of simulations that were not builtd to work together. Furthermore, JSB has been challenged to do this without necessarily modifying these legacy simulations. Meeting this challenge requires a flexible approach that supports developing glue logic and code at a variety of levels. As has been discussed in many other forums, it is not sufficient to get two simulations to exchange information. The exchanged information must mean the same thing to the exchanging simulations and be treated in a manner that ensures consistency of the overall simulation federation, given its intended use. While JSB does not intend to automatically rewrite simulations to change the way they work, JSB is developing tools that permit easy integration of simulations that are logically capable of working together within a single, logical context. JSB is exploring the use of integrative technologies combining HLA, web services, semantic ontology, and data fusion technologies. This new approach must be compatible with past approaches, including Application Level Simulation Protocol (ALSP), Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) and HLA.New technologiesAnother approach to integrating simulations is to define standards, according to which simulations must be built, if they are to be interoperable and function as an integrated whole. While this approach is appealing for new development, the rapid rate of technological change makes it risky to select a single standard that does not change. A number of ongoing DoD framework efforts have adopted this approach and, indeed, simulations built to a particular framework standard usually interoperate nicely with one another. The challenge for JSB is to construct integrative technologies that are dynamic, rather than static, in nature and are, therefore, capable of keeping pace with evolving technology.Integration frameworkJSB integration framework standards must be capable of adapting to change, including new simulation standards and protocols. For instance, the JSB approach defines simulation integration protocol as a building block within the framework. Therefore, ALSP, DIS and HLA are all valid building blocks within the JSB integration framework. Future simulation integration protocols may also be added, including various web services. The challenge is to construct a set of JSB framework standards that realize this vision.Ontological engineeringAnother area being explored by the JSB program is that of ontological engineering. Whereas simulation frameworks establish as standard vocabulary and mechanisms for interoperability of simulations, simulation framework ontologies establish a common vocabulary, syntax and semantics for integrating various simulation frameworks. This approach would support development of a consistent family of frameworks, each geared designed to support different simulation domains, yet being compatible within the context of the simulation framework ontology. Such an approach has shown promise in other fields, leading to ontologies defined by goals, roles, interactions, tasks, information, knowledge and agents [1].JSB Framework Proof-of-ConceptNon-simulation standardsCommercial standards have always played an important role in DoD development efforts, especially as related to system flexibility, reliability, maintainability and extensibility. Simulation frameworks are no exception; taking proper advantage of commercial standards can reduce overall life-cycle cost and increase the longevity of any integration framework. JSB is particularly interested in incorporating such standards as XML and the emerging extensible three-dimensional graphics (X3D) standards, that appear to held great promise for integration of both commercial and defense systems.Simulation standardsInitially, JSB’s integration framework efforts are aimed at ensuring that HLA-compliant simulations will interoperate. The JSB framework design, however, must ensure that other standards, such as ALSP, DIS and emerging web services standards are accommodated. JSB will also monitor emerging standards such as the Base Object Model (BOM) specification, Extensive Modeling and Simulation Framework (XMSF) profile, Mission and Means Framework (MMF) and others, to ensure that the groundwork laid by JSB can be extended to support such standards in the future.Initial prototyping effortsThe JSB program has developed an initial proof-of-concept system, using Digital Harbor’s PiiE™ product Platform and semantic ontology technology. PiiE combines multiple levels of integration to arrive at a flexible solution for application integration. These levels include integration of web services, legacy applications and their interfaces, data integration approaches, processes, events, messages and people. This multi-layer approach provides extensive flexibility for integrating a variety of applications at different levels. For example, one simulation may be integrated with another at a message passing level using HLA, while the same simulation may be integrated with a third simulation using a data integration method based on extensible markup language (XML). Finally, all three simulations may be integrated, from the user’s point of view, by employing a web services presentation layer interfaces to display integrated information, in user format, from all three underlying simulations. This proof-of-concept effort has been proceeding well, with initial efforts focused on extending PiiE to support HLA integration and automation. Initial results appear promising, while the next step will be to integrate actual simulations using the extended PiiE framework.Future directionsThe next step will be to tie together the Air Force Modeling and Simulation Training Toolkit (AFM&STT) with the Joint Semi-Automated Force (JSAF) simulation. The resultant proof-of-concept capability will be demonstrated to JSB users, such as the Distributed Mission Operations Center (DMOC) at Kirtland Air Force Base in Albuquerque, New Mexico, to elicit user feedback. Lessons learned will help establish integration approaches and techniques to be proposed as standards through SISO. Future efforts may look at integrating other efforts such as the Joint Battle Infosphere (JBI), JBI Simulation (JBISIM), Warfighter’s Simulation (WARSIM) 2000, and standards such as Base Object Model (BOM) specification and the Extensible Modeling and Simulation Framework (XMSF) profile. It is hoped that addressing integration issues within the context of an integration framework will facilitate solving such difficult simulation problems as multi-level security, automated scenario generation, and integrated, distributed after action reporting.SummaryThe JSB program is chartered with addressing Air Force modeling and simulation challenges in a manner that can harness legacy simulation, chart a path into the future, and support joint and coalition operations along the way. Meeting this challenge means establishing an innovative framework architecture that can respond to change while retaining enough consistency to permit simulations to operate within a common context. The JSB program office is well on its way to exploring one such approach and determining its usefulness to the DoD community.References[1] 	R. Kishore, H. Zhang and R. Ramesh: “A Helix-Spindle Model for Ontological Engineering” Communications of the ACM, Vo. 47, No. 2, pp. 69-75, February 2004. [1]	A. Author(s) name(s): “This is the Title of the Paper” Journal Name, Vol. 39, pp. 531-548, July 1992.[2]	A. Author(s) name(s): “This is the Book Chapter Title” Book Title, McGraw-Hill, New York 1990.[3]	More Author(s) name(s): Book Title, Peter Peregrinus, London, 1992.Author BiographiesLT. COL. EMILY B. ANDREW is manager of the Joint Synthetic Battlespace Program for the U.S. Air Force (JSB-AF) and runs the Electronic Systems Center Directorate for Modeling and Simulation (ESC/CXES) at Hanscom Air Force Base in Bedford, Massachusetts. Lt. Col. Andrew has been leading development of new modeling and simulation capabilities for the U.S. Department of Defense for over 20 years, including a number of programs for the US Air Force and the US Missile Defense Agency. OTHER BACKGROUND? DEGREES?Lt. Col. Andrew holds an M.S. in Electrical Engineering from Colorado Technical University, a B.S. in Electrical Engineering from the University of Colorado and a B.S. in Biology from the University of Connecticut.DR. ROHIT AGARWAL is chief executive officer for Digital Harbor in Reston, Virginia. Dr. Agarwal has a background in entrepreneurship, ballistic missile defense simulation, and product development. He currently manages information fusion programs for a variety of defense and commercial customers, employing Digital Harbor’s PiiE product line. HISTORY AND DEGREES?GEOFFREY M. BAUM is a senior systems engineer for with Paradigm Technologies Incorporated and serves as the SETA contractor’s engineering team leader on the JSB program. Mr. Baum has over 20 years’ experience in DoD and commercial software development, systems integration and project management including ballistic missile defense simulation, data warehousing, parallel  processing, real-time control and distributed systems. Mr. Baum holds an International MBA from Thunderbird, The American Graduate School of International Management, a B.S. in Computer and Information Science from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst and is a certified Project Management Professional.