Soldier Representation in Models & SimulationsRendering Dynamic Deformation Structures in Military SimulationsCPT MAJ Nick Wittwer, LTC Thomas Cioppa Dr. Niki Deliman GoergerTRADOC Analysis Center (TRAC)P.O. Box 8692, Monterey, CA 93943 USA 1.831.-656.-3732, 831-656-3088HYPERLINK "mailto:Nick.Wittwer@trac.nps.navy.mil"Nick.Wittwer@trac.nps.navy.mil, HYPERLINK "mailto:Thomas.Cioppa@trac.nps.navy.mil"Thomas.Cioppa@trac.nps.navy.mil HYPERLINK "mailto:Niki.Deliman@trac.nps.navy.mil" Niki.Deliman@trac.nps.navy.mil Jeff Weekley, Dr. Don BrutzmanModeling, Virtual Environments and Simulation (MOVES) InstituteCode UW/Br, Naval Postgraduate School Monterey, CA 93943 USA 1.831-.656-.2149,  HYPERLINK "mailto:jdweekley@nps.navy.mil" jdweekley@nps.navy.mil,  HYPERLINK "mailto:brutzman@nps.navy.mil" brutzman@nps.navy.mil Keywords:  Military Simulations, Military Operations in Urban Terrain (MOUT), Homeland Defense) Soldier as a System (SaaS), Soldier Modeling and Analysis Working Group (S-MAWG), Structural Weapons Effects (SWE), Extensible Markup Language (XML), Extensible 3D (X3D)ABSTRACT: As the Army transforms into the Future Force, more emphasis must be placed on portraying the contributions of the individual Soldier.  The “Soldier as a System”(SaaS) is currently underrepresented in models and simulations (M&S) in areas such as modeling actions, reactions, behaviors, and communications of the individual Soldier.  Models need to address shortfalls such as how Soldiers tactically cross danger areas, uses cover and concealment, acquire and prioritize fires, report, and coordinate tactics. This representation is especially important as the US military emphasis transitions to asymmetric operations and large-scale force-on-force engagements are less likely.  This project is aimed at utilizing and focusing students and faculty from various academic departments at the Naval Postgraduate School (NPS) to conduct relevant research towards better representing the individual Solider in M&S. The technical approach will vary with the specific area of research and academic department affiliation.  Approaches may consist of data collection, statistical and sensitivity analysis, algorithm development, perception and decision modeling, simulation creation/improvement/ testing, or model implementation.  The emphasis of this research is to provide reusable products for integration into current and emerging simulations, such as COMBAT XXI, OneSAF Objective System, and IUSS.   This project closely supports the efforts of the U.S. Soldier Modeling and Analysis Working Group (S-MAWG), led by the TRADOC Analysis Center – White Sands Missile Range (TRAC-WSMR).   S-MAWG’s charter is to gain awareness and develop a shared understanding of how the soldier and small unit must be represented within analytic tools to enable credible analysis of the decision issues that pertain to the current and future warrior.A considerable weakness in current military simulations is the inability to accurately model the physics of entity interactions with the environment.  Specific interactions of interest are physics-based munitions effects on complex structures (e.g., buildings) in urban terrain.  Interactions are often calculated offline and the results aggregated to an overall state, which is sometimes associated with a different polygonal representation at various aggregated scores.  Few representations techniques in current use are visually evocative, inherently representational or lightweight enough to for rapid distributiontransport over common information infrastructures.  Dynamic Compatible dynamic interactions between a wide variety of simulation applications and techniques, embedded algorithms, data visualizations and data storage are needed to exploit the full potential of modeling and simulation.    A simulation A common representation for deformable surfaces that accurately models urban environments,  and permits shared distributed computation of entity interactions, and updates the simulation database can contributes to success in future conflicts by facilitating better training and doctrine development. Such a simulation may also serve as a Simulation-Based Acquisition (SBA) tool for modeling Military Operations in Urban Terrain (MOUT) and Homeland Defense Operations. We expect this approach for deformable-surface representations will eventually enable integration of multiple computational approaches for Web-compatible distribution and interactive 3D graphics.1.  IntroductionAt the 2003 Infantry Conference at Fort Benning, Georgia, General Kevin Byrnes, the Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) Commander, noted that operations in Iraq and Afghanistan reinforced the notion that it is the caliber of the soldiers, not the caliber of the weapons that makes the difference in battle.  As such, he has given the Soldier as a System (SaaS) research top priority in order to support Army Transformation goals and objectives.As the likelihood of the US military being involved in large force-on-force engagements becomes less likely and as the Army transforms into the Future Force, more emphasis must be placed on the contributions of the individual Soldier (Sailor, Marine, Airman, or Special Operator), which are currently grossly underrepresented in models and simulations.  In order to provide insights to inform decisions and issues facing current and future Soldier/Army Transformation goals and objectives, analytic tools must credibly and accurately represent the actions, behaviors, and contributions of the individual soldier.  This is not an easy task.Soldiers have traditionally been modeled like combat vehicles: a moving platform/ chassis with weapons, armor and sensors. Unfortunately, modeling this platform’s movement rate and ability to engage a targets like traditional combat vehicles falls short of leveraging the true contributions and potential of the Soldier.  Before analytic modeling tools can provide credible insight on critical issues facing the Army, the SaaS must address numerous deficiencies and shortfalls of representing Soldier actions, reactions, behaviors, and communications. There are many simulations that accurately model entity interactions, using a wide variety of techniques. Complex algorithms are employed to simulate virtually every conceivable state. Unfortunately, fFew representations are visually evocative, inherently representational or lightweight enough to transportfor distributed implementation over common information infrastructures. There are even fewer examples in the complex, but desirable urban terrain environment. The diverse technical approaches that do exist are typically incompatible.  Dynamic interaction between a wide variety of simulation applications and techniques, embedded algorithms, data visualizations and data storage are needed to exploit the full potential of modeling and simulation.  This work explores how common physical representations for deformable surfaces might compatibly employ multiple physics approaches in a manner suitable for real-time 3D graphics and Web-based distribution.The U.S. Military’s involvement in urban operations has escalated significantly over the past several years.  Modeling and Simulation (M&S) plays a role in the development and refinement of Army tactics, techniques and procedures.  A considerable weakness in current military simulations is the inability to compatibly and accurately model diverse accurately entity interactions with the environment.  Specific interactions of interest are physics-based munitions effects on complex structures (e.g., buildings) in urban terrain.  This paper describes multiple design considerations, the technical approach used and progress to date.    2.  BackgroundTechnology has changed the way a Soldier fights and how he is equipped.  Enhanced night vision devices, land navigation equipment, satellite and wireless communications, ballistic protective gear, and modular weapon systems have increased the Soldier’s lethality, survivability, and situational awareness.  Because the U.S. military budget is constrained, acquisition decision-makers must make smart choices in determining which technologies best benefit our ground forces. Today’s decision environment requires credible, relevant analysis tools and methods to support DoD acquisition decisions such as how we equip the individual Soldier and small unit.  Unfortunately, current analysis tools are ill equipped to address many individual Soldier decision issues.1To identify the key individual Soldier and small unit (squad level and below) decision issues relevant to the current and future warrior, a Soldier Modeling and Analysis Working Group (S-MAWG) was sponsored and formed by the TRADOC Analysis Center at White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico (TRAC-WSMR).   Background The S-MAWG’s charter is to gain awareness and develop a shared understanding of how the soldier and small unit must be represented within analytic tools to enable credible analysis of the decision issues that pertain to the current and future warrior.In order to best focus future efforts/funding, the S-MAWG objectively identified gaps in representing the real world phenomena related to the close fight.  A model assessment questionnaire was drafted and sent to each of the below listed model configuration managers to conduct a self-assessment:  Combined Arms and Support Task Force Evaluation Model (CASTFOREM)Janus Combat XXIVector-in-Commander (VIC)Advanced Warfighting Simulation (AWARS)Integrated Unit Simulation System (IUSS)Squad Synthetic Environment (SSE)Objective OneSAFProject AlbertClose Action Environment (CAEn)Joint Conflict and Tactical Simulation (JCATS)Survey (and subsequent interview) results were assembled into a list of modeling deficiencies, or “gaps”.  Approximately sixty gaps were then categorized into the following areas:Situational Awareness /Communications, Command and Control, and Intelligence (SA/C3I)Lethality Mobility Survivability and Protection Soldier Equipment Trustworthiness Modeling the Physical Environment Modeling the Mission Environment The S-MAWG then placed each gap (by vote) into one of three tiers:1- The gap must be filled or an acceptable work around must be in place in order to conduct credible Soldier level analysis in M&S.2- The gap is important, but credible analysis can be conducted in M&S unless the study specific issues require accurate representation of this phenomenon.3- The gap exists, but is not important enough to expend current resources to fill.The resulting prioritized gaps are the basis for the TRAC-Monterey/Naval Postgraduate School (NPS) research efforts.Several major challenges exist in representing Military Operations in Urban Terrain (MOUT) and Homeland Defense Operations in distributed military simulations: accurately representing complex structures, accurately modeling the result (physics-based) of entity interactions with the environment, and rapidly communicating attribute and visual changes to the user and state changes to the simulation database.  Polygonal representations are the current standard practice for visually rendering terrain and other features.  When well done, these models are life-like and compelling, but they often do not carry any additional or, useful information about the physical properties of the terrain or buildings beyond visual information.  A wall textured to look like cinder block visually communicates a great deal about the condition and properties of such a wall, but this visual information could cannot be used to support an algorithm or populate a database.  Polygons and textures are of no use to a model that requires physical properties to calculate the damage that might be inflicted by a direct-fire weapon.  Complex algorithms have been developed to predict virtually any conceivable interaction. However Simulation simulation databases, however, typically do not have all the information needed to calculate physics- based results of entity interactions.   Entity interactions are often artificially modeled and computed externally from the simulation; or information may be is generalized or statistically and/or collected predicted offline to calculate results.  The results of these interactions are typically aggregated to a status or score (e.g., a ppercent of structure damaged).  This score is sometimes used to replace the polygonal image with one in one of several damaged states (i.e., a multi-state object or MSO).  A partially destroyed building is might then be considered said to be “sixty percent destroyed.” However,But this purely numeric representation is often not a this purely numeric representation is often not a tactically or visually usefulgood measure of its entity state. What parts are damaged?  Is the building still useful for some purposes, but not others?  How much more energy must be applied to make it useless and in what area? Few representations are visually evocative, inherently representational, generally interoperable, distributable, or can be dynamically alterable.ed3.  Project Goals3.  ObjectiveIn order to contribute to the credible representation of the individual Soldier in models and simulations, TRAC-Monterey is teaming with the faculty and students at the Naval Postgraduate School (NPS) to conduct focused research in support of student thesis requirements.  Individual but complementary research efforts will concentrate on the gaps identified by the S-MAWG.  The accurate representation of the individual Soldier in models and simulations will help facilitate the underpinnings of future Army transformational decision issues.   The Training & Doctrine Command (TRADOC) Analysis Center (TRAC) and the Naval Postgraduate School (NPS)’s Modeling, Virtual Environments and Simulations (MOVES) Institute are togetheris researching an improved methodology to combine visual and material characteristics to describe, represent, and communicate structures in terms of multiple visual models, various construction materials (type and characteristics), interior spaces, void spaces, and exchange formats. The goal in this context is to model physics-based munitions effects on complex structures, and then subsequently represent both explosive deformations and collateral effects in current and emerging networked 3D simulations.  Our focus is Structural Weapons Effects (SWE).  Figure 1 shows an example project architecture for this approach. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Munitions effects will be based on structural-response algorithms to assess damage to the structure as well as collateral damage. The structure may change or deform based on the calculation (i.e. dent, hole or collapse), change the environment (i.e. rubble about the site), as well as allow the projectile to continue on a modified trajectory, possibly causing more further damage.Another project goal is to be extensible and flexible, being able to support current, future, and legacy simulations and models.  Future simulation systems of interest include OneSAF (One Semi-Automated Force) Objective System (OOS) and COMBAT XXI.  The project’s methodology will be proto-typed in a current simulation called OTB (OneSAF Test-Bed).  An approach that maps to or can encapsulate other models is of great interest as well, such as other structural weapons effects models, dispersion modeling, target and acquisition models, etc. The payoff for this project is the accurate generation of complex terrain for use in modeling military operations. A simulation that accurately models urban environments and entity interactions contributes to success in future conflicts by facilitating better tactics, techniques and procedures (TTPs), better doctrine development, and better weapons analysis for MOUT and Homeland Defense operations.4.  Summary of Technical ApproachOne of TRAC-Monterey’s objectives at NPS is to facilitate academic research that furthers Army and Joint Modeling, Simulation, and Analysis.  This is often in the form of student thesis support.  Although valuable, these efforts are often sporadic and un-orchestrated.  When TRAC-Monterey obtained funding from the Army Model Improvement Program – Simulation Technology Program (AMIP/SIMTECH), it provided a means for a focused effort. The funding enables partnering with NPS faculty towards the common goal of better individual Soldier representation in M&S. 4.1  AssessmentSince techniques and partial solutions abound in this area of research, an assessment of current and emerging methodologies will first be conducted for each area of the project.  Data formats and exchange formats, such as Extensible Markup Language XML (XMLExtensible Markup Language), Virtual Reality Modeling Language VRML (Virtual Reality Modeling LanguageVRML), Java 3D, and Extensible 3D X3D (Extensible 3DX3D) will be explored to interface structural weapons effects algorithms and communicate changes to simulation terrain databases in military simulations.  Exploration will also include how to best integrate or translate existing and developing high-resolution models and software packages (government owned, public domain and commercial).  Integrating exemplar buildings and DIS networking to drive and examine dynamic deformations in distributed simulations will allow us to comparatively assess these software packages, either in standalone mode or networked via the Web.   Capabilities and limitations of methodologies and models will be assessed with respect to:Dynamic coding requirementsPhysics-based algorithm supportReconfigurable terrain databasesData exchange capabilities Combinable methodologies Computing and Rendering EffectsReal Time vs. Slower than Real Time4.2 Proof of Principle PrototypeThe driving exemplars for this project will be representative concrete, cinder cinder-block and wood buildings in a OneSAF TestBed synthetic natural environment and within a commercial web browser. The driving explosions will include small and medium-caliber munitions (7.62 mm/.50 cal munitions) and explosives (Mark 19/M203 grenade launchers and satchel charges).  Second-order and third-order effects will be considered for multiple impacts. 4.3  Selected ApproachThis effort will progress in three phases.  The first is to define, prioritize, and specifically target several sets of research topics in support of modeling the individual Soldier. The priority will be based on the gaps identified by the S-MAWG and potential high return on investment. Essentially, a mix of complementary thesis research projects is sought that allows for the maximum attention to the highest priority topics while ensuring that the topics chosen are the most suitable for masters level thesis work.  The suitability for thesis work of a particular topic or subject matter includes the following characteristics:Subject matter requires little dependence on outside support, particularly experimentation results of a test to be conductedSubject matter reaches across several research topicsSubject matter appeals to officer and his or her military backgroundSubject matter appeals to faculty member and his/her research fieldTime to complete research on particular subject matter supports masters thesis timelineIncluded in this phase is the initial recruitment of faculty and students within various departments at NPS, to include Operations Research (OR), Modeling Virtual Environments and Simulation (MOVES), Computer Science, and Systems Engineering.  The result of this phase will then yield several options of research “packages” that will consist of properly scoped, related research topics offered to thesis students of the departments described above. The second phase includes the mentoring of thesis students (by an NPS Research Associate with a Ph.D.), overseeing their work (TRAC-Monterey personnel serve as second readers), documenting their results, updating relevant DoD simulations as appropriate, and completing an interim report of progress. The technical approach will vary with the specific area of research and academic department affiliation.  Approaches may consist of data collection, statistical and sensitivity analysis, algorithm development, perception and decision modeling, simulation creation/improvement/ testing, or model implementation.The third phase will result in a summary report of work done by the first group of five to seven students and as well as a repetition of phase two with a new group of five to seven students and, possibly, faculty.  Future funding may enable continued supporting researchThe Extensible Mark-up Language (XML) will be used to develop an appropriate representation to encapsulate and portably exchange data required for dynamically rendering deformable surfaces in military simulations. XML is a free, open open-standard, web-accessible, and collaborative markup language designed to support such customization of data.  It is also extensible and platform independent.  It will be used to describe the visual attributes (planes that delineate apertures and enclosures) needed to represent structures in simulations.  The visual attributes will also be tagged with the physical attributes needed to calculate interaction results (i.e. brick wall, 4” thick, point of impact 3’ from an aperture) using physics-based algorithms.  The results of interaction calculations will map to multi-state objects and will dynamically change the characteristics of the physical attributes, using Document Object Model (DOM) and Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP).  This approach is also conducive to mapping to a multitude of present and future models.  .5.  Research AreasUpon examining the prioritized list compiled by the S-MAWG, it quickly becomes apparent that the effort involved and even the scope of some of the identified “gaps” varies greatly.  An example of this disparity is the gap that seeks to model the ability of a soldier to pick-up a weapon from a casualty compared to the gap simply defined as modeling human factors effects, to include physical and cognitive resources and fatigue impacts.  The latter gap could encompass years of effort by an organization such as Natick.  Emerging simulations such as OneSAF Objective System and COMBAT XXI already include perception and rule-based tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs).  The question is how do these simulations attain their full potential with respect to representing the close fight.  We are no longer satisfied with the current resolution of models that use simple probabilities for engagements.  Tomorrow’s analysts would like engagements to consider factors beyond the traditional distance modifier.  Target modifiers such as movement rate, exposed area, exposure time, posture, protective gear, etc.  Shooter modifiers could consider posture, support (using a sandbag or tree limb), training/marksmanship, queuing time, stress, rate of fire, tracers/spotters etc.  This is of course only after the shooter acquires and fires on the target – a whole other field of research. Of course, what happens after the “trigger squeeze”?  Modeling how a soldier reacts to being fired upon changes so many parameters that it is easy to see that this simple example spirals into a lengthy list of potential research areas.  This very “simple” event sheds light on the complexity involved in modeling how a soldier recognizes and crosses a danger area, seeks cover, and conveys intelligence to his superiors and subordinates to act upon.Our challenge is to contribute to this formidable task in an organized and complimentary manner in the context of student theses.  What better location to harness subject matter experts than at NPS?  We have the unique ability to marry up military officers leveraging their backgrounds and experience with organizations willing to partner with and assist research in the name of military M&S.  Such an example is the Army Materiel Systems Analysis Activity (AMSAA) partnering with any student work in the area of weapons effects.Preliminary analysis of the S-MAWG’s prioritized list has led to the following research areas:Reactions to Indirect FireReactions to Direct FireDirect Fire EffectsSoldier Accuracy Based on TimeSoldier Accuracy Based on PostureIndividual Weapon Capabilities in MOUTSoldier Load/Fatigue Semantic TerrainHuman FactorsCover and ConcealmentAlthough at first glance some of the research areas may not seem complementary or even related, there are many overlapping factors.  Each of the identified topics has the capacity to support years of research in a multitude of directions.  As the project managers, TRAC Monterey’s task is to ensure research leverages and/or compliments each other.  Shaping research to look at common factors in the selected areas has cumulative benefits, rather than stand-alone.  By examining the scope and focus within each of the research areas, common factors are threaded and repeated throughout.  The posture of a soldier is an important factor identified in eight of the ten research areas and visual, acoustic, and vibratory cues are emphasized in the four of the research areas. In some cases, research my attempt to improve upon or incorporate existing models or research.  Any research that explores the effect of munitions impacting the soldier and his/her equipment may leverage such models as the Operational Requirements-based Casualty Assessment (ORCA) model or the Integrated Casualty Assessment Methodology (ICEM) model.  Another example would be the use of naming conventions and principles used in developing data exchange formats, such as describing terrain (like the Synthetic Environmental Data Representation Interchange Specification - SEDRIS) and command & control information (using the Command & Control Information Exchange Data Model - C2IEDM).  The principles could be applied to convey information to a soldier, weather it is in the form of orders, tactics, or information collection.4.3.1 Open Standards for Use in Proof of Principle PrototypeAn XML data structure can hold the static and dynamic information that is needed to populate the simulation databases and inputs, as well as serve as a basis for 2D and 3D visualizations, data queries and archiving for playback and analysis.JavaTM technology and XML are a natural match for the creation of applications that exploit the web of information where different classes of clients must interoperate. It allows for the consumption and generation of information that is exchanged between different servers, running on varied system platforms. The open standardization, portability and extensibility of both XML and Java technology make them the ideal choice for the flexibility and wide availability requirements ( HYPERLINK "http://java.sun.com/xml" http://java.sun.com/xml).4.3.2 Exemplar PrototypesMany of these technologies have been prototypes during modeling projects produced by the NPS MOVES Scenario Authoring and Visualization for Advanced Graphical Environments (SAVAGE) project.  Figures 2 and 3 show exemplar XML-based explosion prototypes for real-time distributed building deformations and representations.  4.3.2 Demonstrated API	This interface is demonstrated in the Autonomous Underwater Vehicle (AUV) Data Server (ADS), in use at the Naval Postgraduate School’s Center for AUV Research (http://www.cs.nps.navy.mil/research/auv/). The ADS is a JavaTM – based program that runs on a network. It receives files containing simple data in ASCII format that is generated by and downloaded from AUVs. The data is then checked for validity, stored in XML format and used to generate both United States Message Text Formatting (USMTF) for the Global Command and Control System – Maritime (GCCS-M) and X3D-based 3D scenes that recreate missions as performed by the various AUV platforms. The software is componentized, and packages can be added as new AUVs are developed and new visualization requirements emerge. This approach suits an interoperability prototype for rendering dynamic structures in military simulations, as well.56.  Future ResearchWe anticipate integrating these products into developing COMBAT XXI and/or OneSAF codebases.  Expanded work may include the transformation of terrain data and modeling additional complex structures (e.g. bunkers, tunnels), additional algorithm support (e.g. cratering, shock, sound, or additional munitions), and entity interactions (e.g. vehicle collisions, weather effects, particulate dispersions).  Also  Web3D Consortium endeavors to map Computer-Aided Design (CAD) engineering formats to X3D hold further promise to, this approach  could be used to integrate a vast number of offline structural models into Web-based  military simulations.6. SummaryThe emphasis of this research is to provide reusable products for integration into current and emerging simulations, such as COMBAT XXI, OneSAF Objective System (OOS), and Integrated Unit Simulation System (IUSS).  All products (technical reports, briefings, algorithms, models, etc.) will be provided to DOD repositories, agencies, and programs.  The accurate representation of the individual Soldier in models and simulations will help facilitate the underpinnings of Army transformational decision issues.   An extremely great amount of detail is involved in the computation and distribution of dynamic structure deformations for Web-compatible military simulations. Partial, incomplete and incompatible solutions are commonplace in this field. As we proceed to achieve ambitious goals, we will arbe simultaneously keeping the following “big picture” criteria in mind:Physically correct results, traceability and compatibility computed at various resolutionsResults that are repeatable across simulations and representationsExtensibilityOpen Standards 3D graphics with Web compatibility for broad applicability and re-useOpen source and royalty-free licensing for unconstrained repeatability“Two-track” approach examining both government supported software and open- source solutionsState changes in building structures distributable across the network to participating entitiesAll of these criteria must be satisfied in combination if affordable and scalable system capabilities are to be achieved.77.  AcknowledgementsThis document was preparedwork aligns integrally and closely supports the efforts of S-MAWG.  For additional information about the models evaluated or descriptions of the gap categories referenced in this paper, please consult the S-MAWG Evaluation Report listed in the reference. is based on a TRAC-Monterey research project and is the collaborative research project byeffort of TRAC-Monterey with, the Naval Postgraduate School’s School (NPS) Modeling Virtual Environment and Simulations (MOVES) Institute, and the Engineer Research and Development Center (ERDC).  Special thanks goes to Niki Goerger, Michael Pace, and Don Nelson from ERDC and Jeff Weekly from the MOVES Institute.88.  References[1] ] Pace, MichaelSoldier Modeling and Analysis Working Group Evaluation Report (Draft), U.S. Army TRADOC Analysis Center, White Sands Missile Range (LTC Larry Larimer, MAJ Peter Habic, Mr. Tim Bosse, Mr. David Hardin, Mr. Doug Mackey, Mr. Dan Tulloh), 31 Jan 2004. E. and Warren R. Bennett: “Preliminary Investigations of the Visualization of Buildings in the OneSAF Environment” Information Technology Laboratory, ERDC/ITL SR-01-01, Sept 2001.[2]  Weekley, Jeffrey D., "Technical Report for AUVFest 2001," Center for AUV Research, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CAExtensible 3D (X3D) Graphics, Web3D Consortium,  HYPERLINK "http://www.web3D.org/x3d.html" http://www.web3D.org/x3d.html [3] Blais, Curtis, Brutzman, Don, Horner, Doug and Nicklaus, Shane, “Web-Based 3D Technology for Scenario Authoring and Visualization:  The SAVAGE Project,” Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation, and Education Conference (I/ITSEC) 2001, Orlando Florida, November 2001.  Available at  HYPERLINK "http://web.nps.navy.mil/~brutzman/Savage/WebBased3dTechnology-Savage-IITSEC2001.pdf" http://web.nps.navy.mil/~brutzman/Savage/WebBased3dTechnology-Savage-IITSEC2001.pdfAuthor BiographiesCPT MAJ NICK WITTWER is an Army Officer with over 10 years of commissioned service.  He isserving as  currently an operations research analyst at the U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) Analysis Center (TRAC) in Monterey, California and pursuing an MS in Operations Research at the Naval Postgraduate School.  His research interests are include modeling Military Operations in Urban Terrain (MOUT) and Soldier modeling., specifically dealing with dynamic terrain capabilities, complex structure representation, and environmental interaction.  Dr. Niki Deliman GoergerLTC THOMAS  CIOPPA is a Lieutenant Colonel in the US Army and is currently the Director of the Training and Doctrine Command Analysis Center - Monterey.  He earned his Ph.D. in Operations Research from the United States Naval Postgraduate School.  is a senior researcher at TRAC Monterey whose expertise is in operations research and modeling/simulations. She earned her Ph.D. in Industrial Engineering from Texas A&M University.  Dr. Deliman continues to lead research and development efforts to provide decision makers, war fighters, and materiel developers with improved methods and tools for battlefield assessment, vehicle design/modification/comparison, and engineering support for logistics. Jeff Weekley is a 3D modeler, programmer and multimedia specialist working at the Naval Postgraduate School (NPS).  His expertise includes underwater robot command and control interfaces. Don Brutzman is a computer scientist and retired submarine officer.  He serves as an Associate Professor in the Modeling Virtual Environments & Simulation (MOVES) Institute and Undersea Warfare Center at the Naval Postgraduate School.  His research interests include underwater robotics, real-time 3D computer graphics, artificial intelligence and high-performance networking.  He is a member of the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE), the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Special Interest Group on Graphics (SIGGRAPH) and the American Association for Artificial Intelligence (AAAI).  Currently he leads the Extensible 3D (X3D) Working Group and directs development of the Virtual Reality Transfer Protocol (vrtp) and  Extensible Modeling and Simulation Framework (XMSF).DR. DON BRUTZMAN is a Navy Officer and currently a computer scientist and Associate Professor working at the Naval Postgraduate School.  His research interests include underwater robotics, real-time 3D computer graphics, artificial intelligence and high-performance networking. As MOVES Technical Director for Networked Virtual Environments and 3D Visual Simulation, he currently directs the construction and integration of internetworked physically based models for large-scale virtual environments through development of X3D and the Virtual Reality Transfer Protocol (vrtp).  HYPERLINK "http://web.nps.navy.mil/~brutzman" http://web.nps.navy.mil/~brutzman  http://java.sun.com/xml/ Weekley, Jeffrey D., "Technical Report for AUVFest 2001," Center for AUV Research, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA http://www.cs.nps.navy.mil/research/auv/.Figure 1. Project Architecture Goal EMBED PBrush  Visualw/Eng PropTranslate to visual resultCompute physics-based effectsMunition-Structure interactionVisual ModelVisual Model w/Structural  Properties Engineering Model