Transforming the Data Support Process for Army Studies via Army Characteristics and Performance (C&P) Data PortalJin KwonBryan ParisSean DobbsTom FavingerU.S. Army Materiel Systems Analysis ActivityJoint Technical Coordinating Group for Munitions Effectiveness (JTCG/ME) Joint Data Center (JDC)ATTN: AMSRD-AMS-JD392 Hopkins RoadAberdeen Proving Ground, MD 21005-5071(410) 278 2787jin.kwon@us.army.milPete RiganoKen KertisApplied Research Associates (ARA), Inc.8564 Sycamore Trails Drive Springboro, OH 45066 (831) 656 7575rigatoni@woh.rr.comKeywords:Data, Portal, Standards, Semantics, DIF, XMLABSTRACT: The Army’s analytical community (AMSAA, TRAC, CAA, NGIC and ARL) began an effort to transform the business processes associated with data support for Army studies in the late 1990’s.  This transformation has recently been re-energized by the establishment of a community of interest between these same organizations.  The community is implementing a 3-pronged approach to transforming the processes – data standardization, common business processes and continuous feedback.  All standards and data are accessible via the Army Characteristics and Performance (C&P) Data Portal.  The Army Characteristics and Performance (C&P) Data Portal is an on-line hub that exposes the standards and processes used by the analytical community to exchange data in a controlled and understandable way.  The portal is comprised of two primary applications – the Standard Nomenclature Database (SND) and the Electronic Data Request System (EDRS).  The SND is a web-based catalog of community agreed on names for military equipment.  The SND is a web based catalog that standardizes the names the analytical community uses for many data items including platforms, weapons, munitions and sensors.  The EDRS is a web-based application that assists users in creating data requests that implement data standards and realistic doctrine.  EDRS is inherently linked to the SND and to AMSAA’s data system.  EDRS also incorporates the best practices from the TRAC’s Automated Data Request System (TRACDRS).  One of the keys to the successful transformation was designing the Army C&P Data Portal to support legacy operations at TRAC, CAA, NGIC and AMSAA.  Part of the transformation was the revamping of AMSAA’s data system.  AMSAA models its data support operations as a full service restaurant.  This provides a common everyday process that is easily understood by AMSAA and its customers.  The process components are elements they use every day (orders, recipes, standards, tools, customers and suppliers).  By examining the practices that provide outstanding customer service in restaurants, AMSAA can reconfigure its processes to emulate them.    This approach has facilitated new ways for interacting with customers and provided clarity how data standards and algorithms fit into the process.  The analytical community has established a process for continuing the transformation.  The group meets quarterly as part of the Army C&P Data Portal’s Configuration Control Board (CCB).  The CCB receives direction from a Senior Advisory Group (SAG) with representatives from all the community members plus additional members from the Army and Joint staff.IntroductionThe current process for conducting Army studies works because of extraordinary efforts from data producers and consumers.  Much of the behind-the-scenes efforts performed by these groups are made more difficult (or even impossible) by issues with semantics, format and content of the data and the requests for the data.  Inefficiencies exist on both sides and result in reduced data quality and extended study timelines.   The Figure 1 below shows a generic request – produce – provide sequence for any organization requesting and receiving data using the current study process.Figure 1From a data consumer perspective, the study process includes defining the scenario, selecting the equipment available to the forces in the scenario, ordering the data, transforming and loading the data into a usable format, exercising the simulation tool and analyzing the results.  Under the current system, the data consumer must order data from many sources and transform this data into a format that is compatible with their operations.  They must also resolve the semantic content issues associated with the data (naming, definition and content issues).  Often sources for data, especially authoritative ones, are unknown leaving voids in the study data.  Inconsistent data interchange formats are also a problem.  The result?  Decreased study quality and increased time to perform them.From a data producer perspective, the study process includes receiving a request for data, deciphering that request, transforming it into something usable and delivering the data.  Currently, data producers receive orders for data from many different customers in many formats.  Customers have their own simulation tools, data system and naming conventions.  This requires the data producer to transform the request into something that is usable in their data system.  The lengthiest part of this process is deciphering how the customer’s names and terms for equipment map to the data producer’s.  The producer is also frequently required to explain certain data elements either during or after the study.  This requires that individual study elements have audit trails so that their pedigree can be explained.  Currently, data can be tracked back to its origins but this requires significant effort and is not always definitive.The data portal addresses issues on both the producer and consumer sides.  It provides a framework for distributing data standards (e.g. -equipment naming, format specifications, definitions) and data transformation tools, requesting data, providing data, and conducting research.  It relies on a combination of information technology, standard business processes and people to increase data quality and reduce study timelines.While the data portal is a new concept, much of what it intends to do is not.  Most of the ideas in the portal are initiatives endorsed by the Army’s Data Process Action Team (PAT).  Development of some of these initiatives is in their early phases while others are only notional concepts. Where possible, the portal has leveraged existing efforts and, where needed, it fosters new ones.EvolutionThe portal is an evolution of technologies put in place by various Army analytical agencies in the 1990’s.  In the early 1990’s, the US Army Training and Doctorate Command (TRADOC) Analysis Center (TRAC) embarked on an ambitious plan to standardize the data transfer between their customers and AMSAA.  The interaction between these two agencies produced a common vocabulary called the Standard Nomenclature Database (SND) and an initial set of data interchange formats.  The SND was shared via the Secure Internet Protocol Routed Network (SIPRNET) via UNIX servers.  In the mid-90’s, TRAC built an “SND compliant” personal computer based application for requesting data.  In the late 90’s, US Army Center for Army Analysis (CAA) and AMSAA formed the Army Data PAT to investigate bottlenecks and trouble spots associated with conducting Army studies.  AMSAA and CAA were soon joined by representatives from TRAC, US Army National Ground Intelligence Center (NGIC) and US Army Research Laboratory (ARL)/Survivability Lethality Analysis Directorate (SLAD).  The combined team possessed the knowledge and resources needed to impact the study data request process from top to bottom.  They quickly identified bottlenecks and initiated projects to fix them.  Key Army Data PAT recommendations were:Establish a web based Standard Nomenclature Database application and procedures for operations and support.Develop doctrinal matrix of firer target pairingsReview legacy nomenclatures Expand the use of the TRAC Automated Data Request System (TRACDRS)Establish data transfer formats between data requestors & suppliersOne of the first initiatives was the TRAC developed web-based implementation of the SND.   Other initiatives have resulted in the review of the legacy names, publishing a naming convention and the recasting of TRACDRS as a web-based tool (called Electronic Data Request System (EDRS)).  These initiatives and refinements comprise the current portal.To date the portal’s focus has been on the area of studies and analyses performed by the Army’s major analytical activities (AMSAA, TRAC and CAA).  The 2004 fiscal year marks a major turning point in the portal’s focus as it looks to expand its client base to include the Army’s Battle Labs, US Army Test and Evaluation Command (ATEC)/Operational Test Command (OTC), Program Executive Office (PEO) Simulation Training and Instrumentation (STRI) Program Manager (PM) One Semi Automated Force (SAF), etc.  This extension beyond the initial focus area and enhancement of the portal’s services make 2004 a critical year in the portal’s evolution.Key TenantsData StanrdizationOne of the portal’s main purposes is to expose standards to the community.  Two key standards that the portal publishes are the SND and the C&P Data Interchange Formats (commonly called the Standard File Formats (SFF)).  The SND establishes common vocabularies for the names of military equipment (and other items) used by the Army analytical community.  The C&P Data Interchange Formats (DIF) defines data interchange formats for the SND and external AMSAA performance data.  All the interchange formats in the DIF are based on the vocabularies published in the SND.Data AccessThe portal provides access to the SND vocabularies, AMSAA performance data and NGIC characteristics data.  All SND vocabularies (platform names, munition names, etc.) can be queried by portal users.  The portal allows users to propose changes to the SND vocabularies as well.  AMSAA performance data is currently available for a data request via a file pickup area called the “archives”.  As the portal evolves, these reports will be created dynamically in Extensible Markup Language (XML) formats.  Ultimately, the portal will offer self-serve data areas where users can perform on-line searches for data and save the results to their local computer.Reduced TimelinesReducing study timeline is one of the key tenants of the portal.  This is accomplished through a combination of features.  First and foremost are the implementation of data standards in the exchange of data – namely the SND and the SFF.  Exchanging data based on standards insures effective communication between organizations and allows data consumers and producers to build software to automate this process.  As the portal progress to its objective as a “one-stop shop” for authoritative Army C&P data, users will spend less time searching for the right data to support their studies.Knowledge SharingThe portal’s objective of standardizing data cannot be achieved without sharing information about business processes, methodologies, policies and other factors.  The portal publishes this information so that users can make informed decisions about how to use data in their studies.  The objective portal will have user forums where analysts can discuss data or methodology issues with experts in that area.  This will enable them to learn from each other’s experience with the portal and the data that it offers.Portal CompositionStandard Nomenclature Database (SND)The Standard Nomenclature Database is a repository for standard equipment names and descriptor fields.  It contains the equipment names commonly used throughout the Army study community (AMSAA, TRAC, CAA and ARL).  The concept was initiated by TRAC in the early 90’s and today is available on SIPRNET via its web site.  Extending the SND to allow cross mapping of names with other data systems (e.g. – NGIC’s System Parametric Information Retrieval Tool (SPIRIT) database) is a key initiative of the portal.Electronic Data Request System (EDRS)The EDRS assists users in developing requests using standard equipment names and standard formats.  Portal users use EDRS to order from AMSAA.  The objective EDRS will allow users to build requests that include all of their data requirements (equipment performance, terrain, meteorology, etc.).  The current EDRS version includes the AMSAA direct fire and indirect fire data areas.  Key portal milestones are to extend this to the other types of data AMSAA provides and ultimately the other data needed to support Army and Joint Modeling and Simulation (M&S) efforts.Joint Technical Coordinating Group for Munitions Effectiveness (JTCG/ME) Product and Information Access System (JPIAS)JPIAS is a web-based information system hosted by the Joint Technical Coordinating Group for Munitions Effectiveness (JTCG/ME).  JPIAS provides portal users with access to a wealth of information on joint systems.  All the products available via JPIAS have been approved by the joint community.System Parametric Information Retrieval Tool (SPIRT)NGIC’s SPIRIT database is the authoritative source for threat characteristics data for ground systems.  Portal users can access SPIRIT directly or via the SND.  The SND and SPIRIT are linked via the Modernized Integrated Database (MIDB) equipment code.  This linkage allows portal users to access SPIRIT and its information from SND searches.Characteristics and Performance Data Interchange Format (C&P DIF)The C&P DIF is a data transfer specification that is currently under development by AMSO, AMSAA and TRAC.  The DIF is XML based and is designed to support provisioning of bulk data sets as well as XML data-grams.  The bulk data sets would be used to support large-scale simulations (COMBAT XXI, ONESAF, etc.) while the data-grams would support web-based applications.Self-Service Data AreaThe self-service data area is a future portal feature that will allow users to “help themselves” to characteristics and performance data and other data (terrain, meteorological, etc.).  This area will allow users quick access to data for their studies.  Only “stable” data would be available via the self-service area.  The nature of performance estimates for military equipment is that they change frequently during a systems development or discovery.  Typically data for fielded systems will be available in the self-service data area.  Other data is available via the “special order” service (see below).  All data will be provided in an XML format that conforms to the C&P DIF.  Users can provide feedback on data via the user forums in the Knowledge Base (see below).Data Transformation ToolsThe transformation tools allow consumers to convert data from the C&P DIF format into one usable by their data system or applications.  Data consumers and producers can post transformation tools to the portal so that others can leverage this technology.  This will allow other users to capitalize on these efforts by reusing or extending the tools for their applications.  These tools could be as simple as XML style sheet transformations or as robust as Visual Basic or Java applications.Knowledge BaseThis future component will enable users to search the portal’s on-line technical library for reports on methodology and data or link to other data systems (JPIAS, SPIRIT, etc.) and SIPRNET based resources.  It will also contain user forums where users can hold discussions with their peers on methodology or data issues.  The current portal library contains documents on common business processes.  It is not searchable.Portal ServicesData RequestsData requests are “special orders” for data.  These orders are created and submitted using EDRS. The appropriate data agent will handle the requests.Data AgentsData agents act on the data consumer’s behalf in attaining the data required to support a particular data request.  They are subject area experts (weapons effects data agent, terrain data agent, mobility data agent, etc.) who work with the producers to acquire and reformat (as necessary) the data required by the consumer.  Since they have expertise in analyzing, producing and providing data they are ideally suited to work with both the producer and the consumer.  Agents are typically employed only when the required data aren’t available via self-service.  They can, however, be used as a technical source for information about the self-service data offerings in their area.  More agents will be required initially when relatively few data producers offer self-service data.  As the Army C&P Data Portal matures, more and more data products will be offered via self-service and some human agents will be replaced with virtual ones.Request TrackingThe portal provides an on-line order tracking service.  This service will allow the customer to find out the status of all the areas of their data request.  They can use this information to plan the scheduling of their study assets for simulation runs and other efforts.Configuration Control Board (CCB) and Senior Advisory Group (SAG)The Army C&P Data Portal CCB is a user group that controls the evolution of the portal and its associated business processes.   Controlling the tool and the underlying business processes is critical to the portal’s continued success.   The portal’s sole purpose is to faithfully implement a set of agreed on business processes.  For this reason, user input is critical to portal development.  The list of organizations that currently make-up CCB includes but is not limited to: AMSAA (Chair), Headquarters Department of Army (HQDA) Office of Deputy Chief of Staff (ODCS) G-3 (DAMO-AC), CAA, TRAC, ARL/SLAD, US Army Headquarters TRADOC Deputy Chief of Staff for Combat Development (DCSDEV), HQDA ODCS G-3 (DAMO-ZS)/US Army Modeling and Simulation Office (AMSO), NGIC, and Office of Secretary of Defense (OSD) Program Analysis and Evaluation (PA&E)/Joint Data Support (JDS).  Collectively, they administer the Army’s C&P data exchange (request, generate, transfer, and apply) process in support of Joint and Army studies and analyses.The Army C&P Data Portal SAG consists of the Directors and/or Technical Directors from the following organizations: AMSAA, HQDA ODCS G-3 (DAMO-AC), CAA, TRAC, ARL/SLAD, HQTRADOC DCSDEV, HQDA ODCS G-3 (DAMO-ZS)/AMSO, NGIC, and OSD PA&E/JDS.  The SAG provides overarching guidance and direction to the CCB.  In addition, the SAG is the decision authority for adjudicating changes, additions, and deletions of all functionalities, processes, and standards that may affect data exchange process via the Army C&P Data Portal.  Lastly, the SAG provides guidance and recommendations on the funding sources for upcoming tasks/projects.On-Going Data InitiativesThe Army’s analytical community in conjunction with the other users of the Army C&P Data Portal continue to enhance and expand the portal services by refining and developing the standards and processes in place to exchange C&P data.  Some of these planned developments/enhancements are currently on-going while others are unfunded requirements.   Army C&P Data Portal Capabilities EnhancementsContinued enhancements based on incorporation of System Change Requests (SCRs) from first year’s usage and directives from CCB (e.g., changes in SFF, new data areas within Direct and Indirect Fires, etc.).  This includes an effort to provide complete set of metadata about the C&P data being exchanged.  The portal currently provides information about file formats and definitions via SFF, but it does not provide information about the relationships and application of the data being provided in SFF.Middleware Repository via Identification of C&P Data Users and M&SsDeveloping inventory of middleware/translation programs for converting AMSAA SFF data to “model-applicable” data.  The requirement is based on the new organizations/users not having dedicated personnel/office to process input data for M&Ss and obvious lack of experience in working within the business process identified by Army Data PAT or Army C&P Data Portal CCB.  In order to assist these organizations/users, the initiative calls for developing central repository of community agreed on middleware for “model-applicable” data conversion.  The plan calls for (a) identification/update of new organizations/users on the business process via Army C&P Data portal; (b) interaction with C&P data users to develop list of M&Ss being used by various organizations; (c) identification of process that are currently being used and gather support requirements; (d) development of list of candidate process/middleware that may be shared; and (e) availability of the processes/middleware via Army C&P Data Portal.Army C&P Data Portal Expansion into Other C&P Data AreasExpanding the data areas/categories to cover other weapons effects C&P data being developed by AMSAA.  These areas include Reconnaissance, Surveillance, and Target Acquisition (RSTA); C3; IEW; Active Protection System (APS); Radar; Mines; Mobility; and Fixed Wing.  For each data area, the initiative involves: (a) identification of data development process; (b) identification of data users and how they are obtaining data; (c) identification of problem areas and development of recommendations to resolve these problem areas; (d) development of agreed on process for obtaining data; (e) development of community agreed on DIF; and (f) expansion of capabilities in the Army C&P Data Portal infrastructure to handle community agreed on business process via SND and EDRS.    Joint Data InitiativesDeveloping processes and tools facilitate C&P data exchange in support of Joint and other Service studies.  This includes providing Army data in support of Joint and other Service studies as well as obtaining other Service data in support of Army studies.    AMSAA Blue Characteristics Repository (ABCR)Almost all of the models found in the three M&S domains need input data that describe the physical characteristics of the systems represented in each model. The authoritative source for this type of data for non-US systems is the National Ground Intelligence Center (NGIC).  At this time there is no single authoritative source for this type of data for US/Blue systems.  Individuals and groups who need physical characteristics data for US/ Blue systems are forced to search multiple, and sometimes conflicting, sources for this type of input data.  Having multiple users access multiple data sources is a highly inefficient, costly exercise.  In addition these sources most often name a specific system differently, use different units of measure, describe their data content uniquely, and provide only a portion of the required set of data.  ABCR will provide a single cost-effective authoritative physical characteristics data source of well-structured parametric data on US developed or employed combat systems.  Specifically, the ABCR will contain data describing U.S. platforms, weapons, munitions, sensors, expendables, C4ISR systems and signals as well as their interrelationships. These data will be obtained from Army-selected authoritative sources and displayed to the user by individual source or merged into one presentation, with data from specified sources still identified for each system attribute. ABCR will provide a Knowledge Engineering Tool to facilitate data entry, a metadata framework for data harmonization and management, a highly extensible data model structure, web-enabled access, and an XML data exchange mechanism which can be customized to meet individual customer specifications.Development of XML Schemas and Corresponding Application Codes for AMSAA C&P Data in Army C&P Data Portal This initiative proposes to make the information in the AMSAA SFF more useful by transforming them into XML schemas.   This transformation will enable automated data validation and format verification via off-the-shelf XML tools.  Data consumers will not have to write special purpose programs to perform these tasks since XML tools can read the schemas and perform these tasks already.  Specifically the initiative will provide XML schemas and the corresponding application codes necessary to produce XML-based reports for AMSAA weapon system performance data.  The schemas will provide critical documentation that end users can use to better understand AMSAA data and to build data translation software.  The report software will produce standard XML-based reports.  These XML reports can be readily transformed into the target format required by simulations using low-cost, reusable and extensible approaches.SummaryIn order for Army to take the necessary steps to properly manage C&P data and make it available for use in concept exploration, analysis, testing, training, and other decision-making applications, it is critical to establish a single source for access to certified Army C&P data.  The single repository/portal concept, Army C&P Data Portal, will give controlled on-line access to distributed storage of data throughout the Army.  By end of 2004, community agreed on standards and processes for weapons effects C&P data for various AMSAA C&P data areas will be established via Army C&P Data Portal on SIPRNET for use by M&S community in obtaining authoritative and certified M&S input data.  Limited organizations/users already use Army C&P Data Portal’s current capability to request and obtain AMSAA weapons effect C&P data for the direct and indirect fire munitions.Author BiographiesJIN KWON is an Operation Research Analyst (ORA) for the U.S. Army Materiel Systems Analysis Activity (AMSAA).   His primary duties include being Project Manager and Administrator for Army C&P Data Portal and Army Performance Estimates Data System (APEDS) as well as serving as the Data Standards Category Coordinator for U.S. Army Modeling and Simulation Office.  He holds B.S. degrees in Applied Mathematics (Operations Research) and Industrial Management from Carnegie Mellon University and M.S. degree in Systems Management (Operations Research) from Florida Institute of Technology.PETE RIGANO is employed as a senior engineer with Applied Research Associates (ARA), Inc.   His primary work focus is the business process improvement through the design and development of information systems.  His education includes degrees in Chemical Engineering (B.S.) from the Ohio State University and Systems Management (M.S) from the Florida Institute of Technology.SEAN DOBBS is an ORA for the AMSAA. His primary duties include the generation of direct fire performance estimate data and the handling and processing of direct fire data requests from internal and external customers. He holds a B.S. degree in Physics from Towson University and is working toward a Master’s Degree in Applied and Industrial Mathematics at Towson University.THOMAS FAVINGER is an ORA for the AMSAA.  He works in the Joint Data Center (JDC) where he specializes in handling indirect fire artillery characteristics and performance data request processes.  He received a Bachelor of Science degree in Mathematics, with a minor in Physics, from Millersville University in 1991.  He received a Master of Science degree in Applied Mathematics from the University of Delaware in 1994, and a Ph.D. in Applied Mathematics from the University of Delaware in 2000.  His main interests in graduate school included functional analysis and numerical analysis.