System Acquisition and Product Development (SAPD) Forum2004 Spring OutbriefChairJim CoolahanVice ChairJean GraffagniniSecretaryCrash KonwinObjectives for this Workshop:Sharing actual experiences from both industry and government regarding M&S standards, information sharing, reuse, collaboration, business cases, policy and process, as applied to system acquisition and product development (SAPD).Identifying approaches to key M&S issues in SAPD, and lessons learned in M&S application to SAPD.Exploring application of M&S to the U.S. DoD Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System (JCIDS) and Defense Acquisition System.Comments and Recommendations:Presentations/Panel on emerging/recent senior-level U.S. DoD policy that will fundamentally challenge current M&S programs and support strategies was well attended and well received.  The attenuation of timely and accurate knowledge of these initiatives is rapid once outside the DC area.  This special session helped M&S practitioners “from the field” hear the word and pose questions to senior leaders who may not have realized their perspective.Having a coherent series of papers addressing various aspects of a significant and sustained program (in this case, the Single Integrated Air Picture, SIAP) offered insights into the technical lessons learned and pace of change in actual applications of tough System-of-Systems problems.For both 1. and 2. above, having this SIW in the DC area was of significant benefit in attracting senior/military presenters who would have been unable to accommodate travel to the typical Orlando venue.Marine Corps presentation on the platoon as weapon system showed multiple levels of M&S and analyses needed to support modern Capability-Based Acquisitions: valued-based estimates; performance modeling (classic); Human-System Interface (HSI) issues; and feedback into larger battle value context.  Leveraging across Service boundaries was evident.  WARCON presentation showed similar use of multiple aspects of force design and development, at a more methodical rate of advance (3-4 years).Digital Rights presentation provided a very good primer on the issues and controlling technologies and policy bodies.  SAPD PRP believes author recommendation for a SISO Product Development Group may be a bit premature – assumptions behind potential implementations need to be further explored. Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)33Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)48Peak attendance (including joint sessions)50Total papers presented9“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions3Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):04S-SIW-094 (post-workshop, based on presentation and paper)04S-SIW-051 (post-workshop, based on presentation and paper)04S-SIW-021 (pre-workshop, based on paper only)04S-SIW-045 (pre-workshop, based on paper only)-  PAGE 1 -