Command, Control, Communication, Computers & Intelligence Forum (C4I)ChairJohn DalyVice ChairDon TimianSecretaryTom MullinsAdin BurroughsWim HuiskampGene LaymanDr. Andreaas TolkChris WertmanRandal ZimmermanObjectives for this Workshop:	1) C4I is undergoing a fundamental transformationOld: “Cxxx” Communications/Computer system based on C2 Doctrinal hierarchy with “add ons” piggybacked to it (C2->C3->C4->C4I->C4ISR)New: “Net Centricity” Software reconfigurable IP based computer Networked system capable of supporting advanced information/functionality sharing between any echelon based on service oriented architectures.Explore GIG Opportunity Space for M&S In:Data mining/sense-making tactical analysisDecision support COA analysisPlanning and execution monitoringAnalysis and metrics support 2) Increase awareness of C4I transformation and new GIG paradigm.3) Explore opportunities for SISO C4I Forum to assist in GIG M&S COI.4) Support transformation of M&S functionality into M&S services.45) Become familiar with current C4I-Sim practices via papers/presentations.Comments, Keypoints and Recommendations:There waswere a well receivedwell-received invited presentations on DoD Global Information Grid (GIG) and the next generation Net-Centric C2, the Joint C2 system (JC2).  Awareness was raised in the forum on the fundamental transformation occurring in the U.S. DoD, and how we might find a place for M&S services and applications in the GIG and JC2. The capabilities based nature of JC2 and it’sits mission space based on Warfighting MCP’s was emphasized, in contrast to the GCCS Family of Systems.	SISO should heighten awareness of the GIG, and the need for M&S applications to similarly transform to a web services, distributed paradigm, used by C2 and GIG Enterprise Business domainsThe Service Based-oriented Architecture and NCES brief by DISA was also well received. There clearly is a role for SISO in the implementation of M&S (web) services via a service based-oriented architecture, as GIG Enterprise Services, fulfilling operational requirements. The re-configuration of monolithic M&S applications into services based applications utilizing GIG M&S Enterprise web serviceswith the potential to become M&S COI GIG Enterprise Services or even generally use Net-Centric Enterprise Services in the Core Service domain was discussed. DISA clearly indicated it is open to the M&S community contributing to GIG Web services and application development, and indicated a willingness to reduce architectural and testing/configuration management hurdles to deployment of new services.  Clear message was “less mandates, more innovation.”	 SISO should continue support in the C4I forum to educate the membership on new opportunities for M&S applications and web services, such as the web service tutorial.  SISO must ensure that M&S web service standards are established, and communicated to GIG developers.  Standardized techniques supporting the migration from legacy systems to M&S web services will be emphasized in the CfP.	A Panel discussion was conducted with a panel of Radm RAdmADM Bob Nutwell (USN(ret)), Mr. Bob Beaton,( DISA), Dr. Andreas Tolk, and Mr. Don Timian. The discussion covered more of the areas of the GIG, JC2 and service based architectures, as well as covered the direction of Net-Centric C2.  Composibility Composability of applications in the GIG was mentioned often, along with the need for new security policy to cover Net-Centric architectures. Important work in the areas of BML, Data fusion, and composibilty composability was presented. Data models and the need for standardization also discussed. Current state of the art systems for training and decision support with embedded simulation were presented Use of the MDA and M&S in system design and acquisition was presented. SISO must continue to encourage a diversity of viewpoints and subjects in the call for papers to ensure a lively debate and information exchange at the SIW. A Final C4I Forum discussion was held covering the following items:•Name changes and role of C4I forum need to change with evolving Net-Centricity paradigm • Need to update CFP and establish an MISSION/VISION for forum • Discuss role for forum as a technical resource for M&S GIG COIA specific resolution was for the Forum members informally to support the M&S COI formation in identifying M&S capability areas that map to Joint C2/Gig high interest requirements. The first area chosen was Adaptive Planning. Others will be suggested by members to the DMSO M&S COI POC.iscuss role for forum as a technical resource for M&S GIG COI SISO C4I forum will discuss the proposal to change the name to C2SIM C2M&S on the reflector and decide upon vote of the elected PRP. The CFP will be revised to support our expanded role in the GIG for Spring 2005.  A Community of Interest for M&S within the GIG will be established.SISO should participate in the maximum way possible in supporting an M&S COI in the GIG, and in providing M&S web services and architecture standards to the implementers of the GIG. Additionally, SISO should encourage informal assistance to the GIG M&S COI by members from all foura in SISO.	C4I Forum Spring 2004 SIW StatisticsAverage attendance (excluding joint sessions)45Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)63Peak attendance (including joint sessions)76Total papers presented19Other presentations and panel discussions(P) C4 Transformation and the GIG JC2(P) Service Based Architecture, JC2 and NCES(D) C4 Transformation and the GIG JC2      Service Based Architecture, JC2 and NCES      Future of the C4ISR/Sim TRM(D) Future of C4I forum and M&S COI in the GIG4Final recommendations for the SIWzie Award:1) 04S-SIW-009 Composable Mission Spaces and M&S Repositories - Applicability of Open Standards, Dr. Andreas Tolk 2) 04S-SIW-113 Developing Battle Management Language into a Web Service, Michael R. Hieb, Ph.D.3) 04S-SIW-156 Capabilities-Based Development of Future C4ISR Systems, LTC Ronald B. Sprinkle04S-SIW-00904S-SIW-01904S-SIW-11304S-SIW-156Delete what you don’t want to nominate!