Medical Modeling and Simulation Interoperability Study GroupChairWilliam BeavinVice ChairKenneth Curley/ Rick SeveringhausSecretarySean MurphyObjectives for this Workshop:Opening remarks by Ken CurleyRemarks from Forum ManagerReview of Fall 2003 OutbriefDiscussion of need for marketing to medical M&S developersPotential hurdles of engaging medical developersLeadership and participation issuesPresentation by Beth Pettitt, “Leveraging Warfighter Simulation Investments with HLA and DIS InteroperabilityGoals for Fall 2004Comments and Recommendations:Ken Curley discussed efforts to engage medical M&S community through emailings and discussion of interoperability at medical meetings.  At the 2004 Medicine Meets Virtual Reality meeting the need for interoperability was repeatedly stated by leaders in the field.  The working model that SISO uses might not fit medical M&S practices because existing interoperability work is done electronically or as sessions in larger medical meetings.  It will be difficult to attract stakeholders to attend two week-long meetings each year that have no other medical relevance (as yet), no Continuing Medical Education, etc.  Suggestion between members was that SISO reps should attend meetings like MMVR to introduce SISO, and that an interoperability workshop could be held at these medical meetings.  As groups begin formal development process, they can come to SIW as a product development groups as needed until standard is produced. Pete Swan was introduced by Rick Sharp as the new Marketing member of CC.  We discussed the need to market MM&S to both existing SISO members as well as to the medical community.  Rick Sharp (Track Mgr), Gene Wiehagen (our TAD) and Rick Severinghaus of the EXCOM offered increased support.  With respect to “product”, we discussed that the original idea had been to produce a paper that reviewed the MM&S landscape with respect to what has been standardized, by whom, and what things are arising as standards (e.g. Foundational Model of Anatomy out of U. Wash.).  We discussed development of a brochure that discussed “How To” develop a standard, why this was important and how SISO could be of assistance.  The result was that we will stick to the original plan and then can develop a brochure from what is learned from that.The issues of leadership and involvement were discussed.  Though the workload is not tremendous, we need to share it among the group and we also need involvement of experienced SISO members who are interested in MM&S.  We will continue the SG as noted above, but will have Sean Murphy and Rick Severinghaus as group leaders.  The MED forum will be led by Ken Curley, Gerry Moses and Beth Pettitt with assistance of Rick Sharp and Gene Wiehagen.The conclusion is that MM&S is still new and relatively disorganized, and that we need to go to MM&S vs. expecting that MM&S will come to SISO.  SISO support of MM&S interoperability will likely involve alterations in how SISO is used to functioning since the MM&S community is so diverse and the medical community operates as a many-headed organism where no single organization promulgates policy.  Interoperability is important for both integrating systems into existing DoD simulation/training as well as for increasing the flexibility of systems in the medical and biomedical science realms.  Simulation is becoming an increasingly important tool in both the military and civilian medical systems and there is a definite need for and want of interoperability. Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)10Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)12Peak attendance (including joint sessions)12Total papers presentedN/A“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions1Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):N/A