Panel Discussion on GIG – Key PointsPanelists:		Don Timian, NGIT		RADM (ret) Bob Nutwell, Booze-Allen		Bob  Beaton, DISA		Dr Andreas Tolk, VMASC		Gig is an emerging technology with political as well as technical challenges. There is concern that the grid will give the user the power to bypass the chain of command and work in ways the services do not want them to.Developers must not allow politics/policy to interfere with developing the highest quality/capability  technical solution. Can always limit utilization by policy.Clear polices must be developed by the services detailing how GIG will be used/operated in their context.Risk reduction/prototyping is still necessary before expending major funds.Developing GIG services competitively is both good for end users and also a risk if the nuances of the resulting applications are not properly captured in mete-data so that end-users can pick the proper version of a service for their individual needs. For mission-critical services multiple versions may or may not be a good thing.Developers and end-users are at odds: Developers want to protect users from themselves and end-users want the developers to quit being mom and dad and give them credit for knowing what they want and what they are doing. Release all the software and let the user decide what is best for their needs.Security is going to be a challenge – risk mitigation vs risk avoidance. Physical security and draconian hardware/procedural solutions are not possible in the context of the grid. Accreditation methods need to be developed. Need buy-in from suppliers of information, especially when dealing with multi-level/multi-compartment systems.Composability – In this context composability of services vs simulation components. Services need to be sufficiently atomic so as to be building blocks for new applications consisting of daisy-chains of services.VV&A also a challenge. End users will daisy-chain services that were not necessarily developed in the context of each other. The resultant effects on the validity of the outputs need to be watched.Meta-data is the key to many of the challenges presented here.M&S folks need to work hand-in-hand with the C4 development community to craft the best solutions.Centralized vs decentralized services is a balancing act that needs to be studied. A few big servers, a lot of small ones, or a mixture? Application dependent?