Mission Planning And Rehearsal System (MPARS) – Part of the OneSAF Tool SetPaul Dumanoir U.S. Army Program Executive Office - Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation (PEO STRI)12350 Research ParkwayOrlando, FL 32826(407) 384-3838 HYPERLINK "mailto:paul.dumanoir@peostri.army.mil" paul.dumanoir@peostri.army.milJeff Bittel U.S. Army TRADOC Program Office (TPO) OneSAFFt Monroe, VA(757) 788-5338   bittelj@monroe.army.milKeywords:Mission Planning, Mission Rehearsal, Simulation, Computer Generated Forces (CGFs)ABSTRACT: Whether a combat situation involves soldiers, air power or naval forces in the battlespace, military actions are increasingly dependant on the power of the computer and the wisdom of the planner.  The sand table and planning board are yielding to digital technology which now lets us plan the operations and fight the conflicts in a simulation environment before we wage war on the actual environment.  In 2002 the U.S. Army Program Executive Office (PEO) Simulation Training and Instrumentation (STRI), Product Manager (PM) One Semi-Automated Forces (OneSAF) began an initiative called Mission Planning and Rehearsal System (MPARS) at the request of the Commander 101st Airborne Division.  The objective of this effort was to focus the OneSAF program on short-term fielding of emerging course of action development and analysis and mission rehearsal capabilities. The MPARS is a collection of tools originally built as part of the OneSAF Objective System (OOS) development effort.  The OOS is the Army’s next generation entity level brigade and below constructive simulation specifically designed to meet the needs of the three major, Army modeling and simulation (M&S) domains. This paper provides an overview of the MPARS development, capabilities, and future direction. In addition the paper proposes different configurations in which the MPARS can be used to support mission planning, mission rehearsal and training.1. IntroductionIn the blink of an electronic eye, comprehensive simulations and mapping technologies can now transport war fighters across oceans or around the globe. Ingenious software can put them into global environments so real that, later, going there physically for the first time will be like going back to a familiar setting to fight—and win.  With just this kind of global deployment, flexibility, and mobility in mind, the One Semi-Automated Forces (OneSAF) simulation is being developed to support the Army as it works toward its 21st century objectives. Whether a combat situation involves soldiers, air power or naval forces in the battle space, military actions are increasingly depending on the power of the computer and the wisdom of the planner.  The sand table and planning board are yielding to digital technology which now lets us plan the operations and fight the conflicts in a simulation environment before we wage war on the actual environment. In 2002 the U.S. Army Program Executive Office (PEO) Simulation Training and Instrumentation (STRI), Product Manager (PM) One Semi-Automated Forces (OneSAF) began an initiative called the Mission Planning and Rehearsal System (MPARS) at the request of the Commander 101st Airborne Division.  The objective of this effort was to focus the OneSAF program on short-term fielding of emerging course of action development and analysis and mission rehearsal capabilities. The MPARS is a collection of tools originally built as part of the OneSAF Objective System (OOS) development effort.  The OOS is an entity level brigade and below constructive simulation specifically designed to meet the needs of the three major, Army modeling and simulation (M&S) domains. This paper provides an overview of the MPARS development, capabilities, and future direction.  In addition the paper proposes different configurations in which the MPARS can be used to support mission planning, mission rehearsal, and training.2. BackgroundThe OneSAF program is an evolutionary step to replace and assimilate legacy simulation and training systems and to meet soldier needs in a new era of war fighting. Although the OOS is the main thrust of today’s OneSAF program, the OneSAF program is composed of two major components—the OneSAF Testbed Baseline (OTB) and the OOS. The OTB is a software simulation product that started with the Modular Semi-Automated Forces (ModSAF) 5.0 simulation. The OTB was a mechanism for risk reduction in terms of producing beta versions of the OTB by providing early release of the OOS components to the modeling and simulation community.  In this manner, the OneSAF program is gaining valuable feedback, and users are become familiar with the tools years ahead of fielding.  The OOS is a Computer Generated Forces (CGF) simulation system designed to train leaders at the brigade level and below, and will ultimately be deployed to all active duty brigades and battalions; Army schools, labs and engineering centers; National Guard and Army Reserve units and other destinations as approved.  The OOS, when completed and fully deployed in 2007-2008, will be a single simulation to support all the Army’s modeling and simulation domains.  It will provide leaders with a tool for analysis and design, mission planning and rehearsal; Research, Development and Acquisition (RDA); Advanced Concepts and Requirements (ACR); and Training Exercise and Military Operations (TEMO).  The OOS will also support interoperability between training simulations, virtual simulators such as the Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT), and other large constructive simulations.OneSAF is connected to the Army Constructive Training Federation (ACTF) program in that OneSAF is the simulation that will provide brigade and below operations in all three modeling and simulation domains—ACR, RDA and TEMO.  OneSAF extends its simulation training capability down to the individual soldier. ACTF, on the other hand, will provide the mechanism that links these simulations and adds brigade to echelons above Corps operations.The OOS will represent a full range of operations, systems and control processes from the individual up to the battalion level.  The system simulates activities of ground warfare, specifically engagement and maneuver. It will include Command, Control, Communications, Computers and Intelligence (C4I) as well as combat support. Using a detailed terrain database, the OOS will employ highly realistic representations of the physical environment where soldier movements and behaviors can be reproduced to enhance training value.  Because of its focus on establishing where war fighters will go and what they will do during a land operation, one very important component of the OneSAF program is the MPARS.  The MPARS is actually an early customized version of several OOS components.  This system allows commanders to plan actions that will occur in an area of deployment. Using a terrain database of the area, tactical rehearsals can be run quite effectively.The MPARS concept started soon after the September 11th, 2001 events when the 101st Airborne needed a mission and rehearsal tool. When the Commanding General saw particular components of the OneSAF program, which include the mission/scenario planning component, the simulation/rehearsal component, and the After Action Review (AAR) component, he was impressed enough to order multiple laptop systems for the training of several brigades of the 101st. The MPARS got a true custom look in the process, when special identifiers, weapons systems and equipment lists, particular to the 101st, were added to the database.By providing the “MPARS” to an active duty division, the OneSAF program was afforded a live test of a component while it was still being built.  In another early use of the system’s capabilities, the MPARS was used at Fort Benning, GA, in 2003 as a prototype training tool in the Infantry Officer Advanced Course. The OneSAF program has already benefited from these early user assessments of the MPARS components resulting in the improvement of the planning, rehearsal, and AAR elements of OneSAF before the OOS starts being fielded.3. OneSAF Objective System (OOS) Architecture The OOS simulation is being developed using a product line approach [1]. One of the primary products of this approach is the Product Line Architecture Framework (PLAF) [2], and the Product Line Architecture Specification (PLAS) [3]. The PLAF is intended to identify basic products, components, and interfaces that support the entirety of the OneSAF requirements. It also relates a set of guiding principles for the product line based architecture. The PLAS fully specifies the architectural products, components, interfaces, and services identified in the PLAF. The PLAF is used as a mechanism to organize, categorize, and define the layered software structure to incrementally meet the OneSAF requirements. The PLAF supports a hierarchical composition process to create specific system configurations to support the different user domains. At the highest level products are combined to create the system configurations. The products are complete units of functionality such as an after action review product. Products themselves are made up of one or more components. Components are the elements that can be developed independently and therefore must have complete service and interface definitions along with a formal documented process for combining and ensuring that the overall performance requirements are met. This section provides a top level description of the OOS PLAF and in particular describes the components within the PLAF that make up the MPARS.Figure 3.1 shows the breakout of system configurations, products, and components using a layering approach. The top block shows the end user configurations supporting the TEMO, RDA, and ACR domains. Next the product layer is given showing the products necessary to compose a complete system configuration. Under each product is a list of the components that need to be developed or harvested through reuse to support the product.   There may be a number of “same name” components that are developed in order to support the variability of the OneSAF requirements. These components will need to be easily interchanged in order to support the end user system configurationsFigure 3. SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1 - OneSAF Product Line Architecture Framework (PLAF) 3.1 Systems Compositions Layer Figure 3.2 provides and expanded view of the OneSAF System Compositions Layer.  System Compositions provide configured end-user functionality for operational use within the TEMO, ACR, and RDA domains. Figure 3. SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2 - Architectural ApplicationsThese System Compositions are created from products existing within the OneSAF Product Layer of the PLAF and support identified OneSAF end state scenarios and OneSAF operational use cases. Architectural applications are general classes of OneSAF System Compositions that span the currently recognized OneSAF uses. Specific System Compositions are instances of these Architectural Applications and are constructed using the System Composer Product. 3.2 Product LayerFigure 3.3 provides and expanded view of the OneSAF Product Layer.  The OneSAF Product Layer includes all of the OneSAF Products that will be configured to support the mission area applications. These are the top-level building blocks within the OneSAF Architecture; they provide the specific functionality that makes up a part of setting up, executing, and analyzing simulation results. The PLAF supports multiple implementations of each of these building blocks in order to support the various System Compositions.This same concept applies to the lower layers of the architecture as well. The specific implementations that are included within a System Composition will be determined by user input to the System Composer, which then packages the necessary products to meet the input requirements. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3.3 - OneSAF Product Layer3.3 Component LayerFigure 3.4 provides and expanded view of the OneSAF Component Layer.  The OneSAF Component Layer contains the components that are to be developed independently in support of the products at the OneSAF Product Layer.Specific products use one or more of these components in order to create the necessary functionality. The PLAF supports multiple implementations of each of these components in order to support a specific Product for a specific composition; however, a single component implementation may support multiple products, multiple same kind products, and multiple compositions. Figure 3. SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 4 - Component Layer4. Mission Planning And Rehearsal System (MPARS)The MPARS is a set deployable software tools which primarily use Commercial-Off-The-Shelf (COTS) laptop computers.  The MPARS is planned for use at division and below, with hardware fielded to the division, brigade, and battalion staffs.  The goal of the MPARS is to enable collaborative and distributed mission planning and analysis capabilities that can be incorporated into the unit’s Military Decision-Making Process (MDMP).  The intent is to provide commanders with more efficient and effective planning tools and decision making input. It will help commanders at various levels to coordinate and facilitate a digital rehearsal with feedback that can be evaluated and acted upon at all staff levels. It will be adaptable so that modifications can be made to force structure and equipment availability, in particular through an adaptable set of Modified Table of Organization and Equipment (MTOE) that the user will be able to change as required. The MPARS includes a planning tool (MSDE – Military Scenario Development Environment) aimed at minimizing the time a person in a simulation center would need to build a training exercise, It also includes an AAR tool, and a 3D stealth viewer component which can be used to compliment the 2D plan view display, but is not a requirement in all planning situations. In addition, the simulation currently used by the MPARS for rehearsal is the OTB, but when OOS becomes available, it will replace OTB. Figure 4.1 depicts the collaborative planning concept that allows brigade staffs using MAPRS to analyze mission variables by Battlefield Operating System (BOS) and conduct horizontal planning.  After developing a plan, or during the development, the plan is passed to subordinate units for more detailed vertical planning between echelons.  As the plan evolves, the Courses of Actions (COAs) can be tested and rehearsals can be conducted using data input from the planning component tool - MSDE, to conduct simulated mission execution in the simulation component (OneSAF) with AAR data being produced with PowerSTRIPES for analysis.The key MPARS components and their role as part of the OOS tool set are described in the following sections.  Figure 4.1 - Mission Plan Workflow4.1 Event Planner Product The event planner product supports the planning activities that precede the development and execution of an OneSAF simulation exercise. These planning activities include development of the Military Scenario that describes the military operation to be represented in OneSAF, development of environment databases that represent the areas of operations within those scenarios, and the importing and translation of legacy data to be reused in the scenario or environment.The event planner product contains two product-specific components, the MSDE component, and the Environment Database Generation Environment (EDGE).  Initial versions of the MPARS did not include the EDGE component because it was still under development and did not interoperate seamlessly with the OTB simulation. The EDGE component provides tools to develop new Environment databases as well as the harvesting of legacy terrain and environment databases.The MSDE component, of the event planner product, supports the definition of the military scenario that will be used in OneSAF simulation events. Military scenarios include information such as overlays, control measures, terrain, weather, and unit relationships, affiliations, and organization. In addition, the military scenario captures the results of mission planning, including plan objectives, scenario situation, and other data that supports execution matrices and related planning annexes. The MSDE provides the GUI-based operations for creation, deletion, modification and viewing of Military scenarios. The MSDE works as an add-on to Microsoft PowerPoint©.  This provides the user with a familiar “look and feel” and regularly used software tools to conduct mission planning.4.1.1 Military Scenario Definition LanguageThe Military Scenario Definition Language (MSDL) is an open standard Data Interchange Format (DIF) developed by OneSAF Formatted in XML, the MSDL allows various, disparate systems to share planning information, including units, locations, control graphics, and soon, tasks.  Currently the MSDE, the Command and Control Personal Computer (C2PC), and the Combined Arms Planning and Execution-monitoring System (CAPES) applications interoperate with the OTB and/or the OOS using the MSDL. Future efforts include Future Combat System (FCS) Command and Control (C2) systems and Battlefield Management Language (BML) schema integration. The MSDE will also provide utilities to import and export scenarios from the Army Battle Command Systems (ABCS), ACTF, CCTT, Aviation Combined Arms Tactical Trainer (AVCATT), Combat XXI, OTB, and JANUS, provided they are compliant with the MSDL. This will allow the OneSAF to reuse scenario data from other simulations and organic C4I systems. It will also allow OneSAF to produce military scenario information for reuse by those other systems.4.2 OTB/OOS SimulationThe rehearsal component provides a real-time simulated mission execution capability using the OneSAF simulation products. Once the mission plan is generated, approved, and saved in the MSDE, the user is ready to import this information (via a MSDL file) into the MPARS rehearsal component. Initial versions of the MPARS are using the OTB simulation as the rehearsal component. Once the OOS is available it will replace OTB to simulate the planned mission and courses of action.With the current version of the MPARS, the OTB simulation automatically generates the initial simulation scenario layout on the OTB plan view display as it was generated in the MSDE. Currently, the user has to manually generate the OTB execution matrix to assign behaviors to the entities and units in the scenario.  Once the execution matrix is generated, the user can run as many simulations, based on the initial mission plan, as desired and revise the execution matrix as necessary.  A noted shortfall with the OTB is its inability to run at rates faster than 1:1 and its limited scalability above the battalion level.    When the OOS replaces the OTB, the user will have the option to define the unit and entity behaviors as part of the MSDE via the MSDL data interface format.  This will keep the user from having to enter the behaviors manually once they are using the simulation. When using the OOS, the user will also have access to more simulation options based on the vast array tools, products and services that the OOS provides. Since the OOS is based on a new architecture, the scalability issue, along with the speed limitation will be overcome.  This becomes increasingly important when running multiple COA in a condensed planning window when time is short due to real world events.  4.3 Analysis and Review Product The analysis and review (A&R) product provides the mechanisms to collect, review, manipulate, and analyze data collected during simulation. The analysis and review product contains the following product-specific components: the After Action Review (AAR) component, the Annotator Tool, and the Verification and Validation (V&V) tool.  Initial versions of the MPARS did not include the Annotator or V&V tools because they were still under development and did not interoperate seamlessly with the OTB simulation.The AAR component is based on the PowerStripes AAR system - a stand-alone AAR product that supports graphical review and analysis of all data collected during the OneSAF execution. PowerStripes provides the user the ability to perform hot-wash analysis, real time analysis for situational awareness, and post execution analysis. The AAR component will be available during all phases of an exercise. Automatic event detection and manual event insertion capabilities will also be available to the user. Mining of collected data to construct Measures of Effectiveness (MOEs)/Measures of Performance (MOPs) and analytical charts and graphs as well as allowing data export to COTS office automation and analytical review tools is supported. The user is able to automatically produce standard presentation packages and create "take home" packages for independent review. The OOS will also have the ability to interface to two existing AAR products (e.g. Vision XXI) as well as to future AAR systems through standard, published OneSAF interfaces. This will provide the user community access to existing or future AAR components with which they are familiar that may not have the full range of functionality envisioned for the native OneSAF AAR (PowerStripes) product. 4.4 Stealth ToolThe stealth tool provides the capability to view the battlefield in three dimensions, including the display of entities, terrain, and building interiors. It can display static environment information prior to a simulation exercise to support scenario generation. To support monitor and control activities during the simulation exercise, it can display static environment information, dynamic environment updates such as craters and weather changes, dynamic battlespace objects such as entities, units, and control measures, and dynamic battlefield events such as fires and detonations. The Stealth Tool provides the user a dynamic ability to position the three-dimensional viewpoint at any location and orientation within the battlefield.   The OOS will also have the ability to interface to two existing COTS 3D Stealth products as well as to future 3D Stealth tools through standard, published IEEE and OneSAF interfaces. This will provide the user community access to existing or future 3D Stealth products with which they are familiar that may not have the full range of functionality envisioned for the native OneSAF 3D Stealth tool (Acuscene) product. 5. MPARS ApplicationsThe following section describes the different MPARS applications that have been built to date and lessons learned form those efforts.  These early user applications include using the MPARS M&S capabilities in conjunction with operational planning tools to provide a rehearsal and analysis and review capability. The main focus of these efforts has been to use a standard DIF to interface the MPARS components with operational planning tools such as CAPES and C2PC.  In addition, the MPARS has been used to facilitate training at the Infantry School Captains Course by using the digital maps and distributed computing capabilities.5.1 Army Mission Planning and Rehearsal The CAPES is one of the products developed under the U.S. Army Agile Commander Advanced Technology Demonstration (ATD) program. The purpose of the Agile Commander ATD was to demonstrate information technologies enabling execution-centric, mobile command and control; aided by continuous battle planning and event control systems; engaged in rapidly deployed, split-based operations.  The CAPES is ideally suited to do collaborative planning at the brigade and above level and to do COA development and analysis.  The CAPES uses tables and heuristics to execute, “simulate,” and compare COAs. The intent is to integrate the CAPES into the ABCS architecture, in particular with the Maneuver Control System – Light (MCS–L).Since the 101st Airborne Division was one of the groups that received CAPES as a “beta” product, and they already had the MPARS, they decided to investigate the feasibility of integrating these two tools to provide a fully integrated, go-to-war mission planning and rehearsal solution. This integration effort yielded a prototype that used the MSDL as the main data interface language between the CAPES and the MPARS, and allowed the CAPES (chosen) COA to be read into MPARS to do a higher-fidelity simulation of the COA for more detailed analysis. This prototype underwent system test and evaluation in July 2003, and provided very useful feedback to the OOS development.  Lessons learned from this effort included, but are not limited to, the need for faster than real-time simulation capabilities and adaptable MTOEs so that modifications can be made to force structure and equipment availability. In addition, the potential for distributed rehearsals was also discussed. These capabilities will be addressed by the OOS.5.2 United States Marine Corps (USMC) TrainingExisting USMC Combined Arms Staff Trainer (CAST) facilities are training devices that provide the USMC with an integrated environment where combat units can refine their combined arms coordination procedures.  The centerpiece of each CAST facility is the 3-D terrain board, which consists of interchangeable terrain models representing key areas of the world.  During CAST training events, ground forces, indirect fire, fixed and rotary wing assault, and combat services support commanders maneuver their units on the terrain board.  The computer controlled overhead fire marking system provides the effects of friendly artillery fire, naval gunfire and air-delivered ordnance.  A hard-wired communications system provides for simulated radio communications.The CAST Upgrade (CAST UP) Program is a proof of concept initiative to demonstrate the training enhancements afforded by current modeling and simulation technologies at the 29 Palms, CA CAST facility. This Advanced Concepts Technology Demonstration (ACTD) program will primarily replace the current hard-wired communications system with a dynamically configurable digital communications system.  In addition, the current CAST fire marking system will be replaced with a simulation system based on the US Army’s MPARS components.  The MPARS core components provided a logical starting point to integrate a rich simulation based training system as a base for the CAST facility.  The MPARS based simulation system, being used by the CAST UP program, has evolved and is being enhanced as follows:Develop and/or integrate Marine Corp vehicle and other Littoral models into OneSAF.  The goal is to have a prototype simulation system based on the OOS simulation by the end of FY04.Interfaces to the Command and Control Personal Computer (C2PC) device.  C2PC is a device that is frequently used by the Marine Corp units being trained and is central to much of their combined arms operational methods.  The interfaces allows the CAST system to extract mission plans from a C2PC for injection into the simulation, and allows the simulation to stimulate a C2PC in much the same way that would occur in the field. In this MPARS configuration the user does not use the MSDE to lay out the mission plan. Instead the users go directly from C2PC to the OneSAF simulation by using the MSDL DIF and a C2PC injector device.  This allows the mission plan developed in C2PC to go directly into the rehearsal tool, without having to use the MSDE.  In addition the user is able to add unit movement information through the C2PC injector device so the OTB execution matrix is generated automatically with this unit behavior information. Addition of an Intelligent Tutoring (IT) component to the AAR.  Several concepts of integrating the IT and AAR components are currently being considered.  In the case of the CAST UP, this IT component could eventually evolve into a complete AAR system. Another possible scenario includes adding the IT component into the OOS PLAF to provide services that can be used by other OOS products such as the Analysis & Review product.Addition of a 3D viewer that will be bound to entities in the simulation to provide more accurate situation awareness of Forward Observers and other key “eyes-on” personnel. In the case of the CAST UP, this 3D Tool will be integrated within the OOS PLAF, and use the OOS services and products but does not have to be the same 3D Tool provided by OneSAF.5.3 Army- Training at Ft BenningThe Small Group Instructors (SGIs) at the U.S. Army Infantry School, Ft. Benning, GA., have been using the MPARS to investigate the usefulness of digital maps, and distributed simulations which offer more efficient and productive course tools.  The SGIs have provided valuable feedback to the OOS development team by identifying areas that need to be improved in order to make the MPARS and the OOS useful M&S tools. Lessons learned from this effort are very similar to the 101st effort, and they included the need for faster than real-time simulation capabilities and adaptable MTOEs.  In addition, availability of relevant maps and terrain databases was also an issue. The SGIs needed a Fort Benning terrain database to be able to teach in the classroom with the same synthetic natural environment they would be using when going out to the field.  The OOS development team used the subsequent Fort Benning terrain database generation as a yet another opportunity to improve the terrain generation process for the OOS (a.k.a. EDGE).6. ConclusionThis paper presented an overview of the MPARS and how its components fit into the OneSAF architecture. This paper also provided a description of key MPARS uses thus far. The short-term fielding of the MPARS and its OOS components has provided valuable user feedback and system composition examples that will improve future versions of the MPARS as part of the OOS tool set. One area that has been highlighted through this MPARS early user assessment is the need for further standardization of data interchange formats that will facilitate the integration of go-to-war C4I systems with simulation system such as the OOS.  The key to this is the continued development, evolution and standardization within a collaborative environment between developers and Program Managers (PMs) of these DIFs.  For example, the MSDL will evolve to include a specific data dictionary which adds behavior data to complement the unit, equipment, and map data.  PM OneSAF has initiated an effort that attempts to merge similar data schema developed for the BML with the MSDL.  This will require close collaboration between C4I systems PMs and simulation PMs.The OOS has been chosen as the embedded training simulation for the FCS. The OOS also has potential to be the embedded training simulation for the Land Warrior – Advanced Capability (LW-AC) as well. Since the MPARS capabilities, which are part of the OOS tool set, will already be embedded in the vehicle, they could be used for other purposes such as COA development, analysis and rehearsals.  In addition is could offer LW a mission rehearsal capability never before available to the warfighter.If the MPARS is incorporated into the MCS, the current and future force will be sharing the same tool.  This will facilitate interoperability and rapidly deliver a “leap-ahead” future capability to the current force at little cost.7. AcknowledgementsThe authors wish to thank the following individuals for their vision, contributions and assistance in the MPARS program: LTC Surdu, John Logsdon, and Jeff Abbott from AcuSOFT.8. References[1] R. Wittman Jr., C. Harrison:  “OneSAF: A Product Line Approach to Simulation Development”, 01E-SIW061, Euro Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW) 2001, London England.[2] “One Semi-Automated Forces (OneSAF) Product Line Architecture Framework (PLAF)”, U.S. Army, PEO-STRI.[3] “One Semi-Automated Forces (OneSAF) Product Line Architecture Specification (PLAS)”, U.S. Army, PEO-STRI.Author BiographiesPAUL DUMANOIR is the project director for OneSAF development at U.S. Army Program Executive Office (PEO) Simulation Training and Instrumentation (STRI), Product Manager (PM) One Semi-Automated Forces (OneSAF). As a project director he is responsible for the management and execution of the OneSAF project.  Prior to his involvement with OneSAF he was a principal investigator at US Army RDECOM managing individual combatant simulation Science and Technology Objective (STO) programs.  His current interests include Computer Generated Forces (CGFs), and embedded training and simulation applications.  He has 17 years experience working in DoD simulation and training programs.  He earned his B.S. in Electrical Engineering from the University of South Alabama in 1987 and his M.S. in Computer Systems from the University of Central Florida in 1991.  JEFF BITTEL is a Senior Military Analyst for Alion working on the One Semi-Automated Forces Objective System.  He is the TRADOC Project Officer (TPO) OneSAF’s principal expert on training with simulations at the brigade and below level.  Prior to joining the OneSAF Objective System program, he served as a Simcenter Manager at a battle Focus Training Center in Baumholder Germany. He holds a Batchelor of Science Degree in Natural Resource Management from the University of California, Cal Poly San Luis Obispo.  He has nearly sixteen years experience in command and staff positions from detachment to Army level.2004 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop