Modeling and Simulation Foundation for Capabilities Based PlanningKenn Atkinson, P.E.Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC)1901 N. Beauregard St., Suite 500Alexandria, VA 22311703-824-3414 HYPERLINK "mailto:katkinson@dmso.mil" katkinson@dmso.mil Abstract:  The new DoD Acquisition process, which implements the DoD Transformation Planning Guidance, focuses on capabilities based planning. The CJCSI 3170-01C “Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System Process (JCIDS)” describes the capabilities based processes and replaces the Mission Needs Statement (MNS) and the Operational Requirements Document (ORD) with the Initial Capabilities Document (ICD) and the Capability Development Document (CDD).  The JCIDS process uses the DoD Architecture Framework (DODAF) as a standard method for modeling and describing capabilities.  The JCIDS uses the DODAF architecture products to support two analysis paths, one is a task-based analysis employing the Joint Operating Concepts, and the second is a capability-based analysis using the Joint Functional Concepts.  The current process is to: 1) Develop and activity model, 2) Build a sequenced mission thread, 3) assign metrics to capabilities, 4) Map systems to capabilities, 5) Evaluate the contribution of systems to capability using the assigned metrics, 6) Evaluate capability with respect to systems and 7) Evaluate mission with respect to capabilities.   Modeling and simulation play a foundational role in enabling both types of analysis.  The DODAF provides a standard framework for describing the capability (modeling).  These models are then executed over time (simulation) to derive the values for the assigned metrics used as the basis for evaluation of the capability.  Both CJCSI 3170 and DODI 5000.2 require the use of metrics as the basis for comparison and evaluation, and the current expectation is that Modeling and Simulation will be used as one of the primary tools to generate the needed metrics.This paper provides an overview of the processes described in DODD 5000.1, DODI 5000.2, and CJCSI 3170 and also provides an overview of possible ways Modeling and Simulation can be used to support the process.       Keywords:DODAF, Architecture Framework, JCIDS, PBBE, CJCSI3170, DODI5000.2, Capabilities based planning, Defense Acquisition SystemIntroductionJoint Vision 2020, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction (CJCSI) 3170.01A, “Requirements Generation System,” and DoD 5000.2-R, “Mandatory Procedures for Major Defense Acquisition Programs (MDAPs) and Major Automated Information System (MAIS) Acquisition Programs” are the key documents in the DoD that define the template of how we will conduct war in the future, how we will define our requirements, and how we will buy andsupport the major systems all emphasis the importance of interoperability. (Discussion Paper On Interoperability As Supported By The Defense Standardization Program, www.dsp.dla.mil.)As a part of the DoD Transformation, the Quadrennial Defense Review shifts basis of defense planning from a “threat-based” model to a “capabilities-based” model for the future.  The Capabilities based model has three basic tenets:  1. Focus more on how an adversary might fight rather than specifically whom the adversary might be or where a war might occur, 2. Identify capabilities required to deter and defeat adversaries who will rely on surprise, deception, and asymmetric warfare to achieve objectives, and 3. Maintain our military advantages in key areas while we develop new areas of military advantage and deny asymmetric advantages to adversaries. (Nilo, 2003)The Department of Defense (DoD) has three Decision-making Support Systems:  The Defense Acquisition System defines how we acquire weapon systems and is documented in the new 5000 series Directive & Instruction.  The Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System (JCIDS) focuses on identifying warfighting capabilities and gaps, and is documented in the CJCSI 3170.01c.The Planning, Programming, Budgeting and Execution (PPBE) which focuses on Resource Allocation, providing the warfighter with best mix of forces, equipment and support attainable under fiscal constraints.  and is defined by MID 912.  The Defense Acquisition SystemThe new Department of Defense (DoD) 5000 series documents establish a flexible process that focuses on improved integration of requirements and acquisition processes, evolutionary acquisition strategies, disciplined technology development, interoperability, supportability, and affordability. The objective is to acquire quality products that satisfy user needs with measurable improvements to mission capability and operational support, in a timely manner, and at a fair and reasonable price. (DAU, 2004)The DoDD 5000.1, “Functions of the Department of Defense and Its Major Components” and DoDI5000.2, “Operation of the Defense Acquisition System” describe the revised acquisition process, which integrates the capability documents and architecture models as part of the Acquisition Milestone decisions and works with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction (CJCSI) 3170.01.User Need Activities determine the desired capabilities or requirements. An Initial Capabilities Document (ICD) describes gaps in capability for a particular functional or mission area as defined in the CJCSI 3170.01.  The ICD documents the evaluation of materiel approaches, and proposes a recommended approach that best satisfies the desired capability.Technological Opportunities Activities occur within DOD laboratories & research centers, academia, or commercial sources. Identification of technological opportunities is accomplished by the DOD Science & Technology (S&T) program.   The S&T program mission is to provide users with superior and affordable technology to support their missions and to enable them to have revolutionary war-winning capabilities.  The Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System (JCIDS)The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction (CJCSI) 3170.01 is based on the need for joint forces to transform the acquisition process to create the ability to conduct flexible, distributed, and highly networked operations. the JCIDS process “Through the JCIDS process, the JROC directly supports the Joint Force Commander and sets the strategic direction for warfighting systems development and acquisition.  The JROC can do this best when capabilities proposals are presented within the framework of joint concepts and integrated architectures that properly reflect future capability shortfalls and technological opportunities.“ (CJCSI 3170.01) JCIDS implements an integrated, collaborative process, based on top-level strategic direction, to guide development of new capabilities through changes in doctrine, organization, materiel, training & education, leadership, personnel, and/or facilities (DOTMLPF).	The Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System (JCIDS) defines a total restructuring of “requirements” process.  Joint concepts and integrated architectures provide the construct for analysis and the construct for prioritizing competing demands to improve joint warfighting capabilities. Integrated architectures are a systematic way of communicating a concept to system developers.  These documents provide a framework for conducting functional area analysis, and a tool for promoting interoperability.  An integrated architecture consists of three views:Operational View: This view focuses on depicting the key operational concepts and how the associated capabilities are interrelated. It provides a process description, identifies operational nodes and organizational relationships.  This view is heavily influenced by the warfighter as it focuses on how joint operations will be conducted.Systems View: This view focuses on the physical perspective providing data on system performance within the process identified in the operational views.  Specifically, system views catalog system capability descriptions, system-to-function mapping and identification of system-to-system interfaces.  The acquisition community heavily influences this view since it focuses on system performance details.Technical View: This view focuses on the design perspective.  It is the catalog of design standards and interface protocols sorted by functions identified in the operational view.The Planning, Programming, Budgeting and Execution (PPBE)The purpose of the Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution (PPBE) process is to allocate resources within the Department of Defense. The PPBE process was established in 2003 and evolved from the Planning, Programming, and Budgeting System (PPBS).  The PPBE is a cyclic process consisting of three distinct but interrelated phases: planning, programming, and budgeting.  The PPBE establishes the framework and provides the mechanisms for decision making for the future and provides the opportunity to reexamine prior decisions in light of the present environment (e.g., evolving threat, changing economic conditions, etc.).  This is intended to drive better resource allocation decisions, supporting the ultimate objective of the PPBE process, which is to provide the Combatant Commanders with the best mix of forces, equipment, and support attainable within established fiscal constraints.  The PPBE places new emphasis on using performance metrics to focus on output and return on investment.Capabilities Based PlanningCapabilities-based planning has become a central theme of defense planning. It is defined in broad terms in the new Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) (Rumsfeld, 2001b).  Capabilities-based planning (CPB) is planning, under uncertainty, to provide capabilities suitable for a wide range of modern-day challenges and circumstances while working within an economic framework that necessitates choice. (RAND 1513)  The paradigm is mission/system analysis based on a mission statement which includes metrics of strategic and operational success, taken from a given a set of capability options which proves good assessment and analysis over a broad range of circumstances.  The result is not a simple score, but rather a depiction of when the capability option does well, marginally, or poorly. The issue is how flexible, adaptive, and robust the capabilities will be. (RAND 1513Key elements of capabilities-based planning are; a conceptual framework, an analytical framework and a "building block" approach to applying the frameworks. A conceptual framework allows for planning under uncertainty by emphasizing flexibility, robustness and adaptive capability. The analytical framework provides a way to assess capability options at the operational level and choose among capability alternatives. Finally, a building block approach allows us to define, develop and test individual capabilities within their own domains. By accepting that capabilities can be developed and evaluated within smaller functional domains and then later combined to describe joint force capabilities, we can greatly simplify the process. The three elements; conceptual and analytical frameworks; and, a building block approach, form the foundation for the capabilities-based methodology described in this article. (Mara & Grobman, 2003)The key elements of capabilities-based planning are:A conceptual framework for planning under uncertainty by emphasizing flexibility, robustness, and adaptive ness of capability.An analytical framework with three components:  understanding capability needs, assessing capability options at the level of mission or operation, and choosing capability levels and choosing among capability options in an integrative portfolio framework that considers other factors (e.g., force management), different types of risk, and economic limitations.A solution framework that emphasizes “building blocks.”As DoD moves toward Net-Centric Operations and Warfare (NCOW), architectures continue to provide a critical mechanism for understanding concepts and their relation to capabilities, anticipating changes in operational concepts or in automated capabilities, and acquiring both materiel and non-materiel assets.  The DoD Components have made significant progress in using architectures to support budgeting, identification of capability gaps, acquisition, and operations.  Examples include the Air Force Task Force capabilities based analysis, Navy’s Mission Capability Package analysis approach and OSD/Joint Staff concept of improving interoperability through focusing on key interfaces.  Descriptions of the analytical techniques developed by each of these efforts are included in the Deskbook portion of the Framework.Conceptual FrameworkThe conceptual framework can be described as a series of layers.  The Joint Concept of OperationsThe Joint Concept of Operations will be based on overarching strategic guidance to the department, as stated in documents such as the National Security Strategy, the Defense Strategy, the National Military Strategy, the Quadrennial Defense Review, Joint Vision, Transformation Planning Guidance, and Defense Planning Guidance.  The Joint Concept of Operations will not duplicate these documents, but will serve as general guidance to Joint Force Commanders, outlining the manner in which the Chairman expects these commanders to carry out their warfighting and peacekeeping duties.  The Joint Concept of Operations links overarching national security policy to the joint operating and Functional Concepts.Joint Operating ConceptsJoint Operating Concepts integrate Service and Joint Functional Concepts and implement the Joint Concept of Operations.  They describe how future Joint Force Commanders will plan, prepare, deploy, employ, and sustain a joint force against potential adversary capabilities or crisis situations and provide the measurable detail needed to conduct experimentation and assessment.  The defined Joint Operating Concepts are:Homeland SecurityMajor Combat OperationsStrategic DeterrenceStability OperationsJoint Operating Concepts integrate and guide the development of the Joint Functional and Service Concepts that enable joint capabilities, allowing decision-makers to compare alternative concepts and DOTMLPF capability solutions.Joint Functional ConceptsThe Joint Functional Concepts integrate related military capabilities described in the Joint Operating Concepts which are required to accomplish military operations tasks.  Joint Functional Concepts focus on a defined functional area, but apply across the full range of military operations.  The defined Joint Functional Concepts are:Battlespace AwarenessCommand and ControlForce ApplicationProtectionLogisticsArchitecture“The Defense Science Board and other major studies have concluded that one of the key means for ensuring interoperable and cost-effective military systems is to establish comprehensive architectural guidance for all of DoD.”  [USD (A&T), ASD (C3I), J6, 1997]Architectures provide a mechanism for understanding and managing complexity. The purpose of the DoD Architecture Framework is to improve capabilities by enabling the quick synthesis of “go-to-war” requirements with sound investments leading to the rapid employment of improved operational capabilities, and enabling the efficient engineering of warrior systems. The ability to compare, analyze, and integrate architectures developed by the geographical and functional, unified Commands, Military Services, and Defense Agencies from a cross-organizational perspective is critical to achieving these objectives.  (FEAC 2004)  A new analytical architecture is needed with modernized constructs for ● identifying capability needs● assessing capability options for effectiveness in stressful building-block missions (i.e., operations)● making choices about requirements and ways to achieve them, and doing so in an integrative portfolio framework that addresses future war-fighting capabilities, force management, risk tradeoffs, and related matters in an economic framework. (RAND 1513)An architecture description is a representation of a defined domain, as of a current or future point in time, in terms of its component parts, what those parts do, how the parts relate to each other, and the rules and constraints under which the parts function.  What constitutes each of the elements of this definition depends on the degree of detail of interest.The term architecture is generally used both to refer to an architecture description and an architecture implementation.  An architecture description is a representation of a current or postulated “real- world” configuration of resources, rules, and relationships.  Once the representation enters the design, development, and acquisition portion of the system development life-cycle process, the architecture description is transformed into a real implementation of capabilities and assets in the field.  The DoD Architecture Framework (DODAF)The Department of Defense (DoD) Architecture Framework (DoDAF) provides guidance for describing architectures for both warfighting operations and business operations and processes.  The Framework provides the guidance, rules, and product descriptions for developing and presenting architecture descriptions that ensure a common denominator for understanding, comparing, and integrating Families of Systems (FOSs), Systems of Systems (SoSs), and interoperating and interacting architectures.In the Framework, the three major perspectives (i.e., views) logically combine to document an architecture description.  These are the Operational View (OV), Systems View (SV), and Technical Standards View (TV). Which are presented via 26 products? The setting in which the architecture exists comprises the interrelated conditions that compose the context for the architecture.  These conditions include doctrine; tactics, techniques, and procedures; relevant goals and vision statements; concepts of operations; scenarios; and environmental conditions.The OV is a description of the tasks and activities, operational elements, and information exchanges required to accomplish DoD missions.  DoD missions include both warfighting missions and business processes.  The OV contains graphical and textual products that comprise an identification of the operational nodes and elements, assigned tasks and activities, and information flows required between nodes.  It defines the types of information exchanged, the frequency of exchange, which tasks and activities are supported by the information exchanges, and the nature of information exchanges.The SV is a set of graphical and textual products that describes systems and interconnections providing for, or supporting, DoD functions.  DoD functions include both warfighting and business functions.  The SV associates systems resources to the OV.  These systems resources support the operational activities and facilitate the exchange of information among operational nodes.The TV is the minimal set of rules governing the arrangement, interaction, and interdependence of system parts or elements. Its purpose is to ensure that a system satisfies a specified set of operational requirements. The TV provides the technical systems implementation guidelines upon which engineering specifications are based, common building blocks are established, and product lines are developed.  The TV includes a collection of the technical standards, implementation conventions, standards options, rules, and criteria organized into profile(s) that govern systems and system elements for a given architecture.There are some overarching aspects of architecture that relate to all three of the views.  These overarching aspects are captured in the All-Views (AV) products.  The AV products provide information pertinent to the entire architecture but do not represent a distinct view of the architecture.  AV products set the scope and context of the architecture.  The scope includes the subject area and timeframe for the architecture.  Each of the three views depicts certain architecture attributes.  Some attributes bridge two views and provide integrity, coherence, and consistency to architecture descriptions. DODAF Architecture Products  It is important to distinguish between an architecture view and an architecture product.  As stated earlier, a view represents a perspective on a given architecture, while a product is a specific representation of a particular aspect of that perspective.  Thus, a view consists of one or more products.  The All Views contains two products which provide the scope, general overview and a dictionary of terms for the system. 	There are nine Operational Views products.  They begin with a high level depiction of the operational concept The products work down in specificity, showing systems rules, state transitions, and sequences of events.  These products are primarily used to builds a common understanding between user/customer and developer.  The System View is composed of thirteen products.  As would be expected, it covers interface descriptions, relationships among systems, performance parameters and state transition descriptions.   The Technical Architecture View contains two products, a set of the standards that apply to the architecture and a forecast of future standards and standard changes that are expected to apply over the life of the system.  Integrated ArchitectureAn architecture description is defined to be an integrated architecture when products and their constituent architecture data elements are developed such that architecture data elements defined in one view are the same (i.e., same names, definitions, and values) as architecture data elements referenced in another view.  The term integrated architecture refers to an architecture description that has integrated Operational, Systems, and Technical Standards Views.  That is, there are common points of reference linking the OV and the SV and also linking the SV and the TV.  For example, SV-5 relates operational activities from OV-5 to system functions from SV-4; the SV-4 system functions are related to systems in SV-1, thus bridging the Operational and Systems Views. An integrated architecture as referenced in DoDI 5000.2, DoDI 4630.8, CJCSI 3170.01, and CJCSI 6212.01 consists of AV-1, AV-2, OV-2, OV-3, OV-5, SV-1, and TV-1, at a minimum.  Additional products should be developed for a given architecture description depending on the architecture’s intended use.  Integrated architectures with Doctrine, Organization, Training, Materiel, Leadership & education, Personnel, and Facilities (DOTMLPF) information provide important tools to facilitate coordination between requirements document developers, planners, programmers, budgeters, system acquirers and developers, and interoperability enforcers.  These architectures clarify roles, boundaries, and interfaces between components of large System of Systems and influence participants in requirements generation, acquisition, resource allocation, interoperability enforcement, and waiver processes.  Integrated architectures are the primary tool for enterprise- level systems integration.The Core Architecture Data Model CADMThe Core Architecture Data Model (CADM) Architectures have typically been developed as sets of graphical, tabular, or textual products.  The products are mechanisms for visualizing, understanding, and assimilating the broad scope and complexities of the architecture data and architecture data relationships that comprise an architecture.  The CADM provides the logical basis for moving architectures from compendiums of documents, spreadsheets, and graphics to architecture data that can be stored in architecture data repositories and manipulated with automated tools.  .Architecture analysis frameworkCurrent and future concept of operations (CONOPS) and tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTP) can be modeled in the OV.  Conversely, architecture can be used to generate and update core portions of CONOPS, specifically Concepts of Employment, and TTP documents.  The OV provides a basis for assessing operational concepts and procedures for effectiveness and DOTMLPF impacts.  The OV lends itself particularly to assessing impacts of doctrine, training, personnel, and materiel.   Capabilities are documented in the architecture and measured with the Measures of Effectiveness (MOEs).  The architectures are supplemented with scenarios and their associated data and used as input to the architecture analysis process.  The analysis uses the static and dynamic nature of the different architecture products to generate comparative results which are used to compare different capabilities documented in different architectures. Architecture AnalysisThe JCIDS analysis process is composed of a structured, four-step methodology that defines capability gaps, capability needs and approaches to provide those capabilities within a specified functional or operational area. Based on national defense policy and centered on a common joint warfighting construct, the analyses initiate the development of integrated, joint capabilities from a common understanding of existing joint force operations and doctrine, organization, training, materiel, leadership and education, personnel and facilities (DOTMLPF) capabilities and deficiencies.” Corporate Strategy and CONOPS drive Mission Goals which consists of Capabilities which are described by Architecture Models which are evaluated by Investment Strategies which Produces Investment Recommendations, these in turn transforms and readjusts the Architectures to improve the Capabilities to achieve the Mission Goals.”  (CJCSI 3170, 2003)“One of the key differences between the JCIDS process and the predecessor RGS is a fundamental shift from generating bottom up, stovepiped, component-centric materiel approaches to a more holistic approach that considers the most effective joint force capabilities and the integration of those capabilities early in the process.  Robust, cross-component analysis of warfighting and required capabilities is essential to the revised JCIDS process.  The new process will also ensure that appropriate cross-component expertise, science and technology community initiatives, and experimentation experience are considered in the development of appropriate DOTMLPF solutions to address the warfighting challenges of the future. Due to the wide array of issues that will be considered in the JCIDS process, the analysis may be tailored to suit the issue.” (CJCSI 3170, 2003)Functional Area Analysis (FAA)Identify operational task, conditions, and standards needed to accomplish military objectives. The result is a definition of the tasks to be accomplishedThe first step in the JCIDS analysis begins when the sponsor leads performance of an FAA. An FAA identifies the operational tasks, conditions and standards needed to achieve military objectives. It uses the national strategies, Joint Operating Concepts (JOC), Joint Functional Concepts (JFC), Integrated Architectures (as available), and the Universal Joint Task List (UJTL) as input. Its output is the tasks to be reviewed in the follow-on functional needs analysis. The FAA includes cross-capability and cross-system analysis in identifying operational tasks, conditions and standards. The FAA should be conducted as a collaborative effort.Functional Needs Analysis (FNA) The FNA is the second step of the JCIDS analysis process. The sponsor leads the FNA. It assesses the ability of the current and programmed joint capabilities to accomplish the tasks that the FAA identified, under the full range of operating conditions and to the designated standards. Using the tasks identified in the FAA as primary input, the FNA produces as output a list of capability gaps or shortcomings that require solutions, and indicates the time frame in which those solutions are needed. The FNA should accomplish the following:Describe the capability gap, overlap or problem in operational and/or broad effects-based terms. Describe what additional functional areas may be involved in the problem or solution.Describe the key attributes of a capability or capabilities that would resolve the issue in terms of purpose, tasks and conditions Link to the UJTL These descriptions will enable the development of measures of effectiveness (MOE).Identify the MOE, as derived from the integrated architectures which the proposed capability improves or degrades. Functional Solution Analysis (FSA)The FSA is an operationally based assessment of potential DOTMLPF approaches to solving (or mitigating) one or more of the capability gaps (needs) identified in the FNA. The FSA’s outputs are potential solutions to needs, including in order of priority: integrated DOTMLPF changes; product improvements to existing materiel or facilities alone; adoption of interagency or foreign materiel solutions that have limited non-materiel DOTMLPF consequences; and finally, new materiel starts that have limited non-materiel DOTMLPF consequences. The FSA is composed of three sub-steps:DOTMLPF Analysis is to determine whether an integrated DOTMLPF approach can fill the capability gaps identified in the FNA. Routinely, capability proposals will involve combinations of DOTMLPF changes and materiel changes.Ideas for Materiel Approaches identify materiel approaches to provide the required capabilities. The collaborative nature of this effort is meant to develop potential solutions in an integrated fashion that reflect the future requirements of joint force commanders. The integrated DOTMLPF implications of any proposed materiel solution will always be considered throughout the process.Analysis of Materiel Approaches (AMA) will determine the best materiel approach or combination of approaches to provide the desired capability or capabilities. Post Independent AnalysisThe sponsor will consider the compiled information and analysis results to determine which integrated DOTMLPF approach or approaches best address the joint capability gap(s) in the functional area. Integrated Capability Assessments, Capability Roadmaps, and Investment Strategies Using the integrated architectures, the USD (AT&L) shall lead the development of integrated plans or roadmaps.  The Department of Defense shall use these roadmaps to conduct capability assessments, guide systems development, and define the associated investment plans as the basis for aligning resources and as an input to the Defense Planning Guidance, Program Objective Memorandum development, and Program and Budget Reviews. (DODI 5000.2, 2003)Modeling and simulation support for Capability based planningModeling and Simulation is the use of models, including emulators, prototypes, simulators, and stimulators, either statically or over time, to develop data as a basis for making managerial or technical decisions. The terms "modeling" and "simulation" are often used interchangeably. The definitions are:Model: A physical, mathematical, or otherwise logical representation of a system, entity, phenomenon, or process. Simulation:  A method for implementing a model over time.(DMSO 1996)From Draft Goals for Navy M&S Standards: To improve structure and discipline in the Modeling and Simulation Community by inculcating architectural concepts, ensuring the common use of architectures, and fostering interoperability among architectures.  (Swenson, 2003)  Dr. Lamartin stressed the expanded use of models and simulation, especially for systems of systems “A new generation of models and simulations will be needed to support distributed training; robust and continuous experimentation; and operational planning, execution, and assessment tools.” (Lamartin, 2003)The Role of Modeling and SimulationWhile architectural analysis will be the basis of first order functionality and interoperability assessments, modeling and simulation techniques have a vital role in supporting more detailed second order assessments in these areas. For this reason, we see the relationship between architectures and M&S as synergistic rather than competing. Key areas in which M&S can extend architectural analysis include analyses of functionality, interoperability, and capital budgeting. As discussed earlier, architectures can identify capability gaps and duplications; however, they have trouble answering second order questions such as "What is the risk if we do not fill a selected capability gap?" Campaign-level constructive simulations can help perform risk analysis on these gaps to determine their significance from an operational perspective. Another area where mission-level or campaign-level constructive simulations could extend architectural analysis involves answering questions relating to the consequences of performance differences between systems. For example, simulation can be used to quantify the operational significance of differences in maximum cruise speed between two fighter aircraft both of which are capable of accomplishing similar operational activities. Additionally, detailed engineering-level constructive simulations as well as virtual man-in-the-loop simulations have a role in assessing interoperability between systems in a realistic environment. This sort of analysis will look at dynamic and systems engineering issues that require greater fidelity than can be provided by nodal architectural analysis. Finally, optimization techniques can be used to develop budget-constrained capability roadmaps that maximize "military utility." This approach would require integrating architectural system-task mappings with subjective assessments linking specific capabilities to military utility and system cost data. (Mara & Grobman, 2003)SummaryThe success which employing a common enterprise architecture has achieved in both government and industry make it a This article has described an evolving and maturing capability-based methodology. This first step enables major improvements in delivering capabilities to the joint force over the previous threat-based process. First, and most important, the process makes an explicit linkage from top-level strategic guidance down to individual acquisition decisions. Next, the process allows the JROC to get "out in front" of the acquisition process, procuring systems to support our concepts, not approving concepts that support our systems. The process enables a more responsive (not faster) acquisition system through the portfolio management approach, allowing senior leadership to mange resources within and across functional portfolios. Another important feature is that the process integrates materiel and non-materiel solutions to address capability shortfalls. Finally, the capabilities based methodology frames the discussion of alternatives using a common language and puts decisions in the context of the system-of-systems. (Mara & Grobman, 2003) References(Adshead et al., 2001) Simon Adshead, Thomas Kreitmair, Andreas Tolk, "Definition of ALTBMD Architectures by Applying the C4ISR Architecture Framework", Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop 2001, Paper 01F-SIW-112, Orlando, September 2001(Baker, 2003) Baker, Charles OUSD(C) “From PPBS to PPBE:  How the Process has Changed”, 2003 PEO/SYSCOM Conference, 3 Dec 2003(Carey & Jacobs, 2003) Steve Carey and Michael Jacobs “Delivering Combat and Business Capabilities”, Institute For Enterprise Architecture Developments (IFEAD) (CIOC, 1999) The Chief Information Officers Council, “Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework, Version 1.1”, September 1999(CJCSI 3170, 2003) Chairman Of The Joint Chiefs Of Staff Instruction 3170.01c “Joint Capabilities Integration And Development System”, 24 June 2003(DAU, 2004) Defense Acquisition University (DAU), Defense Acquisition Process Tutorial, 2004 (Davis, 2004) Paul Davis “Analytic Architecture for Capabilities-Based Planning, Mission-System Analysis, and Transformation”, RAND IP-1513(Davis, Bigelow, & McEver, 2001).(DMSO 1996) Defense Modeling and Simulation Office Glossary of Terms(DOD, 2001)Transformation Study Report, Executive Summary, 27 April 2001, http://www.defenselink.mil/specials/transform/intro.html  (DODAF, 2003) DOD Architecture Framework Working Group, “DOD Architecture Framework, Volume 1:  Definitions and Guidelines”, 15 January 2003  (DODD 5000.1, 2003) Department of Defense Directive 5000.1, “The Defense Acquisition System,” May 12, 2003 (DODI 5000.2, 2003) Department of Defense Instruction 5000.2, “Operation of the Defense Acquisition System,” May 12, 2003(FEAC 2004)  FEAC Institute,   HYPERLINK "http://www.feacinstitute.org/certification_education/dodaf" http://www.feacinstitute.org/certification_education/dodaf (IEEE, 2000)  IEEE Recommended Practice for Architectural Description of Software-Intensive Systems (IEEE STD 1471-2000)(Mara & Grobman, 2003) Capt Mike Mara, USN, Joint Staff/J8 and Maj Jeff Grobman, USAF, Joint Staff/J8 “A Capability-Based Planning Methodology for Networked Systems-of-Systems”, PHALANX, Vol. 36, No.4 (Meilich, 2003) Dr. Abe Meilich, “Lessons Learned Developing DoDAF-Compliant Architecture Products”, Systems Enterprise Architect, Lockheed Martin Mission Systems, http://www.ttcus.com/c4isr/agenda.html  (MID 912, 2003)  Management Initiative Decision No. 912, “Joint Battle Management Command and Control”, 7 Jan 2003 (Nilo, 2003) Nilo, Patricia L. “Moving Towards Transformation”, Acting Deputy Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Chemical and Biological Defense(OSD, 2000)  Warfighter M&S Needs Assessment of the Unified Commands and Selected Supporting Commands (Final Report), 17 November 2000.(Lamartin, 2003) Glenn F. Lamartin, Director, Defense Systems, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (AT&L)Next Generation Systems Engineering – An OSD Perspective, October 2003, (PBBE, 2003) PM-2008-ISE, “Defense Planning, Programming, Budgeting and Execution (PPBE) Process”, 1 Oct 2003(Swenson, 2003) Stephen Swenson, “The Role of Modeling and Simulation in Enterprise Architecture”, Architecture Practitioners' Conference,  HYPERLINK "http://www.opengroup.org/architecture/0310wash/reports/21AR_APC_report.htm" http://www.opengroup.org/architecture/0310wash/reports/21AR_APC_report.htm(Tolk & Hieb, 2003) Andreas Tolk, Michael R. Hieb: "Building and Integrating M&S Components into C4ISR Systems for Supporting Future Military Operations", 2003 Western Multi Conference (WMC'03), International Conference on Virtual Worlds and Simulation (VWSIM'03), Orlando, Florida, January 2003(Tolk & Solick, 2003), Andreas Tolk, Susan Solick: "Using the C4ISR Architecture Framework as a Tool to Facilitate V&V for Simulation Systems within the Military Application Domain,” Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop 2003, Paper 03S-SIW-029, Orlando, Florida, April 2003(Tolk, 2003) Andreas Tolk, "Beyond Technical Interoperability - Introducing a Reference Model for Measures of Merit for Coalition Interoperability", 2003 Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium, Washington, D.C., June 2003 (Wood & Cohen, 2003) William G. Wood and Sholom Cohen “DoD Experience with the C4ISR Architecture Framework”, Software Engineering Institute Architecture Tradeoff Analysis Initiative, September 2003AuthorKenn Atkinson is a Scientist for Science Applications International Corporation, assigned to the Support Staff for the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office. He has 23 years experience in software development and RF measurement systems.  Mr. Atkinson is a Registered Professional Engineer, received a Masters in Engineering Administration from the University of Utah and a Bachelors in Physics from the Brigham Young University. EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  