Capabilities and Intended Uses of the Joint Operations Feasibility ToolLee A. Belfore II Ph.D.Department of Electrical and Computer EngineeringOld Dominion UniversityNorfolk,  VA  23529Johnny Garcia General Dynamics AIS7025 Harbour View Boulevard Suffolk,  VA  23435Emily K. Lada Ph.D.1Statistical and Applied Mathematical Sciences InstituteResearch Triangle Park,  NC 27709 Mikel D. Petty Ph.D.Virginia Modeling, Analysis and Simulation CenterOld Dominion UniversityNorfolk,  VA  23529Lt. Col. William P. QuinonesUS Joint Forces CommandJoint Experimentation116 Lakeview PkwySuffolk, VA  23435Keywords:Logistics planning, Capability based planning, Force sustainment, Rapid analysisABSTRACT:   The Joint Operation Feasibility Tool (JOFT) is a logistics model for determining deployment transportation feasibility and sustainment feasibility.  JOFT can be used to quickly assess the feasibility of deployment transportation for military forces to an area of operations and sustainment for those forces once they have been transported.  JOFT's intended uses include time-critical crisis action planning and quick-look feasibility assessment before performing more detailed and time-consuming Force Flow (TPFDD) analysis using JFAST and comparable tools.  It is also intended to exemplify a new iterative and responsive approach to logistics planning that re-positions logistical concerns earlier in the overall planning process, making deployment and sustainment feasibility considerations integral in all phases of operational planning.IntroductionThe Joint Operation Feasibility Tool (JOFT) is a logistics model for determining deployment transportation feasibility and sustainment feasibility.  JOFT can be used to quickly assess the feasibility of deployment transportation for military forces to an area of operations and sustainment for those forces once they have been transported.JOFT has three basic stages.  First, based on a user-supplied list of military capabilities required for a mission, JOFT identifies units with those capabilities.  The user selects specific units for the mission from the list.  Second, the user provides deployment transportation details, such as points of embarkation and debarkation (POE and POD), type of transportation lift to use, and time available for deployment.  From that information, JOFT determines whether the selected force can be deployed and provides the user with specific information regarding the transportation schedule.  Third, given details of the initial supplies accompanying the units, the supplies available in the area of operations, and  ratings of the expected operations tempo, the difficulty of the mission, and the expected rate of resupply, JOFT calculates the sustainment feasibility of the force and identifies supply classes for which sustainment could be problematic.  A key feature of JOFT's design is that all of these steps are iterative, so that if, for example, a selected force cannot be sustained, the user can go back to select a different force and repeat the analysis easily and quickly (within minutes).JOFT's intended uses include time-critical crisis action planning and quick-look feasibility assessment before performing more detailed and time-consuming Force Flow (TPFDD) analysis using JFAST and comparable tools.  It is also intended to exemplify a new iterative and responsive approach to logistics planning that can re-position logistics earlier in the overall planning process, making deployment and sustainment feasibility considerations integral in all phases of operational planning.JOFT was designed and implemented by the U. S. Joint Forces Command using Gensym G2 as a web-based client-server application.  It has been used in simulation experiments and is currently undergoing an independent evaluation conducted by the Virginia Modeling, Analysis and Simulation Center.  In this paper, we describe JOFT's capabilities (illustrating them with detailed examples) and explain the specific calculations of JOFT's transportation and sustainment models.  We also discuss JOFT's intended uses, taking care to place JOFT in the context of the operations planning process, and suggest how JOFT’s capabilities can potentially improve that process.This paper is organized into five sections, including an introduction, a discussion of the evolution of JOFT, the logistics planning conceptual framework, the JOFT logistics model, and a summary.The Evolution of JOFTThis section provides background information on the inception, history, and applications (to date) of JOFT.ContextThe Department of Defense (DoD) recognizes that there is a need to transform the manner in which the United States responds militarily.  In particular, the DoD wishes to examine and modify current military planning processes to accomplish two goals.  First, the DoD would like to streamline the process of planning military actions.  Second, the DoD would like  to simplify the process of joint force selection, including the identification of suitable units to meet the desired capabilities.  The United States has demonstrated the ability to deploy joint forces, as evidenced in Operations Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom.  The Secretary of Defense (SecDef), Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) and Commander, United States Joint Forces Command (CDRUSJFCOM) have emphasized the immediate need to improve the current joint deployment process and to transform the process into a more flexible and agile process to meet the future requirements of Joint Warfighting.  As such, the USJFCOM Joint Deployment Process Owner (JDPO) division has been chartered to outline the direction, means, and methodology for transforming the joint deployment process.Policy GoalsThe Department of Defense Directive (DoDDir) 5158.5, 12 Nov 2001, assigns CDRUSJFCOM (as JDPO) the following Executive Agent responsibilities and authorities: (1) “Ensure proper coordination among the DoD Components during deployment and redeployment process improvement initiatives.” (2) “Provide recommendations to the SecDef, through the CJCS, regarding deployment and redeployment process improvements, including the manner and timing of these improvements.” (3) “Maintain the current effectiveness of the joint deployment process while leading actions to provide substantial improvements in the overall efficiency of deployment and redeployment processes, including prioritization of process improvement efforts.” and (4) “Issue directives to other DoD Components and take action on behalf of the SecDef concerning deployment and redeployment process improvement initiatives, as specifically authorized by the SecDef through the CJCS.”  The Unified Command Plan (UCP) ’02 outlines, “USJFCOM’s functional responsibilities…in transforming US military forces…include…Serving as the JDPO for DOD, responsible for maintaining the global capacity for rapid and decisive military force power projection.”  The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) memorandum (CM-907-03 dtd 23 April 2003) directs USJFCOM to streamline the deployment process so that the JDPO  “separates the short and long-term efforts.”  The short-term efforts will focus on quick fixes to known problems.  The long-term approach is to develop a future deployment process concept that evaluates the whole process starting from a “blank piece of paper”.The goal of transformation is to dramatically improve the efficiency and effectiveness of DoD operations in order to discover and exploit new means to gain an asymmetric advantage.  This transformation is to develop capabilities to solve the combatant commanders’ operational challenges. In support of this objective, the joint deployment process supports the Dominant Maneuver and Focused Logistics Joint Mission Areas (JMAs).  Dominant Maneuver requires the ability to optimally place forces in the battle array to obtain the effects necessary to satisfy the commander’s objectives.  Focused Logistics allows for effective power projection at maximized efficiency.  The JDP is the key enabler to both of these concepts.  JOFT GoalsJOFT is a Deployment, Employment and Sustainment (D/E/S) model that is used to aid planners in determining transportation feasibility for forces needed in a given area of operations.  The model takes a preconceived listing of capabilities, translates those capabilities into the forces that can accomplish those capabilities, and given specific lift constraints, priorities, and port capabilities, determines if the force can be lifted to the area of operations as specified by the JTF Commander. Cooperatively created by the Joint Logistics Transformation Center and Joint Experimentation directorates at USJFCOM, JOFT is a first and significant step at transforming force projection.  D/E/S, now called Joint Deployment, Employment and Sustainment is a novel approach for showing how this process can be done better, not just more efficiently.  Future studies will examine to what extent the conceptual framework implemented in JOFT improves and influences the effectiveness of the process.The Logistics Planning Process and the Intended Uses of JOFTOne aspect of the overall military operational planning process is logistics planning, which includes planning the deployment and sustainment of military forces assigned to a mission.  If deployment and sustainment planning are separated from other parts of operational planning, difficulties associated with a deployment or sustainment plan that is not feasible due to force structure, transportation resource availability, and geography may invalidate an operational plan.  In general, logistics should be more tightly integrated into the operational planning process, and in particular, deployment and sustainment should be considered earlier in the planning process to avoid plan disruption due to logistical limitations.Traditionally, planning for a military operation that involves the deployment of military forces is performed in a sequential, stair-step manner, as illustrated in  REF _Ref64236395 \h Figure 1.  The process begins with identifying forces needed for the mission (ID Force Requirements).  The needed forces are then requested (Develop RFF).  If the Secretary of Defense issues a Deployment Order, the force source requirements are developed and validated (Source Requirements, Validate Sourced Requirements).  Then, transportation resources needed to deploy the forces are scheduled and aggregated (Schedule Lift and Aggregate).  When the transportation resources arrive at the forces’ Point(s) of Department (Scheduled Lift Arrival at POD), the forces are embarked and transported.  Ultimately, the forces arrive in theater and are ready to execute their mission (JRSOI).There are two potential logistical problems with this approach.  First, logistics planners are not involved until relatively late, after the forces have been selected and most of the plan has been developed.  If a logistical constraint is discovered, such as insufficient transportation resources for the selected forces, it may be necessary to repeat significant portions of the planning process.  Second, the process as stated considers only deployment feasibility and omits sustainment feasibility.  Any operation that goes on for more than a few days will require additional supplies beyond organic to and deployed with the forces, and the feasibility of sustaining the selected forces should be considered in the plan.The developers of JOFT want to both shorten the operational process and reduce the possibility that late discovery of logistical constraints will disrupt an operational plan.  Ideally, deployment and sustainment feasibility would be considered during force selection.  To that end, JOFT is both a software utility and an embodiment of a conceptual approach to enhancing the operational planning process.How the JOFT concept can enhance planning is illustrated in  REF _Ref64236257 \h Figure 2.  The process begins with the user (a logistics or operational planner) identifying the force requirements for the mission, not in terms of units, but rather in terms of capabilities.  JOFT then identifies units with those capabilities, from which the planner selects forces.  Next JOFT quickly assesses the feasibility of deploying the selected forces.  There are two important points to this approach.  First, force selection and deployment feasibility assessment are performed concurrently, so that a deployable force is selected from the outset and the rest of the operational planning process can proceed with greatly reduced risk of late-stage disruption due to deployment constraints.  Second, the steps of the force selection as shown are iterative, and with support from the JOFT software, can be repeated easily and quickly as often as necessary to select a force that is both suitable and deployable.  Note that  REF _Ref64236257 \h Figure 2 does not illustrate the sustainment feasibility step.  This step, however, is essentially the same as deployment feasibility in that the feasibility of sustaining the selected force can be quickly assessed and the force selection easily adjusted in an iterative fashion. EMBED Word.Document.8 \s Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1  Sequential (stair-step) approach to the military planning process EMBED Word.Document.8 \s Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2  JOFT's iterative approach to the military planning process. REF _Ref64236307 \h Figure 3 provides an alternative illustration for the same ideas as presented in  REF _Ref64236257 \h Figure 2.  Figure 3 emphasizes the process flow of applying the JOFT concept.  The upper part of the figure shows the force selection process. In this step, JOFT identifies possible units that can execute the capabilities required for the mission. The planner then selects forces for the mission from the list of units provided by JOFT.  In the lower part of the figure the feedback arrows on the right suggest what happens if deploying or sustaining a selected force is found to be infeasible.  The planner repeats the force selection and the feasibility analysis until the difficulty is solved.   EMBED Word.Document.8 \s Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3 Another view of the JOFT concept of force selection and feasibility analysis.The JOFT concept implies certain characteristics that the JOFT software should have.  In  REF _Ref64236307 \h Figure 3, the first and third steps (Determine required force capabilities and Select units for force) are executed by the planner (that is, the human user of the software). The remaining steps are performed by the software, based on the user’s input.  In order to be effective, the JOFT software must be easy to use and understandable to both operational and logistics planners.  It also must include or be able to access up-to-date databases detailing unit capabilities, locations, and status.  Finally, if planners are going to adopt an iterative approach, JOFT must have the capability to allow the user to easily make changes to force selections and furthermore, JOFT must be able to reevaluate deployment and sustainment feasibility for the new force selection quickly. As JOFT (both the concept and the supporting software) is  further developed, the specific ways in which it can be used are expected to become clearer.  Currently, the intended uses of JOFT include the following:Improved operational planning.  This is the use emphasized earlier in this section.  JOFT is intended to influence and improve the traditional approach to operational planning by incorporating logistical concerns in the process earlier.  JOFT is intended to allow planners to select forces based on capabilities, as well as on the resources available for deployment and sustainment.Crisis-action planning.  In crisis-action mode, a threat is clearly defined and a course of action has to be developed quickly (usually within a matter of days).  Currently, it is difficult to quickly conduct quantitative analysis to determine if a crisis-action plan is logistically feasible.  JOFT is intended to help planners in the crisis-action planning process.Feasibility “quick look” analysis.  Logistics models more detailed than JOFT exist (such as JFAST and SUSGEN) and they can be used to evaluate logistics feasibility.  However, the existing methods can be very time-consuming to use and furthermore, testing force selection alternatives in an iterative fashion is not always easy.  JOFT is intended to provide a “quick look” at a plan’s logistical feasibility, and on a rough order of magnitude, determine if a force can be deployed and sustained.  JOFT could be used in this context as a precursor to more sophisticated models, quickly culling alternative plans to only those that warrant detailed analysis.Logistics modeling and planning testing.  Logistics planning design ideas tested and refined in JOFT may influence, or even be integrated, into more context as a precursor to more sophisticated models such as JFAST and SUSGEN.  Similarly, JOFT could be used to experiment with revisions to the logistics and operational planning process.Transportation Feasibility Process and ModelsAs described above, the JOFT model is based on several new ideas, including the selection of forces based on user-specified capabilities and the performing of transportation and sustainment feasibility analysis early in the planning process.  In this section, the sequence of steps executed in JOFT for initial planning is presented.  The steps consist of capability selection, force selection, transportation feasibility analysis, force sustainment feasibility analysis, and post-sustainment feasibility analysis.Capability and Force SelectionIn general, when planning an operation, the JTF Commander is given a tasking.  That tasking is translated into effects that require certain capabilities.  The first step when using the JOFT software is to select the type of capability desired (multiple capabilities may be selected).  JOFT is equipped with a list of pre-defined capabilities including, for instance, peace keeping, raids, and engineering.  The user is then presented with a list of forces capable of executing the selected capability and is able to select a particular unit by assigning it a priority.  To provide an indication of size, the number of passengers (PAX) and short tons (STONS) for each unit is given.  JOFT, however, does not indicate which units are currently deployed.  This does not necessarily pose a problem since JOFT is designed to be used in a collaborative environment and the JTF Commander would therefore have access to commanders from the various branches of the military who would know which units are available.JOFT then presents the selected units and the planner next enters the following data:  (1) number of days until embarkation, (2) the debarkation site, (3) the number of days until the unit needs to arrive at the destination, and (4) a mode of transportation for each unit.  The possible modes of transportation available in JOFT are ship, C-17 Globemaster III, and SDHSS (shallow draft high speed ship).  JOFT is deployed in a manner that is linked to a specific geographic location.  Therefore, the choices for the debarkation site available in JOFT will be based on a particular geographic location.Transportation Feasibility AnalysisAfter selecting capabilities and forces, transportation feasibility is assessed.  The size of the force is compared against time and lift constraints and a pass or fail is returned for transportation feasibility.  It is important to note that the calculations for transportation feasibility do not take into account such issues as availability of bridges or canals.   Furthermore, JOFT only considers the time from the port of embarkation to the port of debarkation, thereby assuming all units are ready to be moved.  If a fail is returned for one or more units, then the user can return to the force selection step and either select a smaller unit or increase the debarkation date.  JOFT also offers a motion analysis option that animates the transportation of the selected units to the theater of operations.  This feature is especially useful for examining the movement of multiple units simultaneously.Force Sustainment Feasibility AnalysisOnce transportation feasibility is achieved, force sustainment is assessed using JOFT’s sustainment planner.  The inputs required by the user are:DTPFDD: TPFDD Baseline Duration Days.  The number of days a force can be employed with the original amount of deployed supplies (with default of 15 days).DR: Days Remaining.  The number of days that remain from the DTPFDD.FR: Risk Factor.  A value between 1 and 5, with 1 representing low risk and 5 representing high risk.RR: Replenishment Rate.  A value between 1 and 5, with 1 representing a high replenishment rate and 5 representing a low replenishment rate.Both the risk factor and the replenishment rate drive the calculations in JOFT’s sustainment engine.  The purpose of the risk factor is to incorporate into one value everything the planner knows about the environment the force will have to operate in.  A high risk factor may be the result of one or more of the following: (1) the planner knows little about the environment,  (2) the operation tempo is high, or (3) the infrastructure of the theater of operations is poor.  In JOFT, the value of the risk factor directly impacts the consumption rate so that the higher the risk factor, the higher the consumption rate of resources.  Finally, the risk factor is uniform across the entire force—that is, all units have the same risk factor.The replenishment rate allows the planner to input worst or best case replenishment scenarios into the sustainment demand.  For instance, factors such as the availability of supplies for purchase in the area of operations and the time required to transport supplies to the theater of operation may be incorporated into the selection of a value for replenishment rate.For each of ten classes of supply (as specified by standard Army nomenclature), the risk factor and replenishment rate are used to compute a consumption rate C.  If we let U equal the number of users of a given item and QU equal the amount of an item that is used in one day per user, then JOFT computes the consumption rate for each class of supply as follows,	 EMBED Equation.3  .	(1)In the above equation, both the risk factor and the replenishment rate are normalized with respect to 3 (the average value).To assess sustainment feasibility, the required level and the actual level of a resource are computed for each of the ten classes of supply.  To calculate the required level and the actual level of a resource, the following values are required:DBR: Balance Days Required:  The number of days gone by. 	 EMBED Equation.3  	(2)QOB: Original Baseline Quantity:  The quantity of an item that is required for the original DTPFDD.QTS: Theater Storage Quantity:  The amount of an item already stored in-theater.QD: Deployed Quantity:  The amount of an item to be deployed.The values for QOB, QTS, and QD are provided by a database.  However, the user is allowed to change these values if desired.  The required level, LR, of a resource is now computed as follows,	 EMBED Equation.3  .	(3)The computation of the actual level of a resource depends on the number of days remaining.  If the number of days remaining is less than or equal to the DTPFDD, then the actual level, LA is given by	 EMBED Equation.3  .	(4)That is, the original amount of available resource is reduced by the consumption rate times the number of days that have gone by.  On the other hand, if DR is greater than DTPFDD, then the operation is expected to last longer than the TPFDD baseline duration and the actual level of a resource is then computed according to	 EMBED Equation.3  .	(5)If the value of the actual level of a particular resource is less than the required level of the resource, then JOFT provides the planner with an indication of the additional amount of the resource that will be required to sustain the force.  The sustainment feasibility calculations are presented to the user in tabular form as shown in  REF _Ref64236443 \h Figure 4.  In this figure, the default logistics quantities are provided based on quantities entered into a master database.  In addition, the quantities may be adjusted and the resulting feasibility can be immediately evaluated.  Note that this interface provides the capability to evaluate sustainment feasibility from the ability to interactively change DTPFDD, DR, FR, RR, QOB, QTS, and QD.The calculations described above that comprise JOFT’s sustainment engine are based on several assumptions.  First, it is assumed that all lift and supplies needed for replenishment are available.  Second, the storage capacity within the theater of operations is limited.  Finally, supply consumption in-transit to the theater of operations is not considered and troop movement is not taken into account.The sustainment portion of JOFT also includes a time-phased analysis view that allows the user to watch the level of a resource as it changes from day to day, as shown in  REF _Ref64236482 \h Figure 5.  The starting value shown in each block is the original baseline TPFDD quantity.  Each simulated day, the quantity of a resource is decreased by its consumption rate.  If the level of a resource is greater than or equal to 80% of the original TPFDD baseline quantity, then the square representing that resource is green.  If the level is between 60% and 79% of the original baseline TPFDD quantity, then the square is yellow.  If the level falls below 60%, then the square turns red.  This time-phased analysis view allows the planner to visually determine if more or less of a particular class of supply is needed.Post Sustainment Transportation AnalysisAfter assessing sustainment feasibility, the user can select the Post Sustainment Transportation Analysis View button in JOFT to determine if the force and its sustainment package are transportation feasible.  As before, either a pass or fail is returned for transportation feasibility.  This view provides a more realistic look at  EMBED Word.Document.8 \s Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 4 Force Sustainment Feasibility.the resources required to deploy and sustain the selected forcesSummaryThe concepts behind and features of the Joint Operations Feasibility Tool (JOFT) have been reviewed.  JOFT, in concept and application, broadens the logistical planning process by including capability-based force selection, improved operational planning, crisis-action planning, feasibility “quick-look” analysis, and logistics modeling and planning testing.  JOFT has been implemented as a web-based application and includes the ability to identify capabilities, select forces, choose POE/POD, and perform transportation feasibility analysisand sustainment analysis.  JOFT’s ability to provide quick analysis suggests a promising potential for positively impacting the logistics planning process.Author BiographiesLee A. Belfore II, Ph.D. is an Associate Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering at Old Dominion University, where he has worked since 1997.  He received a B.S. in Electrical Engineering from the Virginia Tech, a M.S.E. in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science from Princeton University, and a Ph.D. from the University of Virginia in 1990 in Electrical Engineering.  Dr. Belfore is the author or co-author of 45 scholarly publications in various areas.  His research interests include simulation, web-based visualization, virtual reality, data compression, and fault tolerant computing.  He is a Senior Member of the Institute for Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE), the American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE), and Sigma Xi.Johnny Garcia is General Dynamics Advanced Information Systems ETS Chief Technologist and a Modeling and Simulation Ph.D. student at Old Dominion University.  He has over 12 years of engineering experience that includes systems architecture design, software development, database development, C4I systems development, logistics systems development, and new technology insertion for the Department of Defense.Emily Lada, Ph.D. is a Post-Doctoral Fellow at the Statistical and Applied Mathematical Sciences Institute (SAMSI).  She received a Ph.D. and M.S. in Operations Research from North Carolina State University.  She also holds a B.A. in Mathematics from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.  Dr. Lada’s research interests are in the area of simulation output analysis.  In particular, she has investigated the use of wavelet-based techniques for steady-state simulation output analysis, as well as for estimation, analysis, and optimization of simulation metamodels.  She is a member of IIE, INFORMS, and Sigma Xi. EMBED Word.Document.8 \s Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 5  JOFT's Time Phase Based Analysis.Mikel Petty, Ph.D. is Chief Scientist of the Virginia Modeling, Analysis and Simulation Center at Old Dominion University.  He received a Ph.D. in Computer Science from the University of Central Florida in 1997.  Dr. Petty has worked in modeling and simulation research and development since 1990 in areas that include simulation interoperability, computer generated forces, multi-resolution simulation, and applications of theory to simulation. He has published over 90 research papers and has been awarded over 30 research contracts.  He previously worked for the Institute for Simulation and Training at the University of Central Florida.  He has served on a National Research Council committee on modeling and simulation and is currently an editor of the journals SIMULATION:  Transactions of the Society for Modeling and Simulation International and Journal of Defense Modeling and Simulation.Lt. Col. William P. Quinones Lieutenant Colonel Bill Quinones is the Chief of the Knowledge, Management, Command and Control Branch of the Joint Logistics Transformation Center, Joint Forces Command, Joint Experimentation Center.  Lt Col Quinones, a native of New York City, was assigned to Joint Forces Command on August 2002.  He is a career logistician, with 22 years in the United States Air Force.  He has held various logistics and aircraft maintenance assignments in different around the world, including RAF Lakenheath, UK, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, Spangdahlem, Germany, and state-side assignments including Maxwell-Gunter AFB, Alabama, George AFB, California, Letterkenny Army Depot, and Defense Distribution Depot, Pennsylvania. Lt Col Quinones is a graduate of various military professional education activities including the Air War  College, Air Command and Staff College, and Squadron Officer School.  He holds an MBA from Regis University, Denver, Colorado, an MPA from Golden GateUniversity, San Francisco, California, and a BS in Computer Science from the University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.1Work was conducted while Dr. Lada was with VMASC.