RD&E ForumChairRalph WeberVice ChairCynthia BallardSecretaryMark McCallObjectives for this Workshop:Tighten focus on needs of the RDE community for Distributed Simulation.Conduct a panel discussion on M&S for Asymmetric Warfare.Have at least one invited presentation from Manufacturing research community in anticipation of Fall 2004 Conference.Comments and Recommendations:1.  Continuing requirements and desires for RTIs supporting real-time capabilities.2.  Examples of work providing interfaces between non-HLA frameworks and HLA simulations.3.  Continuing desire for Open Source RTI to encourage research, experimentation, and evolution of HLA – we will evaluate interest in potential study group or forum.4.  Challenges to M&S Community due to Asymmetric Warfare.Model the urban environment in 3DModel communications and location problemsModel non-government agenciesModel non-combatantsModel weapons effects accurately in urban environmentSimulation targeted at individual person on the groundModel psychology of the battlefieldAll scenarios must be imaginativeModel unmanned vehicles and unmanned sensorsImprove behavioral representatives of all human entities5.  From our invited presentation, the manufacturing modeling and simulation focuses sited were:  Modeling Methods (integration, correctness, standards, methods and tools), Infrastructure, Acquisition and Manufacturing (define and execute OSD sponsored pilot efforts to advance the use of M&S issues), and Cultural and Human Issues.  Of interest in this presentation is a report due out this month from National Research Counsel (NRC) Board on Manufacturing and Engineering Design Committee on Bridging the Gap between Design and Manufacturing.6.  For Fall 2004 SIW, RDE is interested in continuing a panel discussion on the theme of the conference.  For this conference, we believe this should be a joint panel discussion, probably with SAPD.7.  We continue to see no evidence of cross fertilization with SCS.8.  For SIWs in strange hotels – the Conference Committee needs to be more proactive in fighting for consolidated venues so members can easily move between fora.  Having user groups on two floors impeded movement between fora. Also, provide large signs to direct members to the appropriate meeting rooms.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)31Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)N/APeak attendance (including joint sessions)55Total papers presented8“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions1 – Panel Discussion,1 – Invited PresentationRecommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):04S-SIW-030