Fighting an Asymmetric War from a Virtual CockpitJim CaylorCAE USA Military Simulation & Training4908 Tampa West BoulevardTampa, FL 33634813-887-1594 HYPERLINK "mailto:jim.caylor@cae.com" jim.caylor@cae.comKeywords:Asymmetric Warfare, GWOT, OPFOR, Night Stalkers, Virtual Cockpit, Flight Simulator,Mission Rehearsal System, LVC, Collective Training, Concurrency, Interoperability, C4ISR, TRMABSTRACT:  It has been a few years since Asymmetric Warfare surfaced as a significant modeling and simulation concern.  Its relevance to virtual training devices and mission rehearsal systems is still being discussed.  This paper examines some of the issues related to one area of these discussions - the impact of Asymmetric Warfare on the design, development and use of flight simulators.In addition to mundane things like “Engine Fire During Flight at Low Altitudes” and “Missile Hangfire (motor ignites but missile does not separate)”, simulator training task lists now include things like “Conduct Aviation Urban Operations”,  “Control a Civil Disturbance”, “Prepare for and Operate in a Nuclear, Biological, Chemical Environment” and “Enforce Peace Agreements”.  These new tasks reflect both the asymmetric characteristics of the contemporary opposing force and the recent advances in Live, Virtual, and Constructive (LVC) collective training capabilities.  This paper explores what has been done, can be done, and should be done to support Asymmetric Warfare training in virtual cockpits.Covering all the types of aircraft and missions trained today is well beyond the scope of a short paper.  Some specific virtual training devices and mission rehearsal systems are described to illustrate what are, hopefully, widely applicable points.  Although written by a military simulation and training supplier, an attempt is made to answer “what should be done” from the perspective of the cockpit crews.  While the focus is on virtual training systems, constructive simulations (computer generated forces) are discussed, but only to the extent they interact with virtual cockpits.  In a similar vein, some suggestions on a proper LVC mix for Asymmetric Warfare training are also presented.1. IntroductionThis paper explores the relationship between training for Asymmetric Warfare and the design, development and use of flight simulators.  Definitions and background information are presented, followed by a representative example, discussion and a summary. Since this paper approaches training for Asymmetric Warfare from a rather narrow perspective, no general conclusions or recommendations are presented.  The intent is just to add to the ongoing discussions by introducing a virtual flight simulation point of view.1.1 DefinitionsA few concise definitions are presented here to set the stage and orient readers new to the subject.  Some of the definitions are expanded upon, as necessary, throughout the paper.Asymmetric Warfare:  “Unanticipated or nontraditional approaches to circumvent or undermine an adversary’s strengths while exploiting his vulnerabilities through unexpected technologies or innovative means.” [1] Live Training:  Real people operating real systems, for example traditional live fire training. [2]Virtual Simulation:  Real people operating simulated systems (human-in-the-loop), for example tank and flight simulators.Constructive Simulation:  Simulated people operating simulated systems, for example OneSAF Objective System (OOS), Next Generation Threat System (NGTS), and Joint Conflict and Tactical Simulation (JCATS).Live-Virtual-Constructive (LVC) Collective Training:  Any combination of LVC elements networked to conduct a training exercise or rehearse a mission. Flight Simulator:  A high-fidelity device, including visual and motion systems, for training aircraft and weapon systems operation and tactics.  As used here, includes typical Full Flight Simulators (FFS), Weapon System Trainers (WST), Operational Flight Trainers (OFT) and Combat Mission Simulators (CMS).Part Task Trainer (PTT):   A low-fidelity device, usually not including visual and motion systems, for training a subset of the tasks related to aircraft and weapon systems operation and tactics.  The specific subsystems simulated may be high-fidelity.  As used here, includes typical Flight Training Devices (FTD), Cockpit Procedures Trainers (CPT), and Desk Top Trainers (DTT).   Mission Rehearsal System:  In the context of this paper, a flight simulator and supporting subsystems used to plan, rehearse and review real missions.  Additional networked LVC elements may also be included. Exercise:  A training event incorporating a mix of LVC elements, such as the recent Joint National Training Capability (JNTC) Western Range Complex (WRC) Horizontal Interoperability Event.  In the context of this paper, an “Exercise” includes a large number of participants, as opposed to a “Mission Rehearsal”, which includes a small number of participants.Simulator Training Task List:  A list of aircrew training tasks that must be supported by a simulator or mission rehearsal system.1.2 Background and ScopeAlthough the term is a fairly recent creation, “Asymmetric Warfare” is not new.  David versus Goliath is often cited as an early example.  Vietnam, Panama and Somalia are more recent examples.  Every conflict, even if primarily conventional, has asymmetric aspects.  The current Global War on Terrorism (GWOT) epitomizes Asymmetric Warfare.  One distinguishing feature of contemporary Asymmetric Warfare is that the long-standing “Assumption of the Enemy”, repeated here, is no longer true: “When reliable information of the enemy cannot be obtained, it must be assumed that he has sense and will act with excellent judgment.”The Plattsburg ManualA Handbook for Military Training, 1917 [3] The definition of Asymmetric Warfare in the introduction concisely captures the key points – unanticipated, nontraditional, unexpected, and innovative tactics and means.  This paper focuses on the first few words of the definition, that is, how does one prepare (train) for threats that employ “unanticipated and nontraditional approaches”?  More narrowly, how can flight simulators and mission rehearsal systems support such training?Commenting on the current state of Army training for Asymmetric Warfare in a recent report from Tikrit, Major Robert M. Cassidy makes the point that “…asymmetric warfare is not ephemeral.  The Army has historically viewed irregular warfare as a temporary anomaly.  As a result, it has not done a stellar job of retaining asymmetric warfare techniques in its institutional memory.  Each new experience with irregular warfare has required that the Army learn appropriate techniques all over again”. [4]This paper is not a treatise on Asymmetric Warfare, nor does it dwell on operational doctrine, tactics, techniques and procedures.  For further background information on these topics, several recent writings have been included in the references section. [4 thru 7]2. Contemporary Opposing ForceTo a large degree, training for Asymmetric Warfare means learning to engage a variety of threats employed by the opposing force (OPFOR).  “Threats” can range from Punji Sticks, Rocket Propelled Grenades (RPG) and Improvised Explosive Devices (IED) to Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD).  There are also new threats, yet to be identified.   General Montgomery C. Meigs points out in his recent paper on Asymmetric Warfare that “Defeating these new threats requires…a different definition of training readiness and units manned and trained and equipped for adaptation to new operational tasks on the fly”. [5]Figure 1:  A weapon of choice for nearly 50 years.2.1 Many Aircraft – Many MissionsAircraft, especially helicopters, play a significant role in asymmetric engagements.   Here is just a quick sampling of the “tasks” they perform:Transport and deploy sensors for chemical and biological agentsStandoff detection of biological cloudsDispense crowd control agentsFacilitate crowd control through shock actionFacilitate psychological warfare operationsIsolate an objective and shape the battlefieldInsert, extract and support ground troopsConduct reconnaissanceAct as a Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) platformConduct medical evacuations and support emergency response teamsFigure 2:  DHL A300 after returning to Baghdad.Covering all the types of military aircraft and missions trained today is far beyond the scope of a short paper.  Given events such as those of September 11th and the recent hit on a DHL A300 departing Baghdad, Figure 2, the need for aircrew training against asymmetric threats even extends into commercial aviation.The example that follows should focus the discussion, and is a project with which the author is somewhat familiar.  Judging the applicability to other airborne platforms is left the reader.2.2 Little BirdIt’s rumored that Saddam Hussein was taken to Tikrit in a “Little Bird” following his capture.  The A/MH-6 Little Bird, Figures 3 and 4, is one of three helicopters flown by the Army’s 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment (Airborne) (SOAR (A)).  They also fly the MH-47 Chinook and MH-60 Blackhawk.  Although the Little Bird has been around since the 1960s, the ‘first ever’ simulator will be delivered this year.  The simulator is designated the Light Assault Attack Reconfigurable Combat Mission Simulator (LASAR CMS).  Both the Assault (MH) and Attack (AH) configurations are simulated.  Additional details on the LASAR CMS can be found in Reference [8].  Coupled with supporting subsystems, the LASAR CMS is both a flight simulator and a mission rehearsal system.  It will be used to plan, rehearse and review real missions.The 160th SOAR (A), also known as the Night Stalkers, emerged as a result of the 1980 failed hostage rescue attempt in Iran.  Constituted as Task Force 158, the unit designation has included Task Force 160, 160th Aviation Battalion, and 160th Special Operations Aviation Group (Airborne).  The unit was redesignated the 160th SOAR (A) in 1990. [9]  Since its inception, the 160th has played an essential role in most conflicts.Figure 3:  Little Bird – Assault Configuration.Focusing on the LASAR CMS and the training requirements of the 160th is particularly appropriate given their vital role in the war against terrorism.  The missions flown by the 160th are low-level, high intensity, and involve relatively small numbers of aircraft and personnel.  They specialize in small unit insertions and incredibly close air support.  In many respects, the LASAR CMS has to satisfy the worst-case demands on aircrew training for Asymmetric Warfare.  It also fills a critical near-term need.  Lieutenant General Philip R. Kensinger Jr. recently stated that Army Special Operations Aviation (ARSOA) is undergoing a transformation that represents “…the first major change to Army Special Operations Aviation since the creation 20 years ago of Task Force 160.  The plus-up of both personnel and airframes will allow for the basing of a robust battalion on both coasts of the continental United States.  These units will form a habitual training relationship with all SOF units while providing for rapid overseas response from continental U.S.-based forces”. [10]Figure 4:  Little Bird – Attack Configuration.2.3 LASAR CMSIn order to maximize the probability of mission success, Little Bird aircrews must carry out real-world mission rehearsal to practice, validate, and verify mission plans.  Mission rehearsal training systems generally target aircrews fully qualified to operate the weapon system of interest.  The emphasis is on tactics, situational awareness, decision-making, and crew coordination.  This represents a new focus for virtual simulator development engineers, who are accustomed to concentrating on aircraft subsystem performance modeling.The LASAR CMS, Figure 5, is both a flight simulator and a mission rehearsal system.  Relevant key features and requirements include:Worldwide DatabasesEight Channel “Out-the-Window” Image Generator with an Extreme Field of View (240º by 98º)Six Degree of Freedom Motion System with Vibration PlatformDigital Control LoadingHigh Fidelity Aural CuesNight Vision SystemForward Looking Infrared Radar (FLIR)Defensive SystemsOffensive Systems (Guns/Rockets/Missiles)Cockpit Management SystemCompatibility with SOF Mission Planning SystemsSubstantial Set of Computer Generated ForcesLVC Collective TrainingRapid PrototypingConcurrencyAfter Action ReviewRecord/PlaybackReconfigurable between Assault and Attack ConfigurationsThe discussion that follows will reference some of the items on this list.Figure 5:  LASAR CMS prototype undergoing motion testing at CAE’s Tampa, Florida facility.3. Discussion There are at least two ways to view what should be done to support Asymmetric Warfare training in virtual cockpits.  The first is where the flight simulators are just a small part of a much larger exercise.  In large exercises the training focus is usually on the high-level command and control elements, with the flight simulators playing just a supporting role.  The second view is where the flight simulators, whether participating in a large exercise or rehearsing a mission, are the primary focus of the training.  The discussion that follows takes the second view.  Effective mission rehearsals can be conducted as part of a large exercise, but training techniques and priorities take on a slightly different mix when viewed from the bottom up.3.1 Simulator FidelityFidelity is the degree to which a virtual cockpit replicates the look, feel and performance of the simulated aircraft over its full range of normal and abnormal operations.  Note that fidelity encompasses all the simulator subsystems, including the visual, motion system and computer generated forces (CGF).  The recent trend in collective training has been to lessen the emphasis on simulator fidelity.  Lower fidelity part task trainers are deemed adequate by many because the training is focused on the interactions between participating aircraft, ground units, and command and control centers.  Low fidelity simulators are much cheaper, thus a larger number can be procured for the same money, and larger exercises can then be conducted.  This is sound logic for exercises.For mission rehearsal, however, even if the emphasis is on interactions, the flight crew must not be distracted by low fidelity simulations.  The virtual cockpit must be a comfortable, familiar environment, wherein routine tasks are performed almost without thought.   If this is not the case, then the crew will be unable to focus on the interactions associated with the mission.Given the constant evolution of cockpit avionics and weapons systems, “concurrency” has been a leading fidelity factor.   Concurrency is achieved when the simulator configuration is kept current with, or slightly ahead of, the aircraft configuration.  This obviously allows aircrews to train on new systems before they experience them on the aircraft.  Many procurement specifications now require the initial simulator design to be implemented such that future changes to the aircraft configuration and software can be incorporated into the simulator with “minimal time and resources”.  With the upsurge in new airframes, avionics modernization programs, improved weapons systems, and Global Air Traffic Management (GATM) upgrades, concurrency has an even greater relevance.  Incorporating frequent avionics changes in a timely fashion is a significant challenge to the simulation industry.  Concurrency is also a significant safety issue, and of paramount importance to effective mission rehearsal.  [11,12]  The key to achieving concurrency is to involve simulation engineering early and often on new aircraft avionics and weapon systems development programs.Figure 6:  Little Bird Avionics Upgrade.3.1.1 Some Fidelity IssuesThere are many phases to a mission, some of which can’t be rehearsed in a flight simulator with full fidelity.  For example, the actual insertion of troops is difficult to simulate effectively.  However, all the other phases can be high fidelity simulations, so the benefits of rehearsing an entire mission from a virtual cockpit far outweighs any shortcomings in a particular phase (“getting there is half the battle”).  Note that even during troop insertion the effects on aircraft weight and balance are full fidelity, and the troops can be observed in the visual scene after dismounting. [13]  For additional realism, since the Little Bird usually flies with its doors off, the flight crew is exposed to olfactory cues in the simulator when operating near the ground.Defining and specifying the levels of fidelity desired for exercises and mission rehearsals would benefit the modeling and simulation community, and the end user.   Defined levels of fidelity would aid in determining the appropriate LVC mix (more later), and provide procurement and design personnel with measurable goals.3.2 Rapid PrototypingRapid and quick reaction prototyping capability is essential to training for emerging asymmetric threats.  Examples of applications that may require rapid prototyping in a simulator include:CGF functional enhancements based on new threat data.C4ISR enhancements.New technology insertion and integration (aircraft, mission, and simulator unique systems).Hardware and software upgrades associated with new capabilities.Database generation efforts that provide innovative capabilities.How do you design a simulator that can support rapid prototyping?  It’s simple (yet complex) - the simulator hardware and software architectures must embrace the concepts of modularity, composability, scalability, reusability, and interoperability. 3.3 Composability/Reusability/ScalabilityThese are more than just notions that save money over the long haul.  They are necessary ingredients for a training capability that supports the rapid development of approaches to deal with new threats, tactics and environments.  A recent example is the quick reaction AH-64 Apache simulator software modifications highlighted in Surviving the Storms. [14]  Another example is the rapid deployment of the Military Planning and Rehearsal System (MPARS) by the OneSAF development team.  All wars stimulate rapid tactical refinements and innovations [15], but only recently has technology enabled training to keep pace – in no small part due to Composability, Reusability and Scalability.3.4 InteroperabilityTo effectively train to engage asymmetric threats, mission rehearsal systems must be able to quickly interact with a variable LVC mix of Joint, Interagency, Intergovernmental, and Multinational (JIIM) forces anywhere in the world (“training agility”).  This is certainly true of the missions rehearsed by the 160th.  Pending “fusion”, the key to achieving this objective is interoperability.  Some of the interoperability issues important to flight simulators and mission rehearsal systems are highlighted here. 3.4.1 Common DatabasesCommon databases are mandatory for conducting an effective mission rehearsal.  The need for common, correlated, rapidly generated databases is now an established priority for all the Armed Services.  Databases supply real-time flight simulators with information about the terrain, structures, weather, threats, navigation aids, C4I links, force locations, and bird strike patterns – just to name a few.  Flight simulator subsystems that use this information include the instructor-operator station, visual, computer generated forces, navigation and communication servers, air traffic simulations, ownship sensors and weapons models, aerodynamics model, and mission functions (e.g. height above terrain, line of sight, collision detection, and laser range finding).  The need for networked simulators to access common databases is essential for a fair-fight.  “Rapidly generated” is 96 hours for exercises and 48 hours for mission rehearsals.Several efforts are underway to address the need for common databases.  Here are some that have at least an indirect bearing on the LASAR CMS:Army Special Operations Aviation Training and Rehearsal Systems (ASTARS) Common Database (CDB)Synthetic Environment (SE) Core Master Terrain Database (MTDB)The Army Geospatial Data Integrated Master Plan (AGDIMP)JNTC Rapid Distributed Database Development (RD3) InitiativeDoD Geospatial Integrated Data Management (GIDM) ArchitectureSEDRIS TechnologyThese efforts are not mutually exclusive and the need to harmonize them is apparent.  Other similar initiatives are also underway (e.g. Multi-Spectral Database and Joint Synthetic Battlespace).  The harmonization effort should recognize near-term user peculiar needs and not begin with an across the board mandate.3.4.2 DoctrineSimulators and mission rehearsal systems are competitively procured and must satisfy a statement of work and specification.  Although training agility is desired to quickly deal with emerging threats, if a training system is procured to support collective tasks like “Enforce Peace Agreements”, then there must be some measure of success.  That is, training objectives should be measurable, otherwise the device design may not satisfy the need.  Tracing requirements to published doctrine is one way to measure the effectiveness of training.   Doctrine also drives the entire process, that is, both the weapon system and the training system specifications usually reflect published policies and procedures. As an example, the 160th uses the Portable Flight Planning System (PFPS) to support A/MH-6, MH-60, and MH-47 operations.  PFPS is a constantly evolving suite of PC-based mission planning tools, and includes a threat library.  PFPS is used to plan missions for both the Little Bird and the LASAR CMS, therefore it’s essential that the threat library contained in PFPS correlate with the CGF threat library used in the simulator.  Both sets of threat data should have roots in published data, in this case perhaps the OPFOR field manuals (FM 7-100 series) and Worldwide Equipment Guide, Figure 7. [8]Along similar lines, it’s important that all applications use common threat models.  This not only ensures a fair fight, but eases requirements traceability.  At some point, a central authority for threat data and behavior models should be established (certification, configuration control, and distribution).  Models of varying fidelity should be maintained, and the process must not discourage field experimentation.While training agility is paramount, it’s also important that as new threats emerge, they find their way into published doctrine as soon as possible.  This will simplify the downstream procurement of simulators and mission rehearsal systems.Figure 7:  A foundation in doctrine promotes interoperability.3.4.3 StandardsStandards, of course, are the cornerstones of interoperability.  For the LASAR CMS mission rehearsal system, guidance on standards was derived from the Army’s evolving Synthetic Environment (SE) Core, which specifically targets the virtual domain. [16]  Although still in draft form, SE Core encapsulates the principles and standards necessary to meet legacy, interim, and future force virtual training requirements.  SE Core will integrate new and existing hardware and software products to enable virtual simulations to effectively play in the LVC collective training environment.  Some of the existing or evolving standards and systems mentioned in SE Core are:High Level Architecture (HLA)One Semi-Automated Forces (OneSAF)Army Constructive Training Federation (ACTF)Joint Technical Architecture – Army (JTA-A)Global Information Grid (GIG)Master Terrain Database (MTD)Battle Management Language (BML)Common Training Instrumentation Architecture (CTIA)Army Training Information Architecture (ATIA)National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA)Defense Information Infrastructure (DII) Common Operating Environment (COE)Joint Conflict and Tactical Simulation (JCATS)Army Battle Command System (ABCS)As evidenced by this list, SE Core advocates open standards and the use of common models and databases.3.4.3.1 High Level ArchitectureOne item on the SE Core list, HLA, is causing the virtual domain some nervous agitation.  As the primary mandated interface between LVC elements, it is obviously essential that HLA be able to handle the anticipated demands of both large exercises and mission rehearsals.  While success stories can be found in the literature, the applications reported tend to be limited in scope.  HLA’s ability to handle a large federation with many real-time, widely distributed LVC federates has not yet been confirmed.  The USAF Distributed Mission Operations (DMO) has conducted many successful networked operations, but most of the participating flight simulators still use Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) locally, and a “customized” HLA is reportedly used for the long haul networking.  The Test and Training Enabling Architecture (TENA), after much consideration, did not select HLA for their networking needs. [17]   TENA block diagrams show a “gateway” to HLA applications.  Gateways, portals, translators and the like are the primary source of the virtual domain’s nervous agitation.  These components add additional latency to a network already uneasy over latency.  The intent here is not to draw any conclusions about HLA’s ability to meet the demanding needs of collective training, but to make the point that an objective assessment must be made – and soon.  If enhancements are needed, they must be developed as soon as possible.  Whether it’s HLA, HLA2, or some yet to be discovered protocol, networked exercises and mission rehearsals must be supported.  To aid the assessment/enhancement process, virtual simulation interests must increase their involvement in standards development organizations such as SISO.  Real-time man-in-the-loop design issues are often not considered early on in the standards development process.3.4.3.2 C4ISRQuoting General Meigs once again - “…we need to design into our training programs and command and control systems the mechanisms for mission rehearsal….If we can develop simulations that can drive the C4ISR systems in a no-warning scenario, rehearsals of the leadership can be conducted as a unit deploys and conducts its movement into theater.” [5]C4ISR/Simulation interoperability has significant current and future implications, and impacts most military domains (research, development, procurement, test, operations, and training).  It tops the list of capabilities needed to achieve the training agility required for asymmetric threats.U.S. and international military communities have identified interoperability between simulation and C4ISR systems as a high priority.  This is reflected in the Army Modeling and Simulation Master Plan, the Air Force DMO goals, the Navy and Marine Corps Aviation Simulation Master Plans, the JNTC objectives, the DoD Training Transformation goals, and the NATO Modelling and Simulation Master Plan.  In order for LVC collective training to be effective, simulation to C4ISR interoperability must be seamless.  The issues associated with making it seamless are largely related to developing common standards between the simulation and C4ISR communities, and allowing time for those standards to propagate.  The inevitable mix of fielded legacy, interim and future force systems will make for an interesting training challenge.For the interim and future force, interaction between Live and Virtual/Constructive “players” will primarily occur via C4ISR systems.  For example, Force XXI Battle Command Brigade and Below (FBCB2), a digital battle command information system, receives Live unit location data across the Tactical Internet.  This data can then be translated from Joint Variable Message Format (JVMF) to a format usable by Virtual/Constructive simulations residing on an HLA LAN.Most of the Army simulation to C4ISR interoperability experiments conducted so far involved constructive simulations at the Battalion level and above.  Although the entity counts are high, movement of large ground forces is relatively slow.  Small unit tactics, such as those employed by special operations forces, demand near real-time responses if LVC collective training is to be truly effective.  This must be accounted for in the standards development process.A substantial amount of work is underway to address the myriad of issues related to C4ISR/Simulation interoperability.  The issues range from coalescing an assortment of systems models to identifying levels of interoperability.  The issues are further complicated by the variety of C4ISR and Simulation systems, and the often dissimilar needs of legacy, interim and future applications.  The desire to satisfy both near and far term interoperability requirements poses a challenge when attempting to develop a solution for a specific application.SISO has been actively investigating C4ISR to simulation interoperability issues.  They sponsored a series of study groups, starting in 1999.  These study groups examined the issues associated with C4ISR/Simulation systems interoperability and established the need for a technical reference model.  Their research and recommendations have been documented in several papers, and resulted in the generation of a Sourcebook in September 2003. [18]Figure 8:  C4ISR/Simulation Interoperability Technical Reference Model.  [18]At the Fall 2003 SISO Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW), the final study group recommended the production of a guidance document for interoperability applications.  Approval to develop a product titled Guidance for Use of the C4ISR/Simulation Interoperability Technical Reference Model was just received from the Standards Activity Committee (SAC).  A Product Development Group (PDG), consisting of SISO volunteers, is being organized to produce the document.  The PDG will meet for the first time at the Spring 2004 SIW in Arlington, Virginia.  The guidance document will target all those involved in the development process (management, procurement, engineering, end-user, etc.).  It will serve as a tutorial for those new to the field, establish a common vocabulary, and provide visibility into the work being done by others.The proposed guidance document will focus on the C4ISR/Sim Technical Reference Model (TRM) described at length in [18].  The document will describe how to apply the TRM to interoperability applications.  It will also provide background information and a summary of past and present work.  It may also include a description of current and near-term interfaces (hardware links and software protocols) and a discussion of C4ISR/Simulation data engineering issues (common databases, data management, data translation, data alignment).  It will define levels of simulation, fidelity, and interoperability, and relate the TRM to other existing and evolving standards.  The following organizations have voiced an interest in monitoring the development of the guidance document:Air Force Agency for Modeling and Simulation Army Model and Simulation Office Gestalt LLC IABGNavy Modeling and Simulation Management OfficeSimulation to C4I Interoperability Overarching Integrated Product Team3.5 LVC MixLive rehearsals are still the preferred option for many missions.  “With enough warning…move to a training site for a detailed operational rehearsal in an environment that replicates the operational challenge they will face when deployed…Given warning time…this option remains the preferred method for ensuring mission success…” [5]  Continued advances in collective training capabilities will broaden the training options and accommodate those circumstances where warning times are minimal.Collective training task lists reflect the types of missions a specific unit might rehearse (e.g. Conduct Aviation Urban Operations).  In the case of the 160th SOAR (A), typical rehearsals could involve air assaults or close air support, and include joint or multinational elements.  Many factors must be considered to arrive at the optimum LVC mix for these types of missions.  Ultimately, the LASAR CMS aircrews should not be able to determine whether the dynamics of an entity displayed in the visual scene originate from a Live, Virtual, or Constructive element.Reviewing the high-level benefits of LVC interaction provides some initial guidance in determining the proper mix (Table 1).  Frank, Helms and Voor developed a technology-based methodology for task analysis that assists in evaluating tradeoffs. [20]Flight crews instinctively know what makes sense in terms of a proper LVC mix for effective mission rehearsal, so their views represent the starting point for any discussions on the subject.  The modeling and simulation community contributes insights on cost, schedule and technical feasibility.  As technology evolves, of course, the LVC mix will evolve.  All interests are served when each collective training component is sensibly allocated to the appropriate Live, Virtual or Constructive domain.When deciding on a proper LVC mix, remember that what makes sense when viewed from a conventional unit’s perspective, or a high-level command and control perspective, may not make sense when viewed from a small unit (special) operations mission rehearsal perspective.  Given the asymmetric nature of the contemporary OPFOR, perhaps more emphasis should be placed on the latter.Benefit to:From connection to:Is:Examples: Live Virtual - Include categories of players that are otherwise unavailable. - Can enable training in environmentally challenging arenas. - Virtual C2ISR platforms(AWACS, EP-3, etc). - Virtual cockpits can fly when adverse weather would limit an evolution. Live Constructive - Add level of realism that would be otherwise unaffordable. - Expands training area. - Constructive IADS controlling real ground threat simulators. - Constructive wrap-around allows units to fight larger fronts and enables Joint interactions. Virtual Live - Increased fidelity of force behaviors. - Live C2 adds stressors to virtual participants. Virtual  Constructive - Increased size of forces in training engagements. - Improved C4ISR and C2 environment for virtual players. Constructive Live - Increased fidelity of force behaviors. - V and V behaviors and model characteristics. - SBCT vehicles for MC02. Constructive Virtual - Increased fidelity of force behaviors.  - More realistic C2 and SA environment.   - Allows ground commanders to train as they would fight.Table 1:  JNTC summary of potential benefits of LVC interaction.  [19]4. SummaryFlight simulators and mission rehearsal systems must be designed, to the maximum extent possible, to support unanticipated training requirements.  Training agility is the key to dealing with asymmetric threats.  Oddly enough, the primary enablers summarized in this paper (modularity, composability, scalability, reusability, concurrency, and interoperability) are all being worked – primarily to save money.  These efforts take on a new sense of urgency given their critical role in training for Asymmetric Warfare. As a final note, before we decide to throw away the Plattsburg Manual because of its out-of-date Assumption of the Enemy, consider the following guidance it provides:“You cannot fire on the battlefield with the same accuracy as you do on the target range.  Fear dilates the pupil of the eye.  Men cannot shoot well when they are under great excitement.”“It is a common fault to forget about the service of information once the action has begun…Keep yourself posted on what the enemy is about.  Otherwise he may have some unpleasant surprise for you.”“Don’t get killed unless necessary; your usefulness to the State comes to an end when that occurs.” [3]5. AcknowledgementsThe views expressed in this paper were shaped by the writings of others and countless conversations with customers and colleagues.  The author wishes to acknowledge the community inputs.  The author’s affiliation with CAE is provided for identification purposes only and does not necessarily imply CAE’s concurrence with all the views expressed in this paper.  Also, as it was written from the perspective of a military simulation and training contractor, it does not necessarily reflect the views of the training system users highlighted throughout the paper.6. ReferencesCenter for Army Lessons Learned (CALL) Thesaurus,  HYPERLINK "http://call.army.mil/thesaurus.asp" http://call.army.mil/thesaurus.aspSISO C4ISR Systems-to-Simulations Data and Interface Lexicon Version 2000.09.30,  HYPERLINK "http://www.sisostds.org/doclib" http://www.sisostds.org/doclibCaptains O.O. Ellis and E.B. Garey, The Plattsburg Manual, A Handbook for Military Training, The Century Co., New York, 1917Major Robert M. Cassidy, Renaissance of the Attack Helicopter in the Close Fight, Military Review, Command & General Staff College, July-August 2003,  HYPERLINK "http://www-cgsc.army.mil/milrev/download/english/JulAug03/cassidy.pdf" http://www-cgsc.army.mil/milrev/download/english/JulAug03/cassidy.pdfGeneral Montgomery C. Meigs (USA, Ret.), Unorthodox Thoughts about Asymmetric Warfare, Parameters, US Army War College Quarterly, Summer 2003,  HYPERLINK "http://carlisle-www.army.mil/usawc/Parameters" http://carlisle-www.army.mil/usawc/ParametersColonel Clinton M. Ancker III (USA, Ret.) and LTC Michael D. Burke (USA, Ret.), Doctrine for Asymmetric Warfare, Military Review, Command & General Staff College, July-August 2003,  HYPERLINK "http://www-cgsc.army.mil/milrev/download/english/JulAug03/ancker.pdf" http://www-cgsc.army.mil/milrev/download/english/JulAug03/ancker.pdfSteven Lambakis, James Kiras and Kristin Kolet, Understanding “Asymmetric” Threats to the United States, National Institute for Public Policy, September 2002,  HYPERLINK "http://www.nipp.org" http://www.nipp.orgMajor Michael Newell, Tom Burch, Jim Combee and Jim Caylor, Special Training for Special Forces, Orlando, FL, I/ITSEC 2003,  HYPERLINK "http://www.simsysinc.com/iitsec_errata.htm" http://www.simsysinc.com/iitsec_errata.htmR.E. Dolan, A History of the 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment (Airborne), A Report Prepared by the Federal Research Division, Library of Congress, Washington DC, 2001,  HYPERLINK "http://www.nightstalkers.com/history" http://www.nightstalkers.com/historyLt. Gen. Philip R. Kensinger Jr., A Force Provider to the Warfighting Commanders – Special Operations is Playing a Larger Role In Major Conflicts, ARMY - The Magazine of the Association of the United States Army, 2003-04 Green BookJim Caylor, Concurrent Development:  The C-130J Story, Orlando, FL, I/ITSEC 2001,  HYPERLINK "http://www.simsysinc.com/iitsec_errata.htm" http://www.simsysinc.com/iitsec_errata.htmJim Caylor, Concurrency – A Moving Target, Orlando, FL, I/ITSEC 2002D. Joseph, T. Burch and R. Connolly, Comparison of Display System Options for Helicopter Aircrew Tactical Training Systems, I/ITSEC, Orlando, Fl, 2002Gail Kaufman, Surviving the Storms, Defense News, 05 May 2003,  HYPERLINK "http://www.peostri.army.mil/PAO/pressrelease/survivingtheStorms.jsp" http://www.peostri.army.mil/PAO/pressrelease/survivingtheStorms.jspLt. Gen. Julian J. Ewell, Sharpening the Combat Edge, The Use of Analysis to Reinforce Military Judgment, Department of the Army, Washington, D.C., 1995,  HYPERLINK "http://www.army.mil/cmh-pg/books/Vietnam/Sharpen/ch06.htm" http://www.army.mil/cmh-pg/books/Vietnam/Sharpen/ch06.htmOperational Requirements Document for Synthetic Environment (SE) Core Program ACAT III, 01 Jul 03 Draft, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 2003The Test and Training Enabling Architecture (TENA), Architecture Reference Document, Version 2002, 04 Nov 02, Washington, D.C.,  HYPERLINK "http://fi2010.org/documents/tena2002.pdf" http://fi2010.org/documents/tena2002.pdfFrank Carr, Jim Caylor, Joe Lacetera, and Andreas Tolk, C4ISR/Sim Technical Reference Model Sourcebook, 03F-SIW-124, 2003 SISO Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, September 2003CDR Jeff Wolstenholme, JNTC Live-Virtual-Constructive Presentation, LVCTEPR 03-2, Ft. Leavenworth, KS, 30 Sep 03Geoffrey A. Frank, Robert F. Helms II and David Voor, Determining the Right Mix of Live, Virtual, and Constructive Training, Orlando, FL, I/ITSEC 2000,  HYPERLINK "http://www.rti.org/pubs/live.pdf" http://www.rti.org/pubs/live.pdfAuthor BiographyJIM CAYLOR is a System Architect with CAE USA Military Simulation & Training.  He joined CAE in 1982, following five years as an electronics design engineer with Smiths Industries Aerospace and Defense Systems.  Jim has participated in several commercial and military flight simulator development programs, including the A-300, B-737/747, BAe-125/ATP/J41, A-10, AV-8B, EA-6B, E-6A, C-5 AMP, C-130J, CH-60S, AH-64 CTT, and A/MH-6M.  Jim also participated in America’s longest asymmetric war.  He has a Bachelor of Engineering Technology degree from the University of South Florida and is a registered Professional Engineer and Certified Modeling & Simulation Professional.