Operational Effects Modeling for Defense Against Chemical and Biological WarfareEric Lowenstein, Tom StarkCubic Applications, Inc.5695 King Center DriveAlexandria, VA  22315703-924-3050 HYPERLINK "mailto:eric.lowenstein@cubic.com" eric.lowenstein@cubic.com, tom.stark@cubic.comTom SterleSimulation Technologies, Inc.4027 Executive DriveBeavercreek, OH  45431937-431-8986sterlet@stiusa.comRoland BarrattDefense Science and Technology LaboratoryPorton Down, SalisburyWiltshire, SP4 0JQ, UK01980 614691 HYPERLINK "mailto:rbarratt@dstl.gov.uk" rbarratt@dstl.gov.ukKeywords:operations, effects, model, simulation, CB, defense, STAFFS, REASON, IMPACT, NBC CREST, JOEFABSTRACT:  Operational effects models make use of detailed information on facility operations, infrastructure, and personnel activities to provide a comprehensive assessment of mission capabilities.  Operational effects models are ideally suited to support defense against attacks involving chemical or biological weapons because they enable analysis of the impact of such attacks on operability.  They can also be used to identify materiel, infrastructure, resource, and personnel requirements, to optimize concepts of operation and to aid in doctrine development.  This paper will discuss the utility of operational effects modeling as well as current development efforts, including the recently initiated Joint Operational Effects Federation program.1. IntroductionOperational effects (OE) models are tools for estimating the impact of environmental and situational changes on a complex mission.  Using detailed information on facility operations, materiel, infrastructure, and personnel activities, OE models provide a comprehensive assessment of mission capabilities.  Equipment, resources, materiel, personnel, and even operational concepts can be modeled in as much detail as is necessary to accurately depict real processes.  The ultimate goal of OE modeling is to predict the mission degradation that results from an attack.  When done correctly, OE modeling offers the additional benefit of allowing the user to understand the sensitivities of mission degradation to concepts of operation (ConOps), materiel, etc., for a given attack scenario.OE models are ideally suited to support defense against chemical and biological attacks.  Objectives of chemical and biological attacks are to deny the use of areas or equipment, to cause physical and psychological stress and casualties, and to ultimately degrade and disrupt military operations.  To defend against such attacks, it is necessary to forecast not only the casualties, but also the performance of remaining personnel and the aggregate effects on the site’s capabilities.  While casualties can be predicted by calculating the movement of the hazard and estimating the challenge the hazard presents to the human population, the most comprehensive way of assessing mission degradation is through OE modeling.  The Vulnerability Assessment Tool was used to compare casualties with the sortie rate for a large base in NE Asia. As Figure 1 illustrates, operability is not a simple function of casualties.  OE modeling is needed to adequately describe this relationship. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 1 – Sorties as a Function of Casualties.  Operability is not a simple function of casualties.OE models like Air Force Research Lab’s (AFRL’s) Simulation, Training and Analysis For Fixed Sites model (STAFFS) or the United Kingdom Ministry of Defence’s (MOD) Response and Effects Analysis System for Operational Needs (REASON) simulate military operations on fixed sites and can model the effects of chemical or biological attacks on those operations.  These tools integrate weather modeling and transport and dispersion of the chemical and biological hazard with a simulation incorporating all of the relevant operations and processes to estimate the effects of the hazard on personnel.  Consequently, they can predict the mission degradation resulting from an attack.The Joint Operational Effects Federation (JOEF) program will provide the warfighter with a model-based decision support information system that will estimate the effects of chemical and biological warfare (CBW) on personnel and operations.  To serve as a prototype for this program, STAFFS will be integrated with the Integrated Modeling Platform with Agent Controlled Tasking (IMPACT) and the Nuclear, Biological, Chemical Casualty and Resource Estimation Support Tool (NBC CREST) to produce a Monte Carlo simulation of the medical and operational effects of chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear attacks on an airbase.2. Advantages to Operational Effects ModelingOE modeling enables military decision-makers to better understand the effects of CBW on operational capabilities, thereby improving the ability of forces to defend against this type of warfare.  OE modeling provides a comparison of different methodologies for defense, existing and conceptual.  Mitigation of the effects of CBW is possible through the development and acquisition of effective defensive equipment and implementation of efficient and effective practices.  OE modeling can be used to determine the most desirable quantities of resources and personnel for a given mission.  It can also be used to train personnel and prepare them for inevitable accidents, incidents, and attacks involving chemical and biological (CB) agents.By simulating the use of potential acquisitions and comparing the results, decision-makers can ensure that the most effective equipment is fielded.  Performing cost-benefit analysis on simulations involving hypothetical equipment can suggest advantageous avenues for development.  Similarly, OE modeling will enable decision-makers to determine the effectiveness of ConOps.  Different ConOps can be simulated, their effectiveness compared.While it is often useful to consider certain aspects of the operating environment individually, the ability to combine several items of interest into one simulation is invaluable.  By doing so, interactions and dependencies of equipment, personnel, and processes can be examined.  Most importantly, considering the items together provides a much greater understanding of how they relate to the performance of the military unit with respect to its mission.OE modeling provides a valuable alternative to live exercises.  By modeling equipment or personnel activities instead of carrying out very costly live exercises, funding can be saved for other areas like acquisition and development.  Representing a piece of equipment in an OE model is an inexpensive way to predict how it will interact with other equipment, how it will be used by or how it will affect personnel, and how it will function in a particular situation or environment.  Likewise, simulating personnel activities is a safe and less expensive method for predicting operational capabilities in a CBW environment.In addition to the above-mentioned benefits, OE modeling can be performed repeatedly and much faster (100 times or more) than real-time.  As a result, OE models offer tremendous flexibility in terms of parametric analysis.  Rapid repetition of a simulation allows for different combinations of variables to be tested, providing a better understanding of how they contribute to a given outcome and providing insight into the many contingencies possible given the inherent random nature of real-world processes.  The most valuable application of OE modeling is to examine the consequences of different chemical or biological attacks.  OE models utilize the output of a complex transport and dispersion model to predict the movement of a hazard cloud allowing comparison of different CB detection schemes, decontamination plans, medical resources, ConOps, equipment, and anything else relevant to the facility’s operation.While there are many advantages to OE modeling, there are issues to consider.  For example, data collection can be time-consuming and challenging.  Data on human processes is often difficult to obtain.  Also, the accuracy of a model, its ability to portray facility processes realistically, may not be easily verified without at least limited experimentation.  Simulation of environmental factors, i.e. - weather, transport and dispersion of CB agents, reactions of individual personnel to changing environment or conditions affecting them, is extremely difficult and computationally burdensome.  Variability inherent in processes such as transport and dispersion of agent is also a problem.  Finally, not many OE models exist, therefore it is important to determine how the existing models can be useful for different facilities and different types of operations, as well as to develop new models that can be used where current models are inadequate.3. Models Currently in Development:  STAFFS and REASONThe construction of a realistic simulation of a military site requires a tremendous amount of data on the processes taking place there.  Personnel, resource, and equipment requirements must be addressed.  For an OE model to be accurate, it must be created with the help of the users of the system or systems it is intended to simulate.  Two models currently in development are AFRL’s STAFFS model and MOD’s REASON tool.STAFFS is a complex Monte Carlo class model that simulates military operations at large fixed sites.  These fixed sites can include fighter bases, aerial ports, seaports, army depots, or any other site of military operation.  STAFFS is capable of simulating attacks involving CBW and the effects of those attacks.  To do so, it focuses on the human aspect of base operations.  It considers the health of personnel and their ability to perform their duties given: 1) the concentration of hazard at each individual’s location, 2) the individual’s MOPP  level, and 3) changes to the operating environment due to the attack (i.e. - infrastructure damage and contamination control).  The hazard affects an individual’s health.  Increased MOPP levels affect an individual’s mobility, tactile sensitivity and manual dexterity, hamper communications and may limit the amount of time he or she can work without rest.  Changes to the environment can include loss of infrastructure, the need for contamination avoidance, and a loss of resources, and can drastically affect the continuance of a mission.  All of these factors affect an individual’s performance and contribute to the aggregate degradation of site performance with respect to a given mission. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 2 – STAFFS Display.AFRL performed extensive field testing to obtain accurate models describing how an individual’s performance degrades under the above conditions.  These models are utilized by STAFFS in determining personnel and base performance.  For example, STAFFS can demonstrate a drop in a base’s sortie rate after an attack and can provide data implicating the cause of the drop.  A STAFFS output display is shown in Figure 2.  The model generates numerous data tables while a scenario is played out, but this visualization gives the user a general picture of the environment.  Some of the data that STAFFS outputs includes:•	locations of personnel, fighter and transport aircraft, ships, vehicles, support equipment, detectors, munitions, and spare parts;•	personnel health, including quantities of agent received percutaneously and by inhalation;•	resource availability, including level of contamination;•	aircraft status, including maintenance performed and readiness for flight;•	hazard area concentrations;•	detector history and current reading;•	status of tasks, activities, flights and missions; and•	cargo location and status.CBW is injected into the STAFFS model from the Vapor, Liquid, and Solid Tracking program (VLSTRACK), DoD’s standard transport and dispersion package (although output from other transport/dispersion models may be converted to STAFFS format for this purpose).  The STAFFS model was developed by Simulation Technologies, Inc., for AFRL.  Cubic Applications, Inc., has integrated STAFFS with IMPACT, a higher fidelity transport and dispersion model developed by the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl).  Dstl is part of MOD.  IMPACT possesses a modular architecture incorporating the capabilities of several models into one.  By combining the standard computation engine for a hazard over open terrain (the Second Order Closure Integrated PUFF model, or SCIPUFF) with the state-of-the-art urban effects modeling capabilities of Dstl’s Urban Dispersion Model (UDM), IMPACT offers a more accurate representation of the hazard cloud.REASON is an OE model constructed by Dstl for the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA).  Like STAFFS, REASON employs a transport and dispersion model to estimate the movement of a hazard cloud over complex terrain on a site populated by personnel, buildings, vehicles, and a number of resources.  REASON also employs Monte Carlo methods to simulate fixed site operations.  The current development task involves modeling a military airbase.  A seaport modeling capability will be developed next, followed by a force maneuver capability.Figure 3 – REASON Architecture.REASON consists of 5 main modules.  GEDIS (Geographical and Environmental Database Information System) provides information on geographical features such as buildings, ground areas, and terrain.  MAUI (Modeling Applications User Interface) allows a user to enter scenario details and other geographical data.  Resample is the primary analysis tool and provides the user interface for REASON.  The Resample Controller is another module, allowing the user to control and monitor scenario progress and create reports.  Finally, IMPACT serves as the transport and dispersion model for REASON.  All of these modules will ultimately serve to make REASON a very useful and flexible analytical tool.  A sample visualization from REASON is shown below in Figure 3.  REASON output is similar to STAFFS in content, including data concerning the location and health of personnel, the location and availability of resources, hazard concentration by area, detector status, and sortie rates.STAFFS and REASON have many similar features, but they complement one another by specializing in modeling different aspects of the operating environment.  STAFFS concentrates much of its abilities on the assignment and performance of personnel tasking toward a complex mission, and the use of resources involved in those tasks.  REASON specializes in the computation of hazard effects and casualty estimation.  REASON’s modular structure, including its inclusion of various models of very different abilities along with the flexibility and ease of future development derived from this modularity, make it a very attractive tool.  STAFFS brings a wealth of the necessary detail of military tasking that will be invaluable to future operational analysis.  DTRA plans to integrate STAFFS and REASON, so that the capabilities of each can be achieved in a single model.  Integration of these two tools will surely provide military planners with a very meticulous and comprehensive analysis tool. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 4 – REASON Display.4. The Joint Operational Effects Federation ProgramThe JOEF program is an ACAT III modeling & simulation program intended to provide the warfighter with a model-based decision support information system to estimate the hazardous effects of CBW on personnel and operations.  The objectives of the program are to develop a tool that supports advance and operational planning, integrates with other Chemical/Biological Defense Program models, and deploys on command and control systems of all services.The JOEF will be developed via the concept of blocks or increments of functional performance.  This process will make it possible to add user priority capabilities in a timely manner tailored to program budgetary constraints.  An integration team has been formed to construct a prototype for the JOEF.  Dstl, General Dynamics, and Simulation Technologies, Inc. (STI), comprise the integration team with Cubic Applications, Inc., tasked to manage the effort.  JOEF prototype development will consist of four blocks, providing modeling capability for airbases (Block 1), ports (Block 2), and land, mobile, and littoral forces (Block 3).  Block 4 will provide near real-time decision support.  Medical requirements will be incorporated in Block 1.Figure 4 is a schematic diagram of the software architecture for the JOEF prototype.  The JOEF prototype will be developed using STAFFS, IMPACT, and NBC CREST, developed by STI for the Office of the Surgeon General (OTSG).  For the prototype, the integration team will modify the models as necessary to produce a Monte Carlo simulation of the medical and operational effects of chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear attack on an airbase.The IMPACT model provides an advanced hazard modeling capability, while NBC CREST estimates casualties and medical requirements, and STAFFS models the operational effects of the hazard on the complex fixed-site mission.  STAFFS and NBC CREST will be integrated together as a single, dynamically linked software module and provide the core functionality for the JOEF prototype. STAFFS and NBC CREST will communicate via shared memory, and through standardized Application Programmers’ Interfaces (APIs).  The STAFFS/NBC CREST executable will communicate with the IMPACT hazard modeling software via a High Level Architecture (HLA) Run Time Interface.  To enable a standardized and flexible architecture, the NBC CREST and STAFFS APIs will be captured along with the data requirements of the IMPACT model in an HLA Federation Object Model. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT  Figure 5 – JOEF Prototype Architecture.  The JOEF prototype combines the OE modeling capability of STAFFS with casualty and resource estimation from NBC CREST and transport and diffusion modeling from IMPACT.5. ConclusionThe United States and its allies must improve its ability to defend against the threat of chemical and biological warfare through effective planning.  This can only be achieved by obtaining a clearer understanding of the threat and its effects on operational capabilities.  OE modeling enables military decision-makers to better understand those effects, improving the ability of forces to defend against this type of warfare.  OE models such as STAFFS and REASON enable the user to predict the movement of a chemical or biological hazard cloud and estimate its effects on personnel and their performance with respect to a complex military mission.  Individual tasking, availability of resources to include personnel, and the effectiveness of detection and protective equipment are just a few of the many factors that they model.DTRA, AFRL, and the OTSG in the United States and MOD in the United Kingdom are working together to integrate current modeling efforts and improve our ability to prepare for attacks involving chemical and biological agents.  The integration of STAFFS and REASON will provide defense planners with a very advanced OE modeling capability.  The JOEF program will combine the capabilities of IMPACT, STAFFS, and NBC CREST to construct a very comprehensive, high-fidelity tool.  These products can make an important contribution to our defense by identifying efficient and effective products and operational concepts, and ensuring that research and development funding is directed toward programs that will have real value to defense of the nation’s assets.6. References[1]	P. Hoare, R. Penney, J. Carson, I. Griffiths, M. Bull, T. Stark, C. Simchick, D. Warf, and W. Zimmers: Designing an HLA Federation Object Model for Atmospheric Dispersion Modelling, Paper 02S-SIW-063 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Spring 2002.[2]	S. D. Kwak and E. L. Berger: JOEF (Joint Operational Effects Federation) Architecture, Paper 03F-SIW-035 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Fall 2003.[3]	“Joint Operational Effects Federation (JOEF) Conceptual Model” Report for the Department of the Navy/SPAWAR, April 2003.[3]	R. Barratt: REASON System Design Document, Dstl Physical Sciences Department report for DTRA, January 2004.Author BiographiesERIC LOWENSTEIN is an Operations Research Analyst at Cubic Applications, Inc., in Alexandria, VA. Mr. Lowenstein provides modeling and simulation and operations research support to the Defense Threat Reduction Agency’s Technology Development and Chemical and Biological Defense Directorates.  Mr. Lowenstein holds a Bachelor’s degree in Physics and Mathematics and Master’s degrees in Applied Mathematics and Applied Science.TOM STARK is the Senior Scientist for Cubic Applications, Inc., in Alexandria, VA.  In this position, Dr. Stark provides modeling and simulation, operations research, and information technology support to the Defense Threat Reduction Agency’s Technology Development and Chemical and Biological Defense Directorates.  Dr. Stark holds Bachelor’s, Master’s, and Doctoral degrees in Physics, with a specialization in lasers and quantum electronics.TOM STERLE is a senior Operations Research Analyst for Simulation Technologies, Inc. (STI).   He has been heavily involved since its inception with the STAFFS simulation model, including methodology design, requirements specification, development monitoring and guidance, data collection and formatting, verification and validation, demo production, and installation and training.  He has conducted or planned several small-scale studies using STAFFS in support of the Restoration of Operations (RESTOPS) program managed by the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA), including examining the effects of covert biological warfare attacks, the relationship between personnel attrition and operational capability, underlying causes for lost sorties, and the extent of contaminated waste generation after a chemical attack. ROLAND BARRATT has worked as a scientist with the UK Ministry of Defence (MOD) for seven years.  He is an experienced Software Engineer and Military Operational Research Analyst.  He is currently working at Dstl Physical Sciences Department and is the technical lead for the Response and Effects Analysis Tool for Operational Needs (REASON) program, a tool being developed by Dstl for the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA)..Contents include material subject to © Crown Copyright 2004 Dstl