Preliminary Standards for Medical Simulation InteroperabilityStephen R. SwanDr. A. L. M. Thom McLeanDr. Jeffrey SitterleGeorgia Tech Research InstituteGeorgia Institute of TechnologyAtlanta, Georgia 30332-0832Keywords:Medical Imaging, Standards, Registration, Reference SystemABSTRACT: The advent of new three-dimensional imaging systems, utilizing cone-beam computed tomography and surface photography, has provided the medical community with unique capabilities for viewing internal and external anatomical representations of patients at resolutions around 200 microns. Currently, doctors use these images primarily for diagnostics purposes only. This research investigates methods for using these images in computer simulation of the patient’s unique craniofacial anatomy for the purpose of treatment and outcome simulation, translation of measurements to treatment devices, medical stereo lithography models and prosthetics, and medical procedure training.With a standard set of anatomical landmarks in place, images from multiple formats and multiple users can be oriented for comparison analysis, as well as overlay analysis.  A standard coordinate system will provide the ability to view images from various media without having to re-register the image each time.  In addition, an image can be registered once by an expert in a particular type of image and the coordinate system information could then travel with the image in a metafile. There are currently no registration standards for use with medical images. This paper will address the need for standards to promote medical simulation interoperability.  Specifically, the paper will discuss the use of standards in medical imaging, with a focus on craniofacial images. 1. BACKGROUNDStandardization for medical imaging allows for more capabilities to be extracted from historically one time use medical images.  New Technology makes standardization more feasible.  The use of film based x-rays is slowly ending with the advent of computer based imagery.  From the MRI, to the new cone beam CT scanners, computer based imagery is becoming more advanced with higher accuracy and greater resolution.  The ability to output images directly to a file already in a three-dimensional matrix, that is ready for evaluation, makes the use of registration standards a viable option. Registration standards can stream line the evaluation procedures and produce higher quality diagnosis.  In addition, images are now being placed into two and three-dimensional matrices, which allows an easy way to mark registration points.Furthermore, standards allow for easier comparison.  Having a known set of standards that mark registration points within a medical image, allows for comparison and merging of images from different sources, different facilities and different patients.  Procedures have been used and have been proven valuable in merging an MRI and CT scan to get the best of both worlds.  The MRI gives a view of the soft structures while the CT gives a look at the hard structures.  The process of merging different formats can be made much easier and with greater success by adding common registration points in each format.While comparing images taken in relative close time proximity, progress tracking is also an option.  Images can be compared to monitor time dependent changes within a person.  With standard registration points, a doctor could efficiently evaluate growth or healing and the effects on the surrounding bone structure or soft tissue.  With the coordinate information, along with scale and orientation of the images, it would not be necessary to view the images, as the comparison could be done with a few simple calculations.There has been little or no work done in the standards for medical image registration.  Some work has been done with respect to standard file formats for digital medical images, such as the DICOM format.  Within the DICOM format of image file, there are specifications for preserving patient metadata, which could also include point registration data.  Furthermore, there are possibilities for digitizing images created from earlier imaging techniques, mainly x-rays.  The work required to merge two-dimensional images from earlier, lower resolution images with those of today’s high resolution, three-dimensional images, is possible, but not trivial.  Significant research has been done by Hannam with respect to craniofacial modeling [1].  In addition, preliminary work has been performed on a reference system by Sitterle [2] and anatomical reference was gained from a paper by Nuelle [3].2. Standardizing Medical Image RegistrationAnatomical landmarks are unique areas within the anatomy of a patient that can be easily identified and used for image registration.  Image registration is the process of identifying the orientation and scale of an image with respect to an arbitrary coordinate system.  In the case of a craniofacial image, anatomical landmarks might be the auditory canal, mandibular fossa or the eye orbits.  Figure 2.1, below, displays some possibilities for anatomical landmarks on a model of a human skull.  The labels are as follows: L-left, R-right, AC-auditory canal, SF-superior fossa, IR infraorbital rim, CnC-contact cusp, IAP-incisor axis point, PST-palatal suture intersection.  Figure 2.1: Anterior, Left Sagital, Superior Axial (from top left moving clockwise) views of a Model of a human skull with example Anatomical Landmarks overlaid.These points were developed as landmarks in a system currently used [2] in which the details are being resolved.  The figure demonstrates the idea of anatomical landmarks on a model, but landmarks such as these would be identified and given coordinates within a matrix that makes up a selected medical image.  Another example of some of the points in a three dimensional representation created from a cone-beam CT scan can be seen in Figure 2.2.  Imagery data can be analyzed by a doctor and based on the picture and the knowledge of anatomy possessed by the doctor. A landmark can be identified and virtually marked within the image, by saving the coordinates of the selected point.  While the examples demonstrate adequate reference systems for hard structure craniofacial images, the reference systems give little value for comparison of surface data with the hard structure.  There are some main points that should be considered when developing a standard registration system for medical images.  First, a solid coordinate system that provides stability through basis on anatomical landmarks that are common and referentially immobile.  Once a coordinate system is created, an origin needs to be determined based on these anatomical landmarks, as well as a system for locating the origin within the new coordinates.  Finally, a set of transformations should be recorded to get the image oriented in a repeatable position with respect to the origin of the new coordinate system. For example, a two dimensional picture with coordinates x1y1 into a three dimensional system of x2y2z2.  All of the data needed to perform these functions would travel with the image in a metafile.Figure 2.2:  Anatomical landmarks shown in a three dimensional image created from cone beam ct data.3. Uses of Standardization3.1 Comparison of images from multiple sourcesAs stated earlier, standardized registration points in medical images can be used to compare two or more images in order to get more complete information and provide a better diagnosis.  When used for comparing two images side by side, registration points allow the images to be positioned so they are of the same scale and orientation to reduce the amount of mental visualization necessary for comparison.  An example of a side-by-side comparison might be comparing the open and closed positions of a patient’s jaw, as shown below in Figure 3.1.  Figure 3.1:  NewTom slice images of the same patient from two different scans to compare open and closed jaw positions. From top, Anterior Closed, Anterior Open, Sagital Closed, Sagital Open.On the other hand, registration points allow for easy overlaying of images from multiple sources so they can work together to increase a doctor’s chances of a successful diagnosis.  This is primarily used to merge the soft tissue detail of a MRI with hard structure detail of the CT.3.2 Comparison of images from different time periods to track growth or deteriorationTracking a patients progress, whether it be growth or healing, can be a useful monitoring tool.  Images can be merged with different colors and transparencies to display before and after conditions. Several iterations of a registration point can be displayed to show a growth/deterioration path.  An example of this type of monitoring would be to track the bone loss in the mandible with the progression of age.  By detecting that bone loss is increasing dramatically, proper action can be taken to correct or slow the problem based on the condition of the patient.3.3 Use standard landmarks to create parameterizable models for dynamic analysisFurther application for standard registration points can be seen in the production of parameterized models.  With registration points pulled from an image’s metadata file, a simple model could be created quickly to alert a doctor of a condition that may not be completely obvious in the one image that was created.  The models could perform a simplified dynamic task.  In the case of craniofacial imaging, these points can be plugged into a parameterized model that can be use to visualize simple jaw movement.  Models that are more involved could mimic mastication and occlusion with the proper tooth data.   While this may not give a highly accurate diagnosis, it can be used to warn that further analysis may be needed. Snap shots from a jaw open-close model are shown below.  If the jaw were out of alignment, it would be more visible when seen in motion.  The out-of-alignment condition would be transferred to the model from the registration points.Figure 3.2:  Simplistic model of jaw movement base on parameterization from registration points.In addition, registration points could be used to provide insight into the effects of surgery before actually performing the surgery.  By making informed decisions about where points will end up after performing an operation, the registration points could be translated to new positions and plugged into the parameterized model for future insight.With the introduction of a suitable reference system, a stable framework is created to hang models of varying degrees of complexity.  In the case of the parameterizable model above, while it is simplistic, it is far superior to the mechanical model representing single axis rotation used by dentists in the past.  It displays single axis rotation, but it has taken into account the anatomy of the patient, with little more than the passing of a few point coordinates.  If a standard registration system is correctly and carefully chosen, a computer based model can give more specific physiological relevance than a mechanical model of the same complexity.3.3 IdentificationStandard point registration also sets up a base for identification, whether in the field of forensic science or for use in security processes.  Points that have been previously identified and stored can be compared for likeness and ultimately identification.  This works well with a database of standard point measurements that are kept per person.  Fingerprinting for forensic identification is a familiar form of this type of biometric recognition.  More recently, processes using other biometrics have surfaced, such as retinal scanning and facial image recognition.  Furthermore, the use of human gate as an identification mechanism is one of the newest techniques being explored.  Finally, points taken from bone structure obtained in a scan become more useful when photographic or motion based comparisons are not an option.  Any one of the described methods for identification would benefit from medical imaging standards.4. ConclusionThe addition of registration standards to the field of medical imaging is a step forward in aiding doctors with a more informed diagnosis.  The increased speed in image alignment and merging brings faster analysis time to the patient and less time in the doctor’s office.  The creation of parameterized models gives doctors one more tool in their kit to get them to a successful diagnosis.  Finally, standardized registration points used for identification can increase security and aid forensic scientists in their fact finding.  Standard registration points incorporated into medical imaging can be the key to speed up image analysis, as well as open more doors for its use.4.1 Next StepsThe next step for preliminary standards for medical simulation interoperability is to set up a special interest group.  This group would explore the feasibility of creating such a standard as well as further uses to warrant its presence.5. References[1]	 ADDIN EN.REFLIST Hannam, AG. "Dynamic Modeling and Jaw Biomechanics." Orthod Craniofacial Res 6, no. Suppl. 1 (2003): 59-65.[2] 	Sitterle, Jeff. "Craniofacial Reference System," GTRI Internal Technical Notes February 11th 2003.[3] 	Nuelle, Douglas G., and Michael C. Alpern. "The Temporomandibular Joint: Anatomy and Treatment." In Operative Arthroscopy, edited by J.B. McGinty, R.B. Caspari, R.W. Jackson and G.G. Poehling, 1996.Author BiographiesDr. A. L. M. Thom McLean is a Senior Research Scientist at the Georgia Tech Research Institute.  He has over seventeen years experience in aerospace, information and simulation systems including ten years in information and simulation systems engineering, five years in aviation training and standardization systems, and four years as a tactical aircraft operator.  Before joining GTRI, Dr. McLean conducted distributed simulation research at Booz-Allen and served with the United States Navy.  He was designated a Naval Aviator in 1986, has flown a variety of tactical and training aircraft, and has over two-hundred arrested carrier landings.   His current research interests include Simulation Philosophy and Temporal/Synchronization issues.Dr. Jeffery Sitterle is the Chief Scientist of the Georgia Tech Research Institute.  He received his Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering and Applied Physics from Case Western Reserve University in 1987.  He has over 15 of experience in advanced sensor and imaging systems, the associated propagation phenomenology, and the signal processing.  He is currently leading the GTRI biotechnology activities and his current research activities are associated with craniofacial and spinal 3D imaging techniques and sensor systems for detection of metabolic genetic disorders.Stephen R. Swan is a Research Engineer at the Georgia Tech Research Institute.  He has been involved in the Georgia Tech Health Science initiative, focusing on craniofacial modeling and imaging.  Before working with GTRI, Stephen performed fixed asset accounting software and database implementations for several large utilities with PowerPlan Consultants, Inc.