COTSFed UpdateDavid PayneThe MITRE Corporation7515 Colshire DriveMcLean, Virginia 22102703-883-6366 HYPERLINK "mailto:dpayne@mitre.org" dpayne@mitre.orgKeywords: Multi Agency, Enterprise Analysis, Process Models, Interoperability, HLA, COTSFedABSTRACT: This short paper updates the status of the COTSFed initiative presented at the Fall 2003 SIW (03F-SIW-015: “Exploring HLA Process Model Gateway Components”). This MITRE Center for Enterprise Modernization (CEM) independent research effort continues to explore the feasibility of building HLA gateway components for use in connecting models built in different commercial process modeling environments. The concept is to design and provide gateway modeling components in each supported COTS environment that detect when work objects logically flow out of and into a process simulation model. The HLA RTI is envisioned as the connecting medium, alerting interested federates when so-called “transfer-objects” are published by one federate for introduction into the process flow of another federate. Key status updates include the decision to leverage past MITRE research and initially federate the Gensym ReThink environment with the PIKOS Bonapart (sic) environment, rather than the Imagine That Extend environment, as originally planned. A second and more fundamental shift is the new intention to additionally federate a Gensym G2 based constructive combat simulation with the two process models. This in turn supports a new additional CEM research thrust to complement the Multi Agency Planning research project that continues to support the COTSFed work.1. IntroductionThe COTSFed development effort is sponsored by MITRE Center for Enterprise Modernization (CEM) as part of independent research effort exploring how to enhance Multi Agency Planning, especially in the context of US Government operations. The COTSFed task is a small part of the overall effort, but we are continuing to explore the feasibility of building HLA gateway components for use in connecting several commercial process modeling environments. The concept is to design and provide gateway modeling components in each supported COTS environment that detect when work objects logically flow out of and into a process simulation model. The HLA RTI is envisioned as the connecting medium, alerting interested federates when so-called “transfer-objects” are published by one federate for introduction into the process flow of another federate. This year’s effort expands our federation aspirations by including an operational level model along with two process models, with a federation goal of providing a comprehensive multi agency scenario experimentation environment, with support for overall scenario simulation in the operational model, command, control, and communications modeling in one process modeling environment, and policy and detailed industrial process modeling in the other process modeling environment.  See [1] and [2] for a detailed discussion of the supported research effort and the original goals of COTSFed.2. COTSFed Status UpdateKey status updates include the decision to leverage past MITRE research and initially federate the Gensym ReThink environment with the PIKOS Bonapart environment, rather than the Imagine That Extend environment, as originally planned. A second and more fundamental shift is the new intention to additionally federate a Gensym G2 based constructive combat simulation with the two process models. This in turn supports a new additional CEM research thrust to complement the Multi Agency Planning research project that that continues to support the COTSFed work.3. The New Multi Agency Planning ScenarioThe 2004 Multi Agency Planning scenario is a hypothetical multi agency response to a mass migration of refuges into southern Florida. This scenario was chosen to replace the 2003 sea commerce scenario for several reasons. The primary reason was that the research team felt we learned all we could from the 2003 scenario, and it was time to address a more complex situation. Related to this was a desire to explore the role of several specific Federal, state and local agencies (or type agencies) that could not easily or realistically be included in the sea commerce scenario. Finally, the team discovered through interaction with other MITRE research teams that there was a potential for beneficial collaboration, leading to reuse, leverage and extension of the tools and models developed independently. Moreover, the scenario support opportunity would demonstrate the use of HLA to extend and adjust existing federations to quickly and inexpensively support new user communities. 4. The New COTSFed FederatesFigure 1 illustrates our conceptual architecture for the new version of COTSFed. The ReThink industrial process model used in last year’s effort to model a port in Baltimore, Maryland, remains in the COTSFed conceptual federation, for use as a template for modeling one or more south Florida ports in the new scenario. ReThink may also be used to rapidly model decision and work processes in the non-DoD partners in the multi agency team represented in the scenario. Bonapart was used in another MITRE research effort to model US Army command and control (C2) processes, in federation with the Eagle combat simulation. The Bonapart C2 process model will be slightly modified for the south Florida scenario to simulate C2 of National Guard units, one of the many player types in the new scenario. Bonapart also may be used to model decision and work processes in the non-DoD partners. We may find that some processes are better modeled in ReThink and others are better modeled in Bonapart, or we may simplyuse the two environments to distribute the work of modeling new processes to different subteams. The combat model is intended to serve as the scenario driver. The original plan then for the 2004 federation was to leverage the existing Bonapart-Eagle federation, and simply include the ReThink model or models, using the Gensym G2 HLA Gateway add-on product. Extend was dropped from the COTSFed initial federation in favor of Bonapart primarily to avoid an additional HLA interface and federating effort that would yield little additional research value to the supported Multi Agency Planning project. See [3] for an overview of the research effort that includes the Bonapart-Eagle federation work, and visit the PIKOS web site [4] for more information about Bonapart.Shortly after planning started along these lines, the Bonapart-Eagle team became aware of a different combat simulation used by a principle sponsor in Fort Leavenworth, the US Army’s National Simulation Center. This was a relatively new G2 based model called JMACE, which was already HLA ready and operating in several federations. JMACE used the G2 HLA Gateway to interface with the RTI, and was federated with Bonapart in at least one prototype federation. Since JMACE was already running successfully with the G2 HLA Gateway and with Bonapart, we believe we can leverage this prior work by simply loading ReThink over the G2 HLA Gateway and RTI stack used by JMACE. This should reduce our level of effort and allow us to focus on developing the gateway components needed within ReThink to make it easy to link models built in ReThink, a graphical modeling environment, to the HLA federation. In this new approach JMACE will replace Eagle as the scenario driver.The plan for the ReThink federate remains the same. Figure 2 illustrates this concept. Native model work objects in the ReThink model will flow to a “HLA Transfer Object Generator” block. This block will generate a standardized “HLA Transfer Object”, which has class attributes for the name of the source and target models and blocks (or other addresses within another model in a different COTS environment) and a list containing the information payload being sent to other federates. The assumption is that the federators and model users will coordinate the details of the payload, which is meant to be the information needed to generate a work object or similar entity in the destination modeling environment. Then the “HLA Transfer Object” is routed to a “HLA Gateway Publish Block”, which handles the API interface with the G2 HLA Gateway tool, which in turn interfaces with the RTI to publish the release of a “COTS Transfer Object”, an HLA class defined in the COTSFed FOM. Similarly, the ReThink model will have one or more copies of a “HLA Gateway Subscribe Block”, which works with the G2 HLA Gateway to monitor the RTI for “COTS Transfer Objects” addressed to the ReThink model and generate corresponding “HLA Transfer Objects”. These are then routed to a “Work Object Generator” block, which unpacks the payload in each “HLA Transfer Object” and generates the corresponding ReThink model native work object, which is then routed into the model. See [2] for more detailed descriptions of the COTSFed concept, and visit the Gensym web site [5] for more information about ReThink. 5. Current Status and 2004 PlansCommitments to other projects have deferred the 2004 COTSFed work into at least the first quarter of calendar year 2004. At the time this version of this paper was written, February 2004, our team is just beginning to plan our development and integration effort. Our goal is to have a rough working demonstration prototype running by April, to support a scheduled internal technology symposium. If work progresses as planned, this paper will be updated according for the Spring 2004 SIW, scheduled for April 2004.6. References[1]	Payne, Hoffman, and Zheng.  “Using Interoperable Process Models in a Multi-Agency Planning Toolkit for Enterprise and C4ISR Architecture Analysis”, (03F-SIW-014), Fall 2003 Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW), September 2003, Orlando, FL.  HYPERLINK "http://www.sisostds.org/conference/index.cfm?conf=03fall" http://www.sisostds.org/conference/index.cfm?conf=03fall .  [2]	Payne, David. “Exploring HLA Process Model Gateway Components”, (03F-SIW-015), Fall 2003 Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW), September 2003, Orlando, FL.  HYPERLINK "http://www.sisostds.org/conference/index.cfm?conf=03fall" http://www.sisostds.org/conference/index.cfm?conf=03fall .[3] Pawlowski, Thomas,     “Executable Architecture Methododoly for Analysis” briefing, The MITRE Corporation, 2003   HYPERLINK "http://www.mitre.org/news/events/tech03/briefings/architecture/pawlowski.pdf" http://www.mitre.org/news/events/tech03/briefings/architecture/pawlowski.pdf[4] Bonapart information: PIKOS GmbH Site:    HYPERLINK "http://www.pikos.net/english/" http://www.pikos.net/english/ . [5] ReThink information: Gensym Corporation Web site:  HYPERLINK "http://www.gensym.com" http://www.gensym.com .Author BiographyDAVID PAYNE is Associate Department Head of the Operations Research Department in the MITRE Corporation’s Center for Acquisition and Systems Analysis. He is also the SIW Logistics Forum Chair and an active participant in SISO affairs since the DIS days.©2004 The MITRE Corporation. All rights reserved. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 1. 2004 COTSFed Architecture EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 2. 2004 ReThink COTSFed Architecture