  Using PETS software to capture complex objective measurement data from Distributed Mission Operations (DMO) environments.Eric A. WatzLoren KeckBrian T. SchreiberLockheed MartinAir Force Research Laboratory Human Effectiveness DirectorateWarfighter Training Research DivisionMesa, AZ 85212-6061904 491-0732eric.watz@mesa.afmc.af.milbrian.schreiber@mesa.afmc.af.milloren.keck@mesa.afmc.af.milAbstract: The ability to objectively measure human performance in a DMO environment provides invaluable data used to quantify benefits of a simulation-based warfighter training program.  Simulation data collected from the distributed network can be used to examine the effectiveness training programs, the impact of new technologies, and the overall Return on Investment (ROI) of a DMO facility.  The Air Force Research Laboratory, Warfighter Training Research Division has been developing DMO performance measurement systems since Q1 2001.  These performance measurement and analysis systems have undergone successful proof-of-concept evaluations and have since been redesigned and are in the process of being integrated into fully operational DMO networks.  AFRL's performance measurements software platforms are capable of providing learning-critical information related to Mission Essential Competencies (MECs) and the refinement of warfighters’ cognitive abilities.  In addition to individual objective measurements, the PETS system collects aggregate performance measurements at the team, package and force levels.  This paper describes several aggregate measurements in the PETS software, including a clear avenue of fire measurement, a measurement of the pilots’ ability to manage intercept geometries, and others. This paper also details the significance of each measurement presented, the simulation data required, and the algorithms used, and how these specific measures are aggregated to produce analysis of training results. In addition, this paper presents a case for additional standardized data outputs from simulation entities to enhance human performance measurement capabilities.1. IntroductionDistributed Mission Operations (DMO) training on simulation networks is a cost-effective alternative to live fly operations and training missions. The use of simulation technology allows today’s warfighter pilots to participate in a continuous training cycle and to maintain a high state of combat readiness. Pilots can train from their home squadron or travel to other DMO installations to receive high quality training in the critical skills needed for success in combat missions. Several factors exist which have contributed to the acceptance of DMO as a viable alternative to live fly operations and training. The rapid advancement of networking technologies, an increase in bandwidth capabilities, and continuing development of protocol standards such as Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) and the High Level Architecture (HLA) are all contributors to an environment where large-scale, multi-force Distributed Mission Operations (DMO) exercises have become a reality. The high costs of equipment, maintenance, and personnel involved in the execution of live fly missions have stimulated the need for simulation training. DMO simulation training allows the warfighter to train either as a single ship entity or to collaborate and train with others in a multi-ship, team-based environment. Individual DMO sites can link up with other sites to participate in large-scale simulated operations, as was demonstrated at the 2003 Interservice/Industry Training Simulation and Education Conference (I/ITSEC). During this conference, simulation entities from the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marines participated in several distributed scenarios throughout the week. These exercises included entities located on the conference floor as well as two F-16 fighters from AFRL/Mesa that were connected via a long-haul network. In addition to the collaborative benefits of DMO, another primary purpose of the simulation environment is to develop and refine warfighters’ skills, knowledge, and experiences through participation in various training exercises. Simulation training in a DMO environment provides opportunities that are not available in live fly exercises, such as the ability to repeat a specific scenario designed to exercise one or more components of a Mission Essential Competency.  1.1 Mission Essential CompetenciesMission Essential Competencies (MECs) are “higher-order individual, team, and inter-team competencies that a fully prepared pilot, crew or flight requires for successful mission completion under adverse conditions and in a non-permissive environment” [1]. A warfighter that exhibits high proficiencies in all of the MEC skills is likely to be successful in a hostile environment or during a combat mission. Distributed simulation training in a DMO environment has been demonstrated to contribute to an increased expertise of MEC skills and other critical air combat knowledge. The goal of DMO training is to provide pilots with the opportunity to repeatedly practice the skills employed in combat situations, including target sorting, maintaining formation, and using proper 3-1 team communications. Simulation training in a DMO environment provides the warfighter with the opportunity to refine and develop the experiences necessary to be successful in a combat environment.1.2 Human Effectiveness Research in DMO The Air Force Research Laboratory, Mesa, AZ, (AFRL/Mesa) performs ongoing Human Effectiveness (HE) research on warfighter pilots in a DMO environment. The AFRL/Mesa DMO environment consists of four F-16 Block 30 simulators, an Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS) console, and several threat environment generators, all of which communicate via a local network using the DIS protocol. Warfighter pilots typically visit Mesa for a weeklong training session in which they routinely fly missions as a four-ship team against multi-group, multi-threat adversary forces. In addition, Mesa forces can also join up with forces from other sites via a long-haul network and take part in larger, multi-team DMO exercises. 1.3 Rating DMO Training Each year the technology behind DMO continues to grow at a rapid pace, particularly in the areas of high-resolution 3-D imagery, photorealistic terrain databases, and high-fidelity flight models. Images are consistently becoming more lifelike and exhibiting a more realistic look and feel. Simulation models are increasingly able to replicate the parameters of real-life performance in simulation entities, whether the entity is an aircraft, a missile launched from an aircraft in flight, or a laser-guided bomb. With the large number of products available to the simulation industry, justifying the ROI on investments or upgrades in DMO technologies is often difficult without objective results data that demonstrates a quantifiable improvement in warfighter performance. Typically, most of the ratings done in a DMO training installation use a subjective rating system. Subjective rating schemes – while effective at capturing high level contexts – bring with them several inherent flaws; the individual doing the rating may harbor a personal interest in the direction of the results and could potentially introduce a bias into the data. Additionally, a subjective rating scheme lacks a significant degree of accuracy. For example, a Subject Matter Expert (SME) observing a DMO exercise has no means to accurately measure the distance and angles from a flight leader to their wingman. Exact distances and precision timings of critical events are not possible using subjective ratings. Inaccurate results due to subjectivity can distort or negatively influence the analysis of a training scenario. The myriad of events that occur and the speed of high intensity combat action during a DMO training session may be overwhelming for even the most alert and observant SMEs. This scenario canSubjective evaluation methods alone can potentially lead to errors in the ratings data including incorrect observations or a SME entering a “best guess” at what actually happened  (there are areas of evaluation, however, where SMEs remain superior to an automated objective measurements system, including situational awareness and the occurrence of specific contexts). With the addition of objective measurement data, SMEs are capable of integrating the “whole picture”, meaning they listen in on the communications traffic between pilots and AWACS and between the pilots themselves, and monitor the overall battle situation from the “god’s eye” perspective and the perspective of the individual pilots. SMEs can then look at all available data and make more accurate skills assessments.An automated means to capture and analyze data on a DMO network would provide SMEs, program directors, and researchers the tools needed to objectively record and assess human performance in the DMO environment. Such a system would capture the large amount of data passing through a given DMO network and process the data in real time into a series of objective measurements, examples of which include kill ratios, distance of misses, clear avenue of fire, weapons employment, WEZ penetrations, mic use, and more. Objective measurement capabilities are significantly more accurate and precise than subjective measurements and can be used in multiple contexts including serving as a foundation for empirical research studies, providing a technical assessment of a new simulator component or system, and providing objective training results that can be used as a basis to support the expenditures associated with many DMO installations. 2. Performance Effectiveness Tracking SystemThe Performance Effectiveness Tracking System (PETS) software, developed at AFRL/Mesa in 2001, was designed as a proof-of-concept human performance measurements application that would collect 70 – 80 “core” air combat performance measures in real-time from a DIS network. This initial set of core measurements was selected for their relevance in assisting researchers to analyze specific warfighter skills with relation to MECs. Following its initial debut, the PETS system was successfully integrated into the DMO network at AFRL/Mesa in January 2002. PETS currently operates using a 5Hz collection rate, meaning that network data is sampled and processed in 200 ms blocks, or “data frames”. The initial PETS version 1 software release is currently a mature product and has been used to record 800+ hours of DMO training exercises at AFRL/Mesa. PETS collects data by listening in on the DMO network as warfighters execute their training missions. A typical training week at AFRL/Mesa begins with a Monday AM familiarization period, followed by 3.5 days of actual training, and wraps up Friday AM. During the week, a squadron will typically fly two 1-hour missions per day, with a .5-hour briefing prior to and a 1-hour debrief following the actual mission training. Throughout this paper, the results from the analysis of 19 teams (95 pilots) that participated in DMO training at AFRL/Mesa in 2002 will be reported. Analysis of the measurements presented here, along with others collected by the PETS system, confirms that a significant training effect is taking place during the warfighters’ time spent at the AFRL/Mesa research site[2].The remainder of this paper will discuss a few aggregate measures that are calculated by PETS in real-time. The significance of each measure to human performance measurements research will be discussed along with the data required to calculate the measurement. In addition, an overview of the algorithms used in the calculations of each measure will be presented. The measurements to be discussed include “Clear Avenue of Fire”, “Controls Intercept Geometry”, and “Percent Max Range”. 3. Clear Avenue of FireAlthough the purpose of deploying a munition is to hit the intended target, the launch of a munition also places others in a certain degree of risk of becoming a victim of “friendly fire”. Friendly fire incidents can be minimized or avoided altogether if proper decision-making and careful judgment is used before the weapon is fired. For example, although a warfighter must use sound judgment when deploying any type of munition, this emphasis is increased when the munition is a heat seeker missile. If a heat-seeking missile should somehow lose its original target (a threat entity), it will transition into a “find and reacquire” mode in which the missile will look for the first available target. At this point, the missile cannot discriminate between friendly and foe, and all entities within view of the missile’s seeker become legitimate target contacts; if a shot is deployed and there are friendly entities within a close proximity to the threat target, a malfunction could cause the missile to lock onto the heat signature of a friendly entity and use it as the target. The Clear Avenue of Fire (CAF) measurement begins the instant that a shot is taken and is designed to assess whether or not that shot places any member of a friendly force in a position of unacceptable risk. For example, if a heat-seeking missile is fired as illustrated in Figure 1, other friendly entities (shown in blue) in the vicinity are placed in danger of the munition locking onto their heat signatures while the missile is en route to its target. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1. Clear Avenue of FireThis measure helps trainers and SMEs objectively identify if the pilot used good judgement and made efforts to ensure the safety of other team members in his squadron when firing a shot.3.1 Data Required for CAF MeasureCAF is one example of the many measurements that can be calculated from data available under most standard DIS or HLA implementations. The data used to calculate CAF is obtained from the AFRL/Mesa DMO network and a lookup table within PETS. Typical simulation network data includes the location of the shooting and target entities when the shot is launched. The lookup table within PETS provides the classified ranges and angles needed for the algorithm. A pseudocode representation of the CAF algorithm is shown in Figure 2. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2. CAF AlgorithmThe Clear Avenue of Fire measurement begins when a shot is fired. The locations of the shooting and target entities are recorded, along with the type of weapon that was launched. The initial position of the missile is assumed to be the position of the firing entity at the time the weapon was launched. The location of the missile is then tracked throughout its entire flyout. As entity state updates for all entities are received from the network, their locations are updated and stored in PETS. After all updates are complete for the current data frame, the position of the missile is compared against that of all friendly entities within the specified aspect angle and distance from the missile. For all friendly entities within the aspect and calculated missile distance limits, the CAF algorithm calculates the angle between the missile and the given entity, and the relative distances between them. If the angle is found to be less than the threshold value, then a missile in reacquire mode could potentially acquire the friendly entity as its new target. The CAF measure is focused on improving a warfighter’s Situation Awareness (SA) skills. The pilot must maintain correct SA during a combat mission in order to avoid taking a shot that has a high potential of placing a member of his or her squadron in danger. Warfighters must constantly be alert to the relative locations of other members of their squadrons and employ their weapons safely and effectively in order to minimize danger to their peers. 4. Controls Intercept GeometryA critical component for success in an air combat environment is to position one’s aircraft in such a way as to provide a favorable opportunity to deploy munitions against the adversary while at the same time denying the adversary the chance to deploy their munitions against your aircraft. Pilots need to know where their aircraft is relative to the enemy forces at all times. A pilot’s ability to maintain all enemy aircraft at a safe distance from their aircraft while maintaining a favorable geometric advantage against all threats is critical to their probability of survival in air combat. The chances for a warfighter to be successful in a combat mission decrease as the amount of time spent in a dogfight or “furball” situation increases. Data from studies at AFRL/Mesa have shown that the chances for success increase as the minimum distance to an enemy aircraft increases. The data suggests there is evidence that at longer ranges, pilots are more aware of the situation (i.e. maintaining higher SA), and therefore more able to recognize when favorable opportunities exist to deploy their weapons at these long ranges. In turn, this leads to the pilots more often avoiding close combat, dogfight situations. To keep an enemy away from one’s aircraft requires maintaining a “positional advantage” over the opposing aircraft.  A positional advantage air combat means that a pilot attempts to maneuver his aircraft to a favorable location in space and seeks favorable geometries (angle of attack, pursuit angle, etc.) relative to the other plane. The result of this maneuvering is that the F-16 pilot positions the aircraft to most effectively deploy the aircraft’s weapons while at the same time attempting to minimize the enemy’s ability to deploy their weapons load. A warfighter who maintains high positional advantages over their opponents can be expected to achieve a high degree of success in an air combat environment.The Controls Intercept Geometry (CIG) measurement is designed to measure the level of positional advantage of one aircraft over another. PETS calculates the CIG measurement in real time between each F-16 and all relevant threat entities. Each F-16 pilot maintains a mental heuristic of a series of “vulnerability zones”, as illustrated below in Figure 3. These vulnerability zones are based on the threat aircraft’s altitude, weapon type, and the aspect angle from the threat entity to the friendly entity. When viewed from above (left), the Figure depicts the lateral boundaries of this measurement. Any threat entity that enters the vulnerability zone and whose aspect angle falls within threshold limits will trigger the CIG measurement. Viewed laterally, the vulnerability zone is broken into several bands based on a) relative distance from the aircraft and b) altitude of the threat. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3. Aircraft Vulnerability ZonesAs shown in Figure 3, PETS calculates multiple vulnerability zones based on distance and altitude. The zones are first categorized by distance. The zone farthest from the nose of the aircraft is the Minimum Abort Range (MAR) zone. Closer to the aircraft is the N-Pole zone. The MAR and N-Pole zones represent different ranges of “vulnerability zones”; each zone has different tactical implications if a hostile entity is allowed to penetrate the zone. One of the many focuses of the warfighter during combat training exercises is to limit both the number entries and total time any threat spends in the pilot’s vulnerability zones, while satisfying mission objectives. CIG measures count how often a pilot allows a threat entity into vulnerability zones, and tracks the total time any threat entity has stayed in these zones. Warfighters who allow the least amount of time spent in their vulnerability zones are most effective at managing a tactical advantage relative to their adversaries and deploying offensive weapons at greater ranges, and have been shown to have a higher chance of survival. 4.1 Data Required for CIG MeasurePETS calculates the CIG measurement using standard DIS/HLA data for positional information along with an internal lookup table which stores classified range data for each vulnerability zone. The data needed for this measurement includes the location, attitude, and heading for the friendly and threat entities. In addition to simulation network data, the weapons load of the threat entity must either be known or must be assumed in order to calculate CIG, as the depth of each zone (MAR, N-Pole) varies by weapon type. The CIG algorithm is shown in pseudocode format below. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 4. CIG AlgorithmThe internal lookup values are what trigger the CIG measurement to be started and stopped. Controls Intercept Geometry is calculated for each friendly entity to all threat entities where the aspect angle from the threat to the friendly entity falls within the threshold  and  distance values from the friendly aircraft. Threat entities that are positioned outside the lateral boundary lines or whose aspect angle to the friendly entity falls  outside specified threshold limits are ignored.5. Percent Maximum Range A warfighter’s ability to survive in combat can be analyzed as a function of the range at which they deploy their weapons relative to the maximum range of the weapon, i.e., (range_from_shooter_to_target / maximum_effective_weapon_range) * 100. Subjective evaluations of distance, such as “short, medium, and long range”, do not provide the required precision to capture this measurement, nor does simply knowing the exact range at which the munition was launched. At the instant they are launched, a missile will have a “maximum effective range”, which is the longest range at which the missile can be launched and still impact and subsequently destroy its designated target. The maximum effective range is the point at which physical or atmospheric limitations, such as the missile reaching its maximum altitude, availability of fuel source, or the force of gravity overtake the missile and negate any further pursuit of its target. The maximum effective weapon range as calculated by PETS assumes the target does not maneuver or attempt to avoid the missile in any way; the target is assumed to maintain a constant velocity and heading during the missile flyout sequence. The Percent Maximum Range (PMR) measurement is used to calculate the range from a friendly entity (shooter) to a threat entity (potential target) as a function of the maximum range of a specified missile. The exact value of this range varies based on a number of factors. For example, due to differences in air density with altitude, a weapon launched at low altitudes (example: 4K feet AGL) will have a shorter effective range than if that same weapon was launched from a much higher altitude (example: 35K feet AGL). In addition to air density affecting the range of a weapon, other factors include relative geometry between the shooting and target entities, airspeed of the target entity, aspect angle and closure rates between shooter and target entities, and airspeed of the shooter at time of launch. Warfighters who have participated in DMO training exercises at AFRL/Mesa have demonstrated an 8% longer range in their weapons deployment after 3.5 days of DMO training. This improvement can be correlated with the fact that by the week’s end, the F-16 pilots reduced the proportion of threat missile shots resulting in a kill by 62%. These statistics translate into a more well-trained warfighter pilot capable of maintaining greater distances between his entity and any threat entity, and deploying his weapons more effectively while at the same time minimizing exposure to the threat entity’s weapons envelope. Percent Max Range also uses the weapon flyout models in real time; however unlike Controls Intercept Geometry the PMR measurement is concerned with calculating the maximum flyout range of the particular weapon being deployed. For a given blue/red entity pair, PETS calculates the maximum flyout range of all remaining weapons in real time and returns the range between shooter and target as a percentage of the maximum flyout range. 5.1 Data Required for PMR MeasurementsPETS calculates the Percent Maximum Range measurement using flyout algorithms that have been extracted from the AFRL/Mesa F-16 simulator’s SCU-30 Fire Control Computer (FCC). To calculate PMR it is necessary to run the weapons flyout from start to finish. The flyout models used by PETS are identical to the models that generate the Dynamic Launch Zone (DLZ) radar display used by F-16 simulator pilots. The data needed to calculate the Percent Maximum Range measurement is obtained primarily from standard DIS/HLA network traffic. PETS uses the following values from each entity as inputs to the algorithm: location, attitude, velocity, acceleration, airspeed, and heading. In addition to the above data, relative distances, closure rate, and angles between the entities are calculated and used as inputs to the PMR algorithm. Due to classification reasons, a detailed discussion of the missile flyout algorithm will not be provided. However, the generalized pseudocode for the PMR algorithm is as follows:Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 5. Percent Maximum Range Algorithm6. The Need for Additional DataThe measurements discussed in this paper show that it is possible to construct high-level aggregate measurements that are process-oriented. A number of measurements, such as the ones presented in this paper, have been constructed from the data available on a standard DIS/HLA network; however, many of these measures are process- or outcome-oriented. Outcome oriented measures are useful to report such things as the status of a mission, but these measures lack the ability to capture the human-machine interface, i.e., what the pilot is doing in the cockpit. To effectively study human performance within the DMO environment, additional process- and skill-oriented measurements are needed. As an example, the DIS standard requires that a DETONATE PDU be sent out when a firing entity believes its munition has impacted on another entity. The information contained in the DIS FIRE and DETONATION PDU is currently being used to derive several outcome-oriented measures, however it falls short when considering the actions of the pilot when the shot was taken. A possible outcome-oriented measure that could be derived from the above context is: “What was the pilot doing in the period just before the munition was deployed?” or “What radar mode was the pilot using to detect the threat?” These and other measures would provide HE researchers with the context in which the shot was taken, which could then be analyzed and reviewed for correctness. Only a handful of the 37 MEC skills can be measured using the data currently available through the DIS standard and HLA RPR FOM definitions. In order to accurately measure the remaining MEC skills, additional data needs to be present on DMO simulation networks. Specifically, the additional data should address the human-machine interactions that take place in man-in-the-loop simulations as well as live-fly exercises. A significant portion of the additional data will be in the form of internal state data, examples of which include, but are not limited to, switch positions, display modes, radar modes, radar tracking lists, weapons load, fuel status, fuel burn rate, throttle position, and others, all of which are not currently part of the DIS standard or base HLA RPR FOM. This additional data should be incorporated as part of the DIS standard and should be made available as part of the HLA RPR FOM definition. Having the data as part of an established protocol-level standard will enable performance measurements applications such as PETS to effectively gather data and analyze performance across multiple DMO sites. Currently, there is no way for a standardized measurements tool such as PETS to collect process-oriented measures from multiple sites, as the enumerations or data structures used to pass such data will vary from site to site. 7. ConclusionThe evolution of simulation technology and the Distributed Mission Operations model has significantly improved the ability for warfighters to learn the Mission Essential Competencies required to succeed in battle.  Return On Investment opportunities in the distributed simulation arena are continually being realized.  As technology expands, the need for standardized, objective skills measurement tools has increased.  These tools can take advantage of the wealth of cognitive information transferred across a simulation network and use it to quantify the amount and types of learning taking place.  The PETS system has been successfully integrated into the DMO network at AFRL/Mesa and is providing data of substantial value to researchers and other DMO evaluators; however the system is limited by the amount of available data under the current DIS standard. In order to obtain additional objective human performance measurement data, there is a need to broadcast internal state information on the simulation network for acquisition and analysis.REFERENCES[1] Colegrove, C.M. & Alliger, G.M. (2002). Mission Essential Competencies: Defining Combat Mission Requirements in a Novel Way. Paper presented at the NATO SAS-038 Working Group Meeting, Brussels, Belgium.[2] Schreiber, B.T., Watz, E.A, & Bennett, W. Objective Human Performance Measurement in a Distributed Environment: Tomorrow’s Needs. Published in the proceedings of the Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation and Education Conference (I/ITSEC 2003).Author BiographiesERIC WATZ is a Software Engineer with Lockheed Martin at the Air Force Research Laboratory, Warfighter Training Research Division, in Mesa, AZ.  He completed his M.S. in Computer Information Systems from the University of Phoenix in 2003.BRIAN SCHREIBER is a Staff Scientist with Lockheed Martin at the Air Force Research Laboratory, Warfighter Training Research Division, in Mesa, AZ.  He completed his M.S. in Human Factors Engineering at the University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana in 1995.LOREN KECK is a Lead Software Engineer with Lockheed Martin at the Air Force Research Laboratory, Warfighter Training Research Division in Mesa, Arizona.  He holds a B.S. in Computer Science from Arizona State University, and has several years of experience in the real-time data acquisition & analysis, voice communications and human operational training fields. 