Modeling Force XXI Battle Command Brigade and Below (FBCB2) Using Role Player Workstations (RPWS)Michael J. HanawayNewTecBuilding 8B29, 6th and F StreetNorth Fort Lewis, WA 98433253-966-2394 HYPERLINK "mailto:hanawaym@epg.lewis.army.mil" hanawaym@epg.lewis.army.milKeywords:DAUVSFBCB2FCSRPWSSEITABSTRACT:  The Virtual Proving Ground (VPG) is the US Army Developmental Test Command program to link the capabilities of the individual test centers.  As part of the VPG the Synthetic Environments working group created the Synthetic Environment Integration Testbed (SEIT) -- a federation of live, constructive, and virtual applications that can collaborate to explore all aspects of Future Combat System designs, organizations, and command and control architectures.  The Role Player Workstation (RPWS) and the Digital Army USMTF – VMF Stimulator (DAUVS) contribute the virtual command and control capability to SEIT.  The paper describes how RPWS and DAUVS simulates and stimulates real and constructive tactical networks, how RPWS and DAUVS can adapt to emerging tactical combat organizations and their proposed command and control networks as well as to a wide range of interoperability standards for modeling, simulation and testing, and how RPWS and DAUVS model, distribute, and visualize various types of digital data within a virtual or constructive command and control architecture.1. A New Era of Test and EvaluationTest and Evaluation of emerging U.S. Army Command, Control, Communications, Computers and Intelligence (C4I) systems have, in recent years, become ever more dependent on simulation and stimulation systems to flesh out exceedingly sparse test architectures.  To evaluate C4I system critical operational issues against prescribed criteria, evaluators must examine new systems not as isolated, individual entities, but as systems of systems in operational, multi-echelon forces.  Gathering meaningful and comprehensive performance and effectiveness data on candidate C4I systems typically requires the deployment of at least a division with its subordinate maneuver, combat support, and combat service support elements.  To dedicate such a force solely to support a test event is prohibitively expensive in this age of reduced force structure, constrained funding, high-paced operational tempo, and  real world military obligations abroad.  Testers can only hope to deploy, at best, a bare skeleton of critical C4I nodes for their tests.  While this usually suffices to answer questions of required functionality and correctness of response, it does little to reveal the effectiveness of a digitized force responding to a full load of electronic data flowing across the depth and breadth of a modern, info- and net-centric battlespace.  Hence the need for simulation-based stimulation and response.2.  A C4I Test Tool KitRecognizing that low-cost, multipurpose network stimulators are essential tools in a wide range of C4I system test and evaluation, the U.S. Army Electronic Proving Grounds (EPG), with funding from U.S. Army Operational Test Command (OTC), developed the Digital Army U.S Message Text Format and Variable Message Format Stimulator (DAUVS) and the Role Player Workstation (RPWS).  Together, DAUVS and RPWS contribute several key functionalities to the EPG C4I Test Tool Kit.The DAUVS is a Windows-based application for establishing and maintaining communication links to the tactical networks on which C4I systems operate.  It can directly interface with a variety of Army communications equipment such as the New Technology Data Radio (NTDR), Enhanced Position Location Reporting System (EPLRS), and Single Channel Ground Air Radio System (SINCGARS), as well as routed, Ethernet-based local area networks typically found in unit Tactical Operations Centers (TOCs) and Blue Force Tracker (BFT) operations centers.  With its ability to connect to the communications needlines in an operational force, DAUVS serves as the conduit through which the live systems in the field interoperate with constructive and surrogate systems in simulation.Figure 1.  DAUVSThe RPWS is a Windows-based workstation application very similar to the Force XXI Battle Command Brigade and Below (FBCB2) Soldier-Machine Interface.  With the RPWS, test or exercise participants can create and respond to tactical messages on behalf of any number of designated simulated roles.  It thereby allows simulated forces to interact realistically with live forces.  Moreover, with its ability to play multiple roles, the RPWS requires fewer human participants to represent simulated forces without loss of fidelity in tactical reporting and network loading.  It delivers correctly formed and formatted Joint Variable Message Format (JVMF), U.S. Message Text Format (USMTF), and Over-The-Horizon – Gold (OTH-Gold) messages to DAUVS for transmission onto Tactical Internets (TIs), and for processing and displaying tactical messages received from live forces via DAUVS.  RPWS can generate messages automatically, semi-automatically, or manually.For these two test and evaluation tools, the requirement to transmit correctly formatted and addressed messages on the correct networks using the correct protocols, and to correctly acknowledge incoming messages, are critically important.  DAUVS and RPWS must interoperate with Army Battle Command Systems (ABCS) on upper TIs as well as FBCB2 systems on lower TIs.  DAUVS and RPWS must also support all the required transmission protocols including Acknowledged Multicast, Unicast, Multicast Dissemination Protocol (MDP), and Sendmail (for OTH-Gold messages).Figure 2. RPWSTwo other key features of DAUVS and RPWS are their expandability and scalability.  DAUVS has demonstrated an ability to connect to up to eight tactical networks at once from a single host.  Since multiple DAUVS hosts can be deployed to support large tests or exercises, it can interface with virtually any number of networks.  The RPWS does not restrict the number of roles to be represented on any single workstation, and multiple workstations can be deployed to support any number of simulation cells for a given event.3.  An Adaptable DuoRPWS and DAUVS participate in a number of simulation/stimulation federations or programs including the Simulation, Testing and Operations Rehearsal Model (STORM), the Command, Control, and Communications (C3) Driver program, and the Synthetic Environment Integration Testbed (SEIT).  As a testament to their adaptability, both DAUVS and RPWS have been able to meet the specific and diverse requirements of their federations while maintaining a single developmental baseline.  The DAUVS -- RPWS system sub-architecture is simple and straightforward:  the DAUVS is a server to the RPWS on a persistent TCP/IP connection.  The data is exchanged in the form of fully encoded JVMF bit-oriented messages pre-pended with metadata containing processing instructions.Figure 3. Notional DAUVS-RPWS System Architecture4. A Look to the Future - The SEIT AdaptationsThe Virtual Proving Ground (VPG) of the U.S Army Developmental Test Command (DTC) has been marshalling and demonstrating its suite of modeling and simulation programs under the aegis of the SEIT.  The SEIT has been organizing these diverse applications from various developmental test centers throughout the country into major capability areas, including Command, Control, Communications, and Computers (C4), Infrared (IR), Chemical/Biological, Meteorological, General, and Distributed Test Support.  As components of the SEIT C4 capability area, DAUVS and RPWS have participated in several SEIT Initial Operational Capability (IOC) development spirals and demonstrations during 2003.  The IOCs have given RPWS new opportunities to extend its functionality toward bringing the activities of other SEIT capability area components into an operational command and control context.Figure 4. SEIT Architecture for IOC 1With the participation of Orion and its radio wave form modeling algorithms, RPWS developed the capability of assessing whether certain tactical messages should be delivered to its addressees based on the network status of each role.  At prescribed intervals, Orion publishes the net status of all simulated systems.  RPWS subscribes to this data and adjudicates transmission and delivery accordingly.  Based on terrain, weather, and tactical situation at the time of transmission, RPWS will prevent certain roles from sending messages and disallow delivery to certain roles.  This can provide insights to the capabilities and limitations of existing or future communications systems for an operational force in different combat environments.A particularly innovative adaptation RPWS made for the SEIT is the ability to post chemical sensor data to a digital map as part of the common operational picture.  This is not currently a capability of any existing Army digital C4I system. Various components of the CB capabilities area model chemical weapon detonation, cloud dispersion, and passive chemical sensor data to a very high fidelity.  The Dial-A-Sensor component publishes data from simulated chemical sensors whenever they register returns on their scans.  RPWS subscribes to this sensor data and posts to the tactical map the scan lines through an otherwise invisible virtual chemical hazard.   This can offer new insights into rapid battlefield detection, analysis, and reporting of chemical and biological events as well as explore issues of how best to integrate and employ such sensors within the force structure.Figure 5. Chemical Sensor Scan Lines on RPWSA third adaptation is the ability to automatically generate and transmit Spot reports of enemy forces based on detections from virtual infrared sensors modeled by the Dynamic Infrared Scene Projector Engineering Grade Array (DEGA) component of the IR capability area.  DEGA projects an infrared representation of the virtual battlefield onto IR cameras.  As participants scan the simulated battlefield with these cameras during the course of a tactical scenario, they detect enemy units.  As the operators engage the targets, other IR capability area components publish the target location data.  RPWS subscribes to this data and automatically generates and transmits tactical Spot reports, which then cause enemy forces to be posted to the tactical map.  This capability supports investigations into how best to detect, report, correlate, and fuse battlefield intelligence into a coherent and timely enemy situation.As new force structures and C4I architectures such as the Future Combat System (FCS) emerge, RPWS and DAUVS are poised to adapt to new communications networks, protocols, and data flow models.  For instance, the deployment and integration of robotic air and ground sensors in future forces pose a challenge for emerging C4I doctrine.  Issues of how to deal with the burgeoning quantity of sensor data flowing across the info-space will become vitally important.  RPWS and DAUVS can be adapted to investigate these issues at every stage.5.  In SummaryRPWS and DAUVS have proven their utility and effectiveness in numerous developmental and operational tests as well as major unit exercises since 1999.  As existing Army C4I systems are improved and as new systems emerge, RPWS and DAUVS have always been able to keep pace in providing relevant, precise, and doctrinally correct stimulation support to the Test and Evaluation community.  Participation in the SEIT has shown their worth as adaptable, innovative C4I stimulation tools.Author BiographyMICHAEL HANAWAY is a Senior Computer Scientist at the U.S. Army Electronic Proving Ground Fort Lewis Field Office, Fort Lewis, WA.  He is the Lead Integration Engineer for the STORM Program and the Lead Design Engineer for RPWS.