XMSF Profile SGChairKatherine L. MorseVice ChairAndreas TolkSecretaryJohnny GarciaObjectives for this Workshop:Reach closure on the conopsAssign other profile definitions for reviewBegin to identify XMSF specific requirements for profilesBegin assessing UML applicability to XMSF profilesBegin assessing SRML applicability to XMSF profiles or as candidate XMSF profileBegin assessing BOM applicability to XMSF profilesComments and Recommendations:Although we didn’t reach closure on the conops, we agreed that there is an additional level of user who is neither the technical system/simulation developer, nor the end user, but rather a user who composes simulations dynamically from components that are compliant with profiles.  Katherine L. Morse will rewrite the stakeholder roles and responsibilities and post them to the reflector for the discussion.  She will update the conops class diagram once the roles and responsibilities are settled.Andreas Tolk and Don Brutzman agreed to support the review of other profile definitions and uses by assigning their review to students for summer and/or independent study projects.Steve Reichenthal agreed to produce a profile meta model in UML to help newcomers to understand the role of profiles and their relationships to the components of the profile standard.  This was part of the discussion in which we agreed that profiles, like other standards, may be included in other profiles by reference, i.e. that profiles may be composed hierarchically.The preliminary discussion on the applicability of UML identified possible mechanisms for capturing sizing constraints, possibly in deployment diagrams.The structure for briefings at the next meeting during the Fall SIW will be:Provide an overview of the technologyIdentify which of the definition objective(s) the technology supportsDescribe how the technology supports the roles of the stakeholder(s)Sketch a brief example of the technology’s application to XMSFDescribe the level of automation enabled by the technologyIdentify issues and shortcomingsThis format is designed to integrate with the SG’s process for identifying the structure and content components of the profile as illustrated below.This format proved to be effective for the UML, SRML, and BOM briefings during this meeting, resulting in a strong indication that SRML should probably be a profile rather than a technology for capturing profile contents.The half-day meeting slot was too short for all the material and discussion we needed to cover.  The SG requests a 3/4 to full day slot at the Fall SIW.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)40Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)47Peak attendance (including joint sessions)N/ATotal papers presentedN/A“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions7Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):  N/A, however the following papers are germane to the Profile SG:04S-SIW-050 Findings and Recommendations from the 2003 Composable Mission Space Environments Workshop, Katherine L. Morse, Mikel D. Petty, Paul F. Reynolds Jr., Bill F. Waite, Phil M. Zimmerman04S-SIW-142 Extensible Modeling and Simulation Framework (XMSF) Exemplars in Analytic Combat Modeling, Curt Blais04S-SIW-009 Composable Mission Spaces and M&S Repositories - Applicability of Open Standards, Dr. Andreas Tolk