 System Contextual Development ofPhysical Environmental RepresentationsVirginia T. DobeyScience Applications International CorporationSETA Support to the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office1901 No. Beauregard St., Suite 500Alexandria, VA   22311(703) 824-3411 HYPERLINK "mailto:vdobey@dmso.mil" vdobey@dmso.mil or  HYPERLINK "mailto:VTCDobey@aol.com" dobeyv@saic.com Paul G. FoleyQuantum Research InternationalContractor to the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office1901 No. Beauregard St., Suite 500Alexandria, VA   22311(703) 824-3453 HYPERLINK "mailto:pfoley@dmso.mil" pfoley@dmso.mil or  HYPERLINK "mailto:pfoley@quantum-intl.com" pfoley@quantum-intl.comKey Words: SNE, ECM, Physical or Natural Environment, Environmental Representation, Environment Concept ModelAbstractOver the past few years, several paradigms for including a representation of the environment in a system have been proposed.  Recently, they were integrated into the proposed “Integrated Development Process for Natural Environment Representations.” This umbrella process postulated that the paradigms are complementary, addressing unique aspects of the environmental representation development process without overlap.  The resulting process was further refined, providing detailed guidance on the development of a complete set of requirements for a system’s environmental representation. This representation will fully support lexical, syntactic, and semantic consistency across the temporal and spatial extent of the federation play space.  This set of requirements forms the system’s initial Environment Concept Model (ECM) extension to its system conceptual model.  The final step in the integrated development process is to embed the initial ECM into the system engineering environment.  This paper provides guidance on the issues, tools and techniques needed to ensure that sufficient information is captured in the ECM so that the appropriate optimized environmental representation can be developed and incorporated, with sufficient documentation to support V&V and potential reuse, into the system.CONCEPTUAL BACKGROUNDThis paper is the fourth in a series written for system developers and their team members to explain further and simplify the process of incorporating an environmental representation into a system.  The series is designed to identify relevant development processes and related paradigms, integrate them, simplify the result, and provide guidance on how to implement the integrated process using available tools to develop more easily, integrate, and implement a consistent environmental representation in a system.The first two papers presented complementary overlays to the IEEE P1516.3 Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) which provided for (1) the inclusion of essential Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) activities and (2) the inclusion of a representation of the natural environment, often viewed as something too difficult to accomplish.  The result of these two papers was an Environmental Overlay to the FEDEP that supported and enhanced the development of needed VV&A documentation as it leveraged the system development process for inclusion of an environmental representation.The third paper presented a concrete methodology for identifying a system’s environmental requirements, translating the SNE Conceptual Reference Model into specific, detailed questions about objects and interactions, object characteristics and performance, environmental effects on objects and interactions, impacts of the objects and interactions on the environment, and the environmental conditions and parameters which underlie each effect and impact.  The resulting set of requirements serves as the baseline environmental extension to the system’s conceptual model.  This paper integrates the results of the three previous papers by:  (1)  leveraging the Environmental Overlay to the FEDEP as its foundation system development process, (2) leveraging the detailed set of environmental requirements, or environmental extension to the system’s conceptual model, as the baseline documentation of the system’s implementation-independent requirements for an environmental representation, and (3) assuming that the VV&A processes described in the VV&A Overlay to the FEDEP are properly performed by the development team.What this paper must add is the process by which the system-independent set of environmental requirements is adjusted by the realities of the system engineering processes embedded in the system development process.  While these engineering processes may vary, policy exists to guide the specification and documentation of the necessary system engineering parameters to which the implemented environmental representation must conform.   The documented set of requirements for the system’s environmental representation, as altered by the contextual system engineering parameters, results in the Environment Concept Model (ECM), a significant tool in a system’s efforts to achieve meaningful interoperability.THE PROCESS FOR DEVELOPING AN ENVIRONMENTAL REPRESENTATIONEarlier, a five-step process for developing an environmental representation was extended from the Seven-Step FEDEP.  This process, presented as the set of five steps comprising the lowest level of Figure 1, can be summarized as:Establish Environmental RequirementsBuild Environment Concept ModelDesign Environmental RepresentationImplement Environmental RepresentationIntegrate and Test Environmental Representation EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1.  The Environmental Overlay to the FEDEP (also includes the VV&A Overlay)Several existing and proposed paradigms for developing a set of environmental requirements were decomposed and mapped to this five-step process.  Among them was the Environment Reference Implementation Process, or ERIP (see Figure 2), a proposed methodology to develop the ECM for its intended purpose.The goal of the ERIP is to embed the development of the environmental representation into the system development such that the scenario, context, connectivity, and other aspects of the system architecture are recognized and incorporated into the environmental representation just as they are incorporated into system entities, processes, and interfaces.Although the ERIP was originally presented as a separate development process, it was never intended to be viewed apart from the system development process.  The same is true of the Environment Concept Model. Early efforts to demonstrate the value of the ECM in system VV&A indicate the original developers’ intentions to integrate both the ERIP and the ECM into the system development framework. In fact, such integration is the ultimate value of the ECM to the developer.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2.  The Environment Reference Implementation ProcessThese original intentions support the validity of using the Environmental Overlay to the FEDEP as the foundation system development process in this discussion.THE ORIGINAL ENVIRONMENT CONCEPT MODEL (ECM) PARADIGMThe Environment Concept Model is “an implementation-independent, unified description of the synthetic natural environment for a simulation application.  Its purpose is to describe unambiguously the environmental representation to be used in the simulation application.”The ECM unites two different types of descriptions of environmental requirements.  First, it captures the set of environmental requirements as (a) fully specified without reference to specific system design decisions, and (b) as adapted to the contextual system engineering parameters which enable its proper implementation in the system.  Second, it captures the system engineering context which causes the environmental requirements to change from the requirements as fully specified (the “Inferred Environment”) to the environmental requirements as implemented in the system (the “Implemented Environment”).To understand better the system engineering documentation which must be reflected, and possibly captured, in the ECM, it is helpful to discuss those aspects of the system engineering process which will have a direct impact on the context in which the environmental representation must be tailored. SYSTEM ENGINEERING:  ORIGINATING IN CAPABILITIESWhile the system development process is standardized through processes such as the FEDEP, DoD is standardizing its capabilities-based system acquisition methodology through the use of the DoD Architecture Framework (DoDAF). The DoDAF is a primary tool used by the new Joint Capabilities Integration Development System (JCIDS), which begins the development of a system by first identifying the capabilities required by the warfighter and then assessing the available alternatives for system development based on the capabilities of known technology and the set of known and anticipated technology standards.  DoD is standardizing the documentation of system capabilities through the implementation of various DoDAF products.  These products also serve to document the system design principles and engineering parameters that fully specify the desired system capabilities and provide the complete context which must be considered when designing a system’s environmental representation.ARCHITECTURE:  DOCUMENTING CAPABILITIESDoD has established the DoDAF as the methodology to document the set of desired capabilities and the technologies selected to implement them in the system to be developed.  This framework, depicted in Figure 3, provides three primary perspectives from which to view the capabilities context that will determine the system engineering parameters.  These perspectives are the Operational View (OV), System View (SV), and Technical View (TV).  Short descriptions of each view are found in Figure 4.Initial architecture documentation must be fully developed for use in the first two FEDEP steps.  From the DoDAF-documented set of desired system capabilities, the warfighter requirements that the system must satisfy are to be identified.  At that point, the emphasis will shift to addressing the specific requirements within the context of desired capability. The architectural documents will help establish the engineering parameters to be incorporated into the requirements and metrics of the Initial Capabilities Document (formerly the Mission Needs Statement):Functional Area Analysis, which is derived from the OV-5, OV-6, SV-1, and SV-5 diagrams.  Tasks which appear in these views must be based on the Universal Joint Task List (UJTL) and related training tasksFunctional Needs Analysis, which extends from the Functional Area Analysis and adds OV-2 (for key players), OV-5, all SV diagrams, leveraging Doctrine, Operations, Tactics, Materiel, Logistics, Personnel, and Facilities attributes to identify current capabilities and limitations, identify redundancies, and provide gap analysisFunctional Solutions Analysis, which expresses specific technical solutions derived from both the Functional Area Analysis and Functional Needs Analysis as supplemented by the SV-1, SV-2, SV-4, OV-3, and TV-1 views, which also establish constraints on the solutions provided by the proposed system.During the capabilities development and assessment process, key Architecture Framework products that document the desired capabilities (that ultimately will drive the system engineering context) are:Operational context: OV-1, OV-4, OV-5; System Functionality:  SV-3. SV-4, SV-5;System Interfaces:  OV-2, OV-3, SV-1, SV-2, SV-6, TV-1;System Performance and Behavior:  OV-6c, SV-7, SV-10c; and System Deployment and Acquisition Plans:  SV-8, SV-9, TV-2, CV-6.  INITIATING SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT:  THE CHALLENGE OF DEVELOPING THE OV-1In the new JCIDS process, specification for a new system begins with the identification of the warfighter’s requirement for a new capability. The OV-1 is the depiction of the capabilities that need to be provide and who will provide them.  In most cases, this is from a warfighting perspective, that is, the OV-1 describes the high-level capabilities required by specific units or battlefield roles and any interaction between those capabilities. However, there are other high-level concepts which belong to this scenario and must also be documented as part of the system’s architecture—perhaps as variant or subordinate graphics.  The needed questions, which are properly addressed by (perhaps a layered version of) the OV-1 include:What are the particular capabilities required?Who is the intended user?Will this capability be extensible to other uses?The clear identification of the complete required capability has a major impact on the eventual choice of system temporal and spatial scales, computational methodologies, and data access, storage, and exchange processes.For example, if the desired capability is real-time course of action analysis, translation into a system development might result in the decision to embed an analytic simulation such as the Joint Warfare System (JWARS) into an operational system such as the Global Command and Control System.  JWARS runs at a time ratio of 1000:1 simulated to real time.  This causes a significant restriction on runtime computations such that most, if not all predictive algorithms must be run prior to runtime and be presented a rapid look-up tables.  Consequently, certain numerical predictive or analytic techniques are inappropriate.  This is a critical fact which the end user must understand, as multiple JWARS runs are not needed to develop a probability of occurrence, since such probabilities are already factored into the system as pre-runtime calculations.Specifying the intended user is important to determine what capabilities the developer must provide to the particular user—and what real-time input should be expected to initialize, stimulate, or update the system.  For example, in the Joint Semi-Automated Forces (JSAF) simulation, the original environment was “high noon on a clear day.”  However, users of the mine countermeasures extension to JSAF, the Joint Countermine Operational Simulation (JCOS), wanted forces in training to experience realistic changes in underwater acoustic conditions resulting from weather-related parameters such as temperature and wind.  JSAF had only a rudimentary capability to handle this.  User input was limited.  Consequently, addition of appropriate environmental capability needed to include a method for ensuring that user-specified environmental input was consistent and complete enough to support a “fair fight” across the simulation play space.Extensibility is not as significant as the factors of system purpose and intended user in driving the system context, but it should be considered. Today’s systems are reused or constructed from many legacy components, and used in contexts other than those for which the original simulation was accredited.  If a system is to be iteratively developed, then the composability of the components, including the environmental representation, becomes an important design principle.The care with which a system’s OV-1 and supporting subordinate graphics are developed will greatly affect the development of related architectural products and specification of related system engineering parameters.  Hence, a fully-specified, well-constructed OV-1 is a wise investment on the part of the development team.SYSTEM ENGINEERING:KEY PERFORMANCE PARAMETERSUnder the new DoD Acquisition Process, a system will not progress past initial requirements review (either the current Mission Needs Statement or the future Initial Capabilities Document) until it has been certified as complying with key performance and interoperability parameters.  These parameters, contained in the system’s Net-Ready Key Performance Profile (NR-KPP) and Interoperability Key Performance Profile (I-KPP), provide much of the specific architectural and performance parameters which influence development of the system’s environmental representation.Among those which should be examined are:Net-readiness.  If the system is net-ready, must all data exchanges incorporate XML as a data exchange language?  (XML is but one of many Mark-up languages, and one not overly efficient for large “binary encoded” files, so why are we limiting or unnecessarily focusing the question?)  Quality of service (usage, availability, and response time).  How rapidly must an environmental federate provide a response to a request for information?  How many inquiries can the environmental federate handle at one time without conflict or interference?  Must the environmental federate remain online at all times or only when actively involved in a query or response?Net-centric information assurance defense in depth (access controls, data integrity assurance).  Does the system’s selected information assurance defense affect accessibility to and reliability of potential environmental data sources?Information resource visibility and access:search, subscribe, publish—Must the environmental representation be presented as a federate?  Can the environment be presented as a separate Web service?  How does it search and provide responses to searches for environmental data sources and products?data tailoring—Can the user system tailor environmental input during runtime?  Can the environmental representation be individually tailored and provided to the user (during runtime) within the communications parameters of the system? graceful degradation—How does the environmental representation degrade itself?  How does the user system recognize such degradation?  How are the results of such degradation incorporated into user system results?data staging—Is it necessary to pre-stage environmental information (pre-runtime data distribution)?  Are runtime updates possible?  Realistic?data transformation—At what points in the system (or system of systems) does environmental information undergo any transformation?  Are these transformation points controlled?  After transformation, where are the environmental data sent?Synchronous/asynchronous collaboration.  Does the environmental representation require some forward or backward projection in time or adjustment in parameter value to support appropriate comparisons?  How are these handled in the system? Global Information Grid (GIG) Enterprise Services (ES) infrastructure awareness and management.  Do the environmental representation and its source provide the appropriate metadata for service management and querying?Cross-security domain information exchange.  What are the security requirements for the individual systems?  What is the highest allowable security level of individual databases?  Of the aggregate system data?  What is the security level of the intended operating environment of the system?Additional capabilities, which may or may not be separately evaluated, are:Interoperability—Do data exchanged across system interfaces adhere to system standards for information exchange?Data interoperability—Are environmental data “visible” to system users?  Are all appropriate metadata available to the system registry and network look-up table?Information integrity—Are environmental data exchanged with complete integrity across the network?Transport element status—How are environmental data exchanges affected by changes in the status of network hardware such as routers?Network status—How are environmental data exchanges affected by changes in the status of the network itself?While there are many other important attributes which must be addressed in the two Key Performance Profiles (both the I-KPP and the NR-KPP), those of particular significance to the development of the environmental representation are:Analytical and collaboration services—Does the system support data mining?  Does it perform collaborative planning or use embedded decision aids such as models or simulations (requires additional stimulation and initialization data, along with concurrent use of operational data)?  Does it leverage intelligent agents?Availability/reliability—How critical is the environmental representation information to the system user?  Can the necessary information be handled within the bounds of Survival Information Dissemination (critical information of less than 12 Kb)?Capacity of the network, individual nodes and systems—What bandwidth demands does the environmental representation place on network use?  Can the network handle those demands without undue stress?Cohesiveness—Is the environmental representation handled as an integrated whole or is it scattered across the system?  Are the environmental components not only cohesive (integrated) but coherent (internally consistent)?Connectivity—How does the environmental federate maintain connectivity to the system?  Is this connectivity continuous or on-demand?Correlation—Can the environmental representation identify and eliminate redundant information?  How does it identify and resolve conflicting information?Cross-platform functionality—How independent is the environmental representation of the hardware on which it is hosted?Data distribution—Is there only one identifiable source for each type of environmental information?  How does the system guard against the proliferation of multiple sources of the same environmental data?  If multiple storage locations are needed, how does the system ensure consistency of the environmental representation with the designated single reference source?Data interoperability—Does the system use a common standard for data and data exchange?  If there is not a single logical data mode for the environmental representation, does the system use an environmental data exchange standard such as the Environmental Data Coding Specification to ensure environmental data interoperability?Delivery management—How will the system’s use of the environmental representation and update data be affected by other network delivery priorities, including changes in the quality of service?Directory service—Will the environmental data be identified in the system’s network directory service?  What metadata will be provided and in what language?Dynamic profiling—How flexible is the environmental representation in responding to rapid changes in user publish/subscribe requirements?Filtering of multiple sources—Can the environmental representation filter out extraneous information, particularly that which is not at the appropriate fidelity level identified by the system user?Information description (metadata)—see Directory service.Information flow awareness—Can the environmental representation adjust to changes in user demands for environmental information?  For example, how many requests can be concurrently processed by the environmental federate?  How many calculations are required for each request?  At what point is the capacity of the federate exceeded?  What is the federate’s response when its performance capacity is exceeded?Information integrity—Does the environmental representation maintain the integrity of input information?  How does it verify the integrity of transformed information?  How does it ensure environmental cohesiveness (see also Correlation and Data distribution)?Interface definition—How does the environmental representation interface with other systems or system representations?  (See also Data interoperability.)Interprocess communication—Do system processes involving the environmental representation employ standardized mechanisms and leverage standard process interfaces?  (See also Data interoperability.)Modularity—What impact will system requirements for modularity have on the environmental representation?Neutrality—Are all environmental representation data clearly labeled to avoid misinterpretation or confusion when exchanged within the system?Process availability—How will the provision of the environmental representation be affected by failures in other system run-time processes?Process prioritization—Can requests for environmental services be prioritized by user?  How flexible is this process to short-notice changes?Quality of ServicePrioritization – Can the environment data be transmitted according to user-specified priorities?  How are priority conflicts resolved?Response Time – What are the minimum and maximum required time increments between user query and receipt of environmental data?  Do these increments allow for runtime operation of environmental models or must data be pre-computed?Latency – What is the latency between the time of user data request and the valid time of the environmental data?  What is the latency between the valid time of the environmental data and the receipt of those data by the user?  How is this latency, as a potential error source, handled and controlled?Standards—Does the environmental representation adhere to DoD JTA standards (among which are the “emerging” SEDRIS standards ”)?Standards-based processing—What standards are required by the system for processing the environmental representation and associated data?CREATING THE ENVIRONMENT CONCEPT MODELThe list of system engineering requirements that are extracted from system requirements and grounded in the capabilities to be provided to the warfighter identify those parameters which affect the development of the system’s environmental representation.  Using that list as the statement of system context into which the physical environment representation must fit, we can begin to define clearly the contents of the ECM.ENVIRONMENT CONCEPT MODEL:  INFERRED ENVIRONMENT BASELINEUsing the multi-level system scenario (OV-1) as developed during the initial development step, development efforts focus on validating system capabilities vs. requirements (FEDEP Step 2). Concurrently, the complete and comprehensive set of requirements for the environmental representation is developed. This development is non-trivial, and should involve environmental Subject Matter Experts if possible.Baselined as the “Inferred Environment” in the ECM, this set forms the desired environmental representation as derived from system requirements and the system scenario without respect to any contextual limitations caused by the realities of system engineering.  In general, the only system design parameters incorporated into the Inferred Environment are those identified to this point in the system development (and documented in its conceptual model).  Thus, system purpose and intended user factors influence the choice of spatial and temporal scales and update increments reflected in the Inferred Environment, but network connectivity, available bandwidth, and synchronicity do not.  ENVIRONMENT CONCEPT MODEL:IMPLEMENTED ENVIRONMENT BASELINEAfter the extensive system design work in FEDEP Step 3 is completed and documented in the appropriate architectural products, the development process begins.  It is during this step, Step 4, that the value of the integrated architectural products is most realized.  The list of environmental requirements stated in the Inferred Environment portion of the ECM must now be adjusted to reflect the now-explicit system design capabilities and limitations. As an example, system design parameters significantly contribute to the challenge of developing a representation of enviro-acoustic conditions, particularly in three dimensions. Although environmental scientists desire to “achieve trainer realism by relying on high-fidelity physics-based wave models to perform accurate wave propagation simulations on demand,” the realities of computational demands, including speed and memory requirements, provide immediate constraints on model selection.One issue is the challenge of incorporating beamforming in enviro-acoustic calculations.  The computational cost of multiple calculations, one for each sensor in the array, can be high—so a relevant design question is whether the system accuracy would tolerate the aggregate calculation of a series of sensors as a single beam.  Another issue is that of the type of parameter which must be presented to the operator.  If the calculation is made as part of sensor input (a sensor stimulator), it must be presented in the form in which the sensor collects its data.  This is far more challenging than providing the results of a calculation directly to an operator (a simulator) who merely sees the results rather than manipulates the sensor.Other issues are affected by the establishment of the system’s Key Performance Parameters.  Latency of calculations, particularly as affected by system transmission times, will affect the determination of real-time vs. pre-runtime calculations as well as the temporal and spatial update increment which must be incorporated into those calculations.  System synchronicity will also affect the temporal and spatial update increment.  System available bandwidth and network management will affect the ability to transfer data and may force a change in environmental representation due to network capacity and limitations on the size of transmitted information.These are only some of the many factors which must be reflected as impacts to the Inferred Environment, with traceability to the resulting design decision.  Once all system engineering impacts have been reflected in the ECM, the final specification for the environmental representation is baselined as the “Implemented Environment.”ADJUSTING THEENVIRONMENT CONCEPT MODEL:  INTEGRATION AND TEST RESULTSChanges to the design of the system and its environmental representation are possible as the development moves from Step 4 into the integration and testing which takes place in FEDEP Step 5.  These changes must be reflected in the system documentation, including architectural products, developed earlier.  The changes may have an impact on some of the design parameters of the environmental representation.The changes must be reflected in changes to the baseline Implemented Environment of the Environment Concept Model.  Traceability of these changes may prove challenging, since they are being made to established products and related system design—but such traceability may prove vital in system VV&A, particularly as the accreditation will reflect actual capabilities and limitations of the fielded system, including its environmental representation.  If the FEDEP was followed, the appropriate system documentation developed, and the related environmental representation documentation developed and maintained, the resulting Environment Concept Model will be a complete and accurate description of the system environmental representation.  Furthermore, the resulting environment will be accurate within the scope and context of the system, and will be reasonably easy to verify and validate.CONCLUSIONWhile many developers have perceived the inclusion of an environmental representation in their system as “too hard,” and either avoided the inclusion of the environment in a system development or have handled it separately, this perception is no longer valid.  This series of papers has provided system developers with a complete and detailed methodology for including the development of an environmental representation as an integral part of the FEDEP process.  The paper has demonstrated the value of including the development of the natural environment.  It has provided a detailed methodology for determining the necessary environmental representation and ensuring that it supports meaningful interoperability.  It has completed the conceptual specification for the Environment Concept Model as a tool to assist developers in documenting many of the system engineering parameters and providing needed documentation in support of the system’s VV&A process.  System developers now have an additional set of tools and resources at their disposal to empower them to improve the quality of their systems by incorporating the realism of the natural environment without adding undue complexity or jeopardizing system timelines.  An appropriately-developed and documented Environment Concept Model in the developer’s tool of choice is a key resource which makes this much more achievable.AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIESVIRGINIA T. DOBEY is a former Navy Commander (Special Duty—Oceanography) who has been involved in environmental software development, testing, and implementation since 1975.  Instrumental in initiating the incorporation of environmental data into the Department of Defense data standardization program, she has been involved in U.S. and international data standardization efforts since 1993.  A leader in environmental data standards efforts for both operational and M&S users, she is an expert on environmental data quality and VV&A.  A member of the DMSO Environmental Representation Technology Area team since 1998, Ms. Dobey holds a Master of Science in Meteorology and Oceanography degree from the Naval Postgraduate School.PAUL G. FOLEY is an Information Systems Engineer with Quantum Research International, and is currently the DMSO Environmental Representation Technology Area lead.  A retired Army Corps of Engineers Officer, he has over 30 years' experience in Army topographic and digital geospatial system operations.  He holds advanced degrees in Photogrammetry from Purdue University and R&D Systems Management from the University of Southern California.  He is a graduate of the Army War College.    While this paper uses the FEDERATION development process as its baseline, the information contained herein is also applicable to individual simulations, systems within simulations, and objects within systems.  Rather than confuse the reader, "system" will be generically used to describe {federations, stand-alone simulations, systems, and objects}, "component" will describe {stand-alone simulations, systems, and objects}—and particular words will be used when specificity is required. Dobey, V. T., “Representing the Natural Environment:  An Integrated Development Process,” Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization, 03S-SIW-083, April 2003 (concurrently published by the Society for Computer Simulation). Dobey, V.T., “System Environmental Representation:  Building for Success from the Very Beginning,” Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation, and Education Conference 2003 (paper 1378), December 2003. Dobey, V.T. and R.O. Lewis, Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) Process Overlay for the FEDEP, 03S-SIW-085, April, 2003SEE ALSO:  Dobey, V.T., 03S-SIW-083, op.cit. Dobey, V.T., IITSEC 2003 paper 1378, op.cit. Birkel, P.A., SNE Conceptual Reference Model, 98F-SIW-018, September, 1998. Chadbourne, C. and D. Clark, Insuring Consistent Synthetic Environmental Representation across an Engineering Federation—A First User Case, 98F-SIW-097, September, 1998SEE ALSO: Chadbourne, C. and D. Clark, Building, Using, Sharing, and Reusing Environment Concept Models, 99F-SIW-093, September, 1999SEE ALSO:  Clark, D.L., R. Howard, C. Chadbourne, C. Root, and R. Esslinger, Consistency as a First Step in Moving Toward a Common Synthetic Natural Environment Standard, I/ITSEC 1999 paper 99-IITSEC-MS018, December, 1999SEE ALSO:  Clark, D.L., S.K. Numrich, R.J. Howard, and G. Purser, Meaningful Interoperability and the Synthetic Natural Environment, 01E-SIW-080, April, 2001SEE ALSO:  Numrich, S.K., V. Dobey, C. Chadbourne, and D. Clark, Environment Concept Model:  A Step Toward Validation, Simulation Industry Association of Australia, SIMTECT paper 039, April 2000  Numrich, Dobey, Chadbourne & Clark, SIMTECT 2000 paper 039, op.cit. ibid. DoD Architecture Framework in three volumes, published in 2003 CJCS Instruction 3170.01C, Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System dtd 24 Jun 2003 Key resources in addressing this challenge are the Modeling and Simulation Executive Agents for the natural environment.  See Dobey, V.T., Foundations for Verification and Validation of the Environmental Representation in a Simulation, as published in the DoD VV&A Recommended Practices Guide, Build 2.5 (available at:   HYPERLINK "https://www.vva.dmso.mil" https://www.vva.dmso.mil) DoD Directive 5000.1, The Defense Acquisition System dtd 12 May 2003SEE ALSO:  DoD I 5000.2, Operation of the Defense Acquisition System dtd 12 May 2003SEE ALSO:  CJCS Instruction 3170.01C, Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System dtd 24 Jun 2003SEE ALSO;  DoD Directive 4630.5, Interoperability and Supportability of Information Technology (IT) and National Security Systems (NSS)SEE ALSO:  DoD Instruction 4630.8, Procedures for Interoperability and Supportability of Information Technology (IT) and National Security Systems (NSS)SEE ALSO:  CJCS Instruction 6212.01C, Interoperability and Supportability of Information Technology and National Security Systems (IT and NSS) Parameters cited in Capability Development Document (CDD) for Net-Centric Enterprise Services (NCES) [for the Global Information Grid], Draft Version 0.7.12 dtd 19 Sep 03 (DoD Joint Requirements Oversight Council)  Artifacts from the GIG Capstone Requirements Document (CRD) which are brought forward into the Initial Capabilities Document (ICD) for the Global Information Grid Enterprise Services (GIG ES) dtd 9 Sep 03 (Defense Information Systems Agency)  Attributes brought forward from the GIG CRD, ibid.   ISO 18025, available at  HYPERLINK "http://www.sedris.org" www.sedris.org   ISO 18023  SEDRIS Transmittal Format, ISO 18025, Environmental Data Coding Specification, and ISO 18026, Spatial Reference Model, are “emerging”  core standards for Geospatial Data Interchange, cited in the DoD Joint Technical Architecture v5.0 dated 4 Apr 03.   The questions found in Dobey, IITSEC 2003 paper 1378 and Dobey, Foundations for Verification and Validation of the Environmental Representation in a Simulation (DoD VV&A RPG build 2.5) are valuable tools in this development. Modeling and Simulation Executive Agents (MSEAs) for the Natural Environment are a key resource.  For the Air and Space Natural Environment:  HYPERLINK mailto:BenWebb@afccc.af.mil http://msea.afccc.af.mil/.Ocean,  HYPERLINK "https://quickplace.hq.navy.mil/msea-ocean" \t "_blank" https://quickplace.hq.navy.mil/msea-oceanTerrain, http://www.tmpo.nima.mil Howard, R.J., T. Foreman and D. Clark, Architectural and Design Considerations in Propagation Model Selection and Design, 00S-SIW-054, April 2000.PAGE  1 EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3.  Three Perspectives of the DoD Architecture Framework EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 4.  Short Descriptions of Each DoDAF View