HLA Evolved PDGChairRoy ScrudderVice ChairRandy SaundersSecretaryKatherine L. MorseObjectives for this Workshop:Kickoff update of IEEE 1516 specificationsReview Product NominationReview SISO procedures (BPDP) and IEEE Balloting ProceduresElect officers (see above)Appoint DG editors (1516 – Lightner, 1516.1 – Little, 1516.2 – Lutz) and identify DG members (see chair’s briefing posted to PDG reflector)Review and approve proposed scheduleComments and Recommendations:The PDG would like to have US and international (non-US) co-Vice Chairs.  The BPDP doesn’t address this circumstance.  The TAD needs to get approval for this from the SAC, and begin a discussion of a potential modification of the BPDPThe PDG would like to have SAC confirm that PDGs have the latitude to change voting rules on a per meeting basis. Typically, the first motion is that all present can vote (where the BPDP calls for SISO membership and reflector membership). Can the SISO membership be waived during the meeting?  This is especially an issue for joint SISO/SCS meetings, where SCS members are not granted SISO membership.The BPDP doesn’t address classification of comments, e.g. editorial vs. content.  The TAD will raise this issue with the SAC in addition to determining the drafting groups latitude for reclassifying comments.If the IST comment tracking system does not allow the attachment of a document as part of a comment (e.g., a PDF file with a lengthy suggested comment resolution), then this capability needs to be added.Because the documents under revision are IEEE copyrighted material that normally require remuneration, the PDG needs to have the comment tracking system protected to prevent non-PDG members from using the comment tracking system as a loophole for acquiring a free copy of the documents. Additionally, if the documents are to be posted to the SISO document library, they need to be protected such that only PDG members may access them.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)37Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)37Peak attendance (including joint sessions)N/ATotal papers presentedN/A“No-show” presentationsN/AOther presentations and panel discussionsN/ARecommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):  N/A