Product Nomination TitleIEEE 1278.1 DIS UpdateProponent Name(s) and Contact Information	Lead	Frank Hill 	fhill@sdslink.comOthers	Ralph Weber	rweber@csc.com	Graham Shanks	graham.shanks@amsjv.com		See Item# 9 for list of volunteersType of ProductThe outcome of the PDG effort is expected to be a Standards Product. Product DescriptionThis group will develop a balloted update to the IEEE DIS standard 1278.1a. The three basic choices are (1)  a 1278.1b update (2) a new 1278.1-200x standard that merges 1278.1-1995 and 1278.1a-1998 with new material or (3) a SISO balloted standard (SISO-STD-xxxx)  that is the equivalent of an IEEE 1278.1b edition in format and content.  The decision as to the appropriate approach will depend on SISO and community feedback.  An incremental approach as described in paragraph 8 is preferred in order to expedite publication of the first few revisions as there are important changes that need to be made, and balloted on, in the very near term, such as the recommended entity handover changes from the SISO Transfer Control Study Group. Identification of The Community To Which Product AppliesThe new documents are intended for the advanced distributed simulation community including but not limited to those that use DIS and protocols that interface to DIS through gateways or translators.Problem(s) And/Or Issue(s) That The Proposed Product Addresses	Provide details on the specific need or requirement for this product in the community.SISO’s interest is to encourage standardization between simulations.  Since it is now clear that both the DIS and HLA protocols are both going to be used for the foreseeable future, the standard needs to be updated to correct known errors, provide much needed clarifications, incorporate new PDUs that are in use by implementing agencies and to reflect actual DIS usage.  It has been six years since the standard was last updated.  Significant developments have occurred in the simulation community during this time and DIS users have developed ad hoc changes to the rules.  The DIS standards were reaffirmed in 2002 and it was anticipated that the standard would not need to be further updated due to the DoD directive concerning adoption of HLA which was to replace DIS.  That directive has since been modified to allow continued use of DIS and HLA by DoD agencies for the foreseeable future.Many U.S. DoD agencies have determined that, with the advent of the DIS/HLA Gateway and training needs that can continue to be met in a cost-effective manner using DIS, in the near term, HLA is unlikely to achieve 100% replacement of DIS for all simulations. In addition, other nations such as Australia will be using DIS as their standard distributed simulation methodology along side of HLA for the next 10 years.  The U.S., Australia, United Kingdom, Canada, Germany, Sweden and other NATO countries will continue to conduct joint distributed training exercises using DIS and HLA, as well as other protocols, for the foreseeable future.  Many countries have a large investment in DIS.  Since the DIS protocol is actively being used worldwide, the standard must be kept current with simulation developments and an active DIS community must exist to support DIS software development and use.Provide details on the discussion of the need for this product in the community.Since the IEEE standard was last updated in 1998, users of DIS and the RPR FOM have seen the need for changes and additions to the standard.Changes to the standard can be categorized as:Editorial corrections.Clarifications to the standardUpdates to reflect current DIS usage, such as the use of multiple heartbeat and timeouts.Integrity changes.Moving material from the Enumerations Document back into the standard where it properly belongs.  This includes the IFF PDU rules and record formats. (Since 1278.1 was no longer getting updated, the community had to resort to using the Enumeration document instead.)Changes to Existing PDUs to support the current simulation environment and to improve interpretability with HLA.  New PDUs to include those that are already in use and proposed new ones that would make DIS more compatible with HLA.  Address issues with the rapidly changing Advanced Distributed Simulation environment.Have you investigated similar products in the community to ensure that no overlap exists?Absolutely.  The DIS SG has made a concerted effort to investigate current standards.  These include USAF Combat Air Force (CAF) DMO standards and U.S. Navy BFTT standards.  None of them replace the IEEE 1278.1 standard.Maturity of the Proposed Product Detailed Description On How The Problem/Issue Will Be Solved (Approach)The first step is to define shortcomings in the existing standard.  This work has been completed by the DIS Study Group.  Approximately 100 Problem/Change Requests (PCRs) have been identified.  Many have already had a preliminary analysis performed for them including, in some cases, recommended specific wording changes to the IEEE 1278.1 standard.A configuration management system has been established that can be easily transitioned to the PDG to track changes.  This CM system includes a Document Library and Reflector and weekly or biweekly telecons as needed to review and discuss PCRs.A key decision will be the form the updated DIS standard will take and what changes will be included in a new DIS version document.  Backward compatibility is a key issue. It may be that several DIS versions will be proposed - one with changes that do not entail changes to existing DIS applications or entail what is agreed-to as only minor changes.  New PDU’s may be included if they do not replace existing PDUs.  Another version may include changes that would have significant impact.  It may be that a “capability level” concept will be needed to allow DIS applications to be compliant with certain changes to the rules or to new rules or just remain compatible with existing rules.Brief Discussion On The Maturity Of The Proposed ProductDIS is a mature simulation technology, and well-defined standards for its use already exist.  Updates to the standard will be based on a large base of users with deep expertise and experience in the technology and the interoperability issues involved in its use.  Over 100 Problem/Change Requests have been identified that cover clarification requests and changes that have been made to DIS over the last six years by organizations and companies that are using the DIS Protocol.  A key goal is to enhance DIS to improve interoperability with HLA federates through use of DIS/HLA gateways.Brief Discussion On Alternative Approaches To The Proposed ProductAlternative 1:  Prepare Only a Draft IEEE 1278.1b DocumentGeneral Discussion:  Prepare a Revision b to the existing IEEE 1278.1a standard.  Since it would be limited to changed material only, users will have to have both the IEEE 1278.1-1995 and 1278.1a-1998 editions in hand as well. Advantages: 	Ease of implementation versus a complete new 1278.1-200x version of the standard.Ease of balloting compared to a complete new version.Less costly than a complete new version.Faster process as only changed material is being prepared and balloted.Users would be aware of the new version even if they are not SISO members as it shows up in IEEE Catalog as latest version.Disadvantage:	Increases the already difficult task of finding answers in three separate documentsAlternative 2:  Prepare a Draft IEEE 1278.1-200X Document  General Discussion:  This would replace IEEE 1278.1 and 1278.1a with a new 1278.1-200x version.  This would offer the most comprehensive version with the most widespread authoritative appeal to the international community.	Advantages:	Single source document for DISUsers would be aware of the new version even if they are not SISO members as it shows up in IEEE Catalog as latest version.Disadvantages:	More difficult for the PDG to produce.Longer development and ballot cycle.More costly that the other options.	Alternative 3:  Prepare a SISO Standards Document- DIS Protocol Version 7General Discussion:  The SISO Standards document would be a balloted document that would be the equivalent of a Revision b to the IEEE 1278.1 Standard.  It would be written in the format of the IEEE 1278.1a document.  Protocol version 6 was 1278.1a.  It could be cited as a standard to be used in conjunction with 1278.1.Advantages:		Much easier and less time needed to produce and ballot.Provides a standard that can be referenced and cited now for contracts where DIS development is being performed	.  Disadvantages:	Not as widely recognized a standard as the IEEE Standard.Reference and availability of the IEEE 1278.1 and 1278.1a documents will be required.  Everyone will have to read three documents.	Will not benefit the international community as much as an IEEE standard.Provide Examples Of Prototypes Of The Proposed Product Or Reasons Why This Product Will Not Be PrototypedThe update to the DIS Standard would only involve prototyping to the extent that a proposed change had already been implemented and used by an organization in which case their experience would be used to assess the viability of the change.Some of the issues identified by the DIS Study Group have already been prototyped, or implemented, by one or more organizations.  Implementation of all proposed modifications to the standard will ordinarily be impossible because most users do not implement all PDUs.  Most use the ones that they need to accomplish their purposes.  	Any proposed change will undergo wide simulation community review and analysis as has been done in the past during standard development.   What Impact Will The Proposed Product Have On The M&S Community?Regardless of the alternative chosen, products developed by the DIS PDG will have a positive impact on the modeling and simulation community.  Positive impacts will include:It will reduce the continuing interoperability issues between DIS simulations and between DIS and HLA by providing a formal change process.   It will allow DIS to be more compatible with HLA and other standards.It will reduce the cost of modifying DIS software or implementing new features.	Potential negative impacts may include:Cost to produce the updated standard.Costs to simulator users who have implemented non-standard changes.Some changes may impact DIS/HLA Gateways and FOMs.What Impact Will This Proposed Product Have On The SISO Community?Improvements to the DIS standardization will serve to address the operational and technical needs of the SISO community.  Furthermore, improved standardization provides an opportunity for SISO to show its fairness and commitment to those in who are using DIS to support the warfighter throughout the world, expand its area of interest and influence within the simulation community.  Completion of this project will demonstrate the commitment of the SISO community to develop real solutions to pervasive interoperability problems.  Depending on the alternative chosen, SISO will also demonstrate a continued commitment to DIS-HLA interoperability that recognizes the reality represented by continued worldwide support of DIS.What Is The Impact To The Community If This Proposed Product Is Not Developed?Without an updated DIS standard, the simulation interoperability community will continue to experience some significant problems with both DIS to DIS and DIS to HLA simulation interoperability.  Some of the important advantages of HLA will not be able to be realized by DIS applications where it is not cost-effective to convert to native HLA and a DIS/HLA Gateway is being used instead.  What Are The Domain Implications For This Proposed Product?Products developed by this group are applicable to all simulation domains including DIS and those that use a DIS/HLA Gateway.  They provide potentially significant cost savings for all users of the DIS protocol.State Which Existing SIW Conference Forum(s) Take An Active Interest In The Development Of This Proposed Product?Almost all the existing forums will be taking an active interest in the PDG as evidenced by the present DIS Study Group subscribers who are also active supporters of many of the forums.  The RDE forum has endorsed this effort.Planned Compliance Testing Of The Proposed Product	This PDG will provide briefings to industry and government on the changes that will necessitate changes to DIS compliance software applications.  Schedule Of Product Development Milestones Including Reviews And ReportsThe intent is to have a 6-month cycle such that at each SIW there is the release of a new version of the standard that has been balloted and approved.  These small incremental releases will serve the DIS community much better than one major revision that takes a year or more to be balloted and approved. This is made possible by categorizing and assigning specific changes to specific versions and ensuring that no version is overloaded with too many changes, much like software problems are assigned to be fixed in different versions that are produced at regular intervals based on user needs and available resources. Candidate Volunteers for the Product Development EffortThe following individuals have already expressed interest in supporting the PDG.NameOrganizationEmailFrank HillSDS Internationalfrank.hill@forscom.army.milAlan BerryUSAF DMOC, SRCalan.berry@kirtland.af.milDwight DragerUSAF DMOC, SRCdwight.drager@kirtland.af.milRalph WeberCSC, MSCoErweber@csc.comPeter RyanDSTO, Australiapeter.ryan@dsto.defence.gov.auLucien ZalcmanDSTO, Australialucien.zalcman@dsto.defence.gov.auPeter ClarkDSTO, Australiapeter.clark@dsto.defence.gov.auGrayden FigartGrayhawk Systemsfigart.grayden@grayhawksystems.comPeter RossDSTO, Australiapeter.ross@dsto.defence.gov.auSuggested Product Periodic Review Cycle (Timeline)It is proposed that a yearly periodic review be conducted for the standard instead of the minimum five year review cycle contained in Section 4.6 of the SISO Balloted Products Development Cycle.  In addition, it is proposed that the SISO Balloted Products Development Cycle be changed to require that an ongoing configuration management system be in place to process problem and change requests from the user community for the standard and to serve as an on-going forum to assist users.  There must be a process whereby two community requirements are met by a PDG: (1) the timely availability of help and advice for using a product and (2) a clarification and change process whereby users of a product can submit problems and changes at any time.  The PDG level of activity will vary depending on the phase of the product cycle.  It is expected that after the first two or three incremental changes using the six-month cycle to provide much needed clarification and address high priority DIS issues from the community, that there will be a need to come out with a complete revision of IEEE 1278.1.  Perhaps, the DIS Update PDG can establish two Drafting groups, one to work on the incremental changes and one to work on preparing a complete revision.DIS 1278.1 Update	8 April 2004PAGE  PAGE  6