Capabilities-Based Development of Future C4ISR SystemsLTC Ronald B. SprinkleHeadquarters DA, G-3Battle Command Division400 Army PentagonWashington, DC 20310-0400ron.sprinkle@us.army.milRichard F. BrownTPIO Battle Command415 Sherman AveFt. Leavenworth, KS 66027dick.brown@us.army.milABSTRACT: The Chief of Staff of the Army (CSA) directed that Version 6.4 be the final version of the Army Battle Command Systems (ABCS).  He also directed the fielding of ABCS Version 6.4 to all Active and Reserve components of the Army. In a single decision, the Army moves to eliminate the inequality of the digital unit “haves” and “have nots” and baselines the Army at the maximum capability of the ABCS lineage.  This has been titled the “Good Enough” decision.  In part, the Good Enough decision resulted from the frustrated attempts to use ABCS as a system–of-systems.  The individual Command, Control, Computers, Communications, Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) systems comprising the ABCS suite suffered seriously from underlying architectural, data and standards differences.  These differences limited the ultimate potential of ABCS to satisfy commander’s needs.While the Army solidifies its current digital capability, attention for future C4ISR systems may now shift to Future Combat Systems (FCS) and Joint Command and Control (JC2). Common architectures, standards and data models must be developed and enforced to enable System-of-Systems (SoS) interoperability and capability.  Leveraging common architectures, standards and data models, recent research and development concepts and software can be incorporated into future C4ISR systems to achieve the promise of digital systems to increase commander’s speed and certainty of decision and actions.  Coordinated through its new Battle Command Division, the Army is aligned with the JC2 Functional Concept.  The JC2  Functional Concept is crystallizing the communities of interest (COI) and can be used to shape the Army Battlefield Automated Systems (BAS) in a single, unified and Joint direction.  To assist in aligning the COIs, this paper proposes a set of common sense capabilities for warfighting staff and suggests significant roles for simulation infrastructure and the simulation community.IntroductionImagine a commander and his staff watching their next mission as it is transmitted.  The commander expresses his vision and intent as the Operations Order (OPORD) is replayed a second time.  His subordinate commanders watch and receive a live WARNORD during the replay.  The staff develops possible Courses of Action (COA) and pits them against an enemy-like, computer generated force while measuring the “goodness” of the desired outcomes.  Meanwhile, the subordinate units have begun preparing for possible missions and leaders have been conducting virtual reconnaissance of the terrain and road systems.  The commander and his subordinate commanders select a COA based on their collaborative perception of inputs, computer generated outputs, and potential for unexpected outcomes.  The staff begins to graphically develop the selected COA detail while subordinate commanders convey their intent to their staffs.  Mission detail complete, the staff transmits the complete visual OPORD to subordinate and supporting units.  Transition of the OPORD from 2 to 3 dimensional map display motion is completed on demand at any workstation and is used to explore further detail for likely subordinate COAs.Is this far fetched?  Hardly.  Pieces of this digital “future” are being deployed by the 1ST US Cavalry Division and are destined for Rotation 2 of Operation Iraqi Freedom.OpportunityOpportunity arises from the decision to halt further development of ABCS.  There will be a future BC System.  Its baseline capability will be greater than ABCS Version 6.4 with inherent interoperability through unified architectures, common software and data models.  Without sufficient capability descriptions, future architectures will lack enabling components for future C4ISR SoS capabilities.  The Army must take the opportunity now to describe the future Joint C4ISR SoS capabilities.  How do we approach this opportunity?ThesisWe propose that the answer to this question lies in increasing the effectiveness of the Military Decision Making Process (MDMP).  Speed and agility are the two most critical attributes in an effective military decision making cycle.  Increase speed and the commander can decide and act faster than the enemy.  Increase agility and the commander can react to changes faster than the enemy.We measure the success of future Battle Command systems in their ability to improve commanders' speed and agility in decision-making.  To achieve this improvement, major changes in how information systems are developed are required.  With these thoughts, this paper contains discussions on not only future C4ISR system's capabilities, but also on key issues and considerations for their development.ScopeThe scope of this paper includes digital capabilities forecasted through the year 2015 and placed into the hands of the future Land Component Joint Warfighter through the Joint Command & Control (JC2) Capabilities Description Document.  Figure 1.3-1 shows the Army’s BC in context with Joint Battle Management Command & Control (JBMC2) and the Global Information Grid (GIG).  As can be seen in Figure 1.3-1, the Army operates within the Joint Arena and, as implied by the purple color within the Battle Command Arch box, is increasingly Joint at lower and lower echelons.  This “Jointness” is not just context within which the Army operates, but is an integral part of the scope of Battle Command capabilities.Paper OrganizationGiven the thesis, we cover future BC capabilities in the following way.  In the next section we establish the context for developing future capabilities.  In Section 3 we enumerate BC capabilities which bring power to the warfighting commanders and staffs.  Finally, we draw conclusions about where the Army must now apply itself to support the development of future BC capabilities.The Context of C4ISR The Army’s BC does not exist in a vacuum.  This section contains some of the context for developing land component future BC capabilities.  As we go forward with the opportunity to get BC right, the Army risks failure by ignoring the important issues discussed in these subtopics.The Need for C4ISR ImprovementCurrent Army C4ISR systems fail to support commanders and staffs in some basic ways.  As software systems, C4ISR systems must support the user in two essential categories.  First, they must do something useful for the user. Second, they must function intuitively at a level that the target user audience, the warfighting commanders and staff, can both assimilate (learn) and retain.The following list, termed the Commander’s 7+1 needs, was surfaced by the OIF commanders to the Chief of Staff of the Army (CSA) as the top needs for the Army’s BC systems.  Know Friendly LocationsKnow Current Enemy SituationConduct Running EstimateManipulate Graphic Control MeasuresIssue Fragmentary Orders (FRAGOs)Support Commander’s Situation Report (SITREP)Issue Fire Support Coordination Measures/Capabilities Overlay+1 	Joint and Coalition InteroperabilityThis list names a basic set of C2 functions absolutely essential (something useful) to perform the MDMP.  Without these capabilities, commanders are forced to find workaround processes.  Digitally performing these functions are the focus of ABCS version 6.4 to be delivered in April 2004 to the Central Technical Support Facility (CTSF) and destined to support OIF Rotation 3 (OIF3) commanders.  Clearly, the existence of the Commander’s 7+1 needs list and the focus to insert these functions in a future ABCS version, indicate that there is much to do before BC systems achieve their potential in fully supporting the users needs.In general, current systems are too complex to operate and present difficult to use interfaces for their audience.  Simple functions require the users to understand and operate complex architectures of software and communications systems.  The V Corps AAR paper said: “the intelligence systems themselves have great difficulty sharing information across the joint community. The Common Operational Picture (COP) development process was paralleled by an equally complex intelligence information sharing effort among V Corps, IMEF (1st Marine Expeditionary Force) and the CFLCC (Coalition Forces Land Component Command).” and “It is nearly impossible to develop and maintain a (ABCS) master unit database in a dynamic environment of changing forces and BFT (Blue Force Tracker)” [1].  It is not an overstatement to say that intelligence sharing and task (re)organization are two functions critical to Command & Control.  Their absence, when not an integral part of the digital MDMP, represents a significant cost of manpower and a corresponding degradation in the execution speed of the Observe, Orient, Decide and Act (OODA) loop depicted in Figure 2.1-1.These cursory observations indicate that current C4ISR systems have fallen short in delivering capabilities to do something useful and to function intuitively for the warfighting commander & staff.  We turn now to subjects that address aspects of these shortfalls.Recent advances in C4ISR capabilitiesThe U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) has been hard at work developing new C4ISR capabilities.  Many systems are significantly different in their function and their development needs.  Several efforts have directly addressed the heart of BC functions in daring and new ways.  While the following list is not comprehensive, it does represent ideas that have found their way out of the laboratory and into the hands of the warfighter.  Command Post of the Future (CPoF).  This Defense Advanced Projects Agency (DARPA) program has focused on providing a 2D/3D collaborative planning capability to its users.  CPoF enables geographically dispersed staff and commanders to independently, simultaneously and graphically develop plans which can be viewed by any/all participants and subsequently layered on 2D and/or 3D terrain representation.  1st Cavalry Division will take CPoF to OIF2.Mission Planning and Rehearsal System (MPARS).  MPARS is a combination of a scenario generation capability based on the MDMP and One Semi-Automated Forces (OneSAF) Test Bed simulation.  MPARS provides Course of Action (COA) development, analysis through simulation and 3D terrain visualization.  MPARS went with the 101st Airborne Division to OIF1. [2]Combined Arms Planning and Execution-monitoring System (CAPES).  CAPES was developed from a software toolkit originating from the Agile Commander Advanced Concept Technology Demonstrator (ACTD).  CAPES automates some of the current MDMP in a collaborative environment and outputs a 5 paragraph order and some annexes.  Integration with ABCS systems is intended to enable an execution monitoring capability.  CAPES, integrated with MPARS, went with the 101st Airborne Division to OIF1. [2]The challenge is to recognize the direction which these capabilities lead, compliment and adapt their function(s) to provide a comprehensive set of capabilities which significantly enhances the warfighters ability to decide and act.Interoperable Army SoSThe DoD’s Levels of Information Systems Interoperability (LISI) [3] Model, shown in Figure 2.3-1, forms a basis to assess and improve information systems interoperability.  It can be used to highlight the challenges that distinct systems must overcome to achieve meaningful automated data exchange.  BC systems face these challenges today.  Many issues identified in the LISI Model must be solved for future BC systems to function within the Army and Joint Communities.  The LISI report by the C4ISR Architecture Working Group identified different standardization initiatives, such as the Joint Technical Architecture (JTA), the Defense Information Infrastructure (DII) Common Operating Environment (COE) and the Shared Data Environment (SHADE), which can be used to attack interoperability issues and stated “whether taken individually or collectively, these initiatives are not sufficient.”In Figure 2.3-1, the LISI Reference Model identifies 5 levels of interoperability (0-4).  It is easy to see that the Army, alone and in Joint context, currently enjoys the benefits of connection-based interoperability in Levels 1, 2 and 3, but lags far behind in capitalizing on the SoS synergy enabled by data interoperability.  Level 1 data interoperability is described as “allow(s) decision-makers to exchange one-dimensional information but have little capability to fuse information together to support decision-making.”  We have not yet reached, in any density, the status of Level 2 described as: “Formal data models (logical and physical) are present.  Generally, however, only the logical data model is accepted across programs and each program defines its own physical data model.”  Studies, such as done in [4] by the Institute for Defense Analyses (IDA) show in great detail that the Army and DoD must adopt authoritative logical and physical data models to achieve the synergy required today and by future BC systems to achieve significant OODA loop time reduction.  The IDA report focused on a readily available and NATO accepted data model called the Command and Control Information Exchange Data Model (C2IEDM).Relevance of ArchitecturesIn the best of all worlds, a C4ISR SoS would consist of highly organized and integrated architectures, concepts, assumptions of practice, standards, relationships, mission threads, community views, etc.  Even in the best of worlds, a C4ISR SoS is internally interdependent with one decision affecting many elements and relationships.  With an imperfect solution (reality), many elements exist in conflict or are simply redundant.  Attempts to make sense of such a collage of elements by taking a sum of the parts can fail miserably.The Assistant Secretary of Defense (ASD) Networks & Information Integration (NII) Chief Information Officer (CIO) sponsored C4ISR Integration Task Force defines architecture as “the structure of components, their relationships and the principles and guidelines governing their design and evolution…”[5].  If the DoD expects the C4ISR SoS to be synergistic, non-duplicative and just plain effective, C4ISR architecture components and their relationships must be defined.  Only then can we focus effectively on developing C4ISR SoS components and their relationships to their potential.  To date, the C4ISR architecture components and their relationships have not been defined.The authors note that no one ever killed the enemy with architecture.  Architectures don’t do anything directly.  Effective architectures enable systems and SoS capabilities.  Ineffective or ad-hoc architectures inhibit horizontal integration, a key enabler of SoS capabilities.It may seem obvious, but to build an effective architecture, it is critical to plan for the capabilities that the architecture will enable.  Architecture documents specify where those capabilities exist within the components of the architecture.  If the architecture documents existing components, the architecture may be used to focus resources and reduce redundancy.  If an architecture documents intended future components and relationships, it can be used to focus resources efficiently and to enable multiple systems collaboration in the execution of a SoS capability.  Simulation InfrastructureHieb and Sprinkle in [6] describe how simulation infrastructure must be incorporated with the C4ISR infrastructure.  This assumes an underlying software layered architecture, such as the DISA COE.  The point of the paper is that there is much to be gained within operational C4ISR systems from work completed within the simulation community.  The combined community products, properly fused together, enable capabilities that are highly desirable to decrease uncertainty and increase speed of decisions within the MDMP.  Examples of simulation-enabled C2 planning software, such as CPoF and MPARS, are being prototyped and tested today.  Lack of considerations, such as those noted in Section  REF _Ref67648942 \n \h 2.4, will ensure that stovepipe developments will arise between the simulation infrastructure elements and C4ISR infrastructure elements.  Consider the example of playing a graphical plan in real time on the COP simultaneously with Situational Awareness (SA) data as both are overlaid on the same map graphics.  To do this requires multiple, independent time clocks.  As discussed in [7] it also requires a data initialization sequence for planning versus actual data.  Left to its own, the C4ISR infrastructure has not, and will not likely contain multiple independent time clocks or data initialization mechanisms.  The simulation community has accounted for the need to create and apply multiple independent time lines in collections of simulations working together within the High Level Architecture (HLA).  In addition, only the most rudimentary simulations exist without initialization routines.The incorporation of such simulation infrastructure elements into the C4ISR infrastructure enabling common software components and basic future BC capabilities are essential to squeezing the automated OODA loop tighter to maintain decision superiority over future adversaries.Joint Command & Control (JC2)Increasingly, Joint Operations are executed at echelons lower than ever before.  Joint Operations require more than joining the seams among Uniformed Services.  They require a true integration of how the services do business.As a “top-down” driven document, the JC2 concept lays the foundation for a system that support the commander and the decision making process.  It emphasizes collaboration and speed in uncertain environments enhanced through the use of automation. The Joint Command & Control Operational Concept offers the following concept statement:“In 2015, Joint C2 will be agile across the range of military operations. Joint forces, interagency, multinational partners, and non-governmental organizations will be able to rapidly respond and decisively execute Commander’s Intent in a complex, uncertain and dynamic operating environment. C2 processes will be performed collaboratively to improve the speed and quality of the individual decisions and allow for the rapid and continuous synchronization of multiple decisions to achieve unity of effort. Commanders will rapidly tailor their C2 capabilities to any situation and will be able to exploit the benefits of decentralization – initiative, adaptability and tempo – without sacrificing unity of command. This will be achieved through a collaborative information environment that enables cohesive teams, regardless of location, to develop a shared understanding of Commander’s Intent, and of the battlespace, enabling flexible synchronization and superior decision making.”The authors believe that “shared understanding”, “flexible synchronization” and “superior decision-making” are critical for BC future capabilities. It is important to note that the Army is synchronized with the Joint community when focusing on these aspects of future BC capabilities. In the next section we will look at capabilities that increase certainty, increase speed and increase agility within the OODA loop.  All of these capabilities address “shared understanding”, “flexible synchronization” and “superior decision-making”.Technology or Doctrine Drives ChangeJoint Publication 0-2, Unified Action defines “doctrine” as the …”Fundamental principles by which the military forces or elements thereof guide their actions in support of national objectives….”.  Concisely, doctrine is the basis for the way we prosecute war.  Codified in “how to fight” manuals, doctrine establishes a framework for the way we fight.  Doctrine is derived from the tactics, techniques and procedures that have been successfully used in the field.  Doctrine remains as a stable set of guiding principles until change is needed or is forced.  Technology is a doctrine change driver.  Historical examples include horse-mounted soldiers in 1066 caused by the introduction of saddles with stirrups, early 15th Century firearms, and 20th Century aviation.Technology drives changes in doctrine, but in the current digital age, the Army and the Joint Force must learn how best to harness technology.   Too often in the past, we have tried to build software applications that autonomously automate the MDMP.  Without a human in the loop, i.e. the commander and staff, autonomous computer applications have failed miserably. The decision making process used by maneuver commanders has been derived from millennia of experience.  In the 1980’s, we began looking at Operational Architectures.  The thought process was to overlay automation over the operational structure.  The underlying doctrine remained in place.  This was asking to replace a pencil with a typewriter.  The process did not recognize the capabilities of databases and processing power.As we progress into the 21st Century, recent experiences in using technology must drive changes in doctrine.  The MDMP should be taught in Service schools in its analog form so that staff officers can understand the decision making process, but its practical application demands that we employ technology.  This gives us the upper hand in the speed of decision making.Building C4ISR SOs CAPABILTIESThis section describes what the authors have found is almost a unique written perspective on C4ISR SoS capabilities.  As discussed in previous sections, large pieces of the interdependent C4ISR SoS are being described and designed at the Joint and DoD levels as in [8].  However, we have noted little focus on SoS capabilities that directly influence the melding of automated systems and process in the MDMP.  It is the authors’ belief that these decision process capabilities not only show the greatest potential for automated systems impact, but in fact are the crystallizing elements which focus the support of all of the Army on the warfighting commander and his staff for operations planning and execution.A New MDMP?“The natural tendency would be to separate the technical and operational aspects of executing information management because, generally speaking, the operational community has difficulty articulating operational requirements in technical terms and the technical community has difficulty predicting and meeting operational requirements with technical solutions.” [1]The preceding quote from the V Corps AAR, underscores an issue that has limited the operational community’s ability to influence the intersection of the support provided by information systems and the method used by commanders and staffs to execute BC.  In Section  REF _Ref61429858 \w \h  \* MERGEFORMAT 2.1  REF _Ref61429858 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Technology or Doctrine Drives Change? we discussed the tension that exists between leading technologies and doctrine.  The DoD is at a tensile point between improving technologies and the possible capabilities feasibly provided to the operational community.  It is insufficient to describe technology without operational context, just as it is incomplete to describe operations without information systems context.  Agents for realistic and actionable change must foresee the impact of technologies and describe them together with an operational context.  To date, the Army has been using technology to accelerate the paper process supporting the Military Decision Making Process (MDMP).  If we reasonably anticipate advances in technology and use them appropriately, we must consider the broadest use that technologies can influence. There needs to be a fundamental shift in the process itself, not merely an acceleration of an analog process.Major arguments exist to change the MDMP to a graphical paradigm.  First, the MDMP is a linear, sequential process intended to prepare a linear plan for the execution of a nonlinear battle.  Whitehead notes that throughout history, staffs have planned in linear sequence to simplify the planning process, causing significant, nonlinear execution issues [12].  A dynamic graphical representation of a plan can be used in nonlinear fashion within the execution monitoring process essentially enabling nonlinear responses and planning in real time.Second, the current MDMP develops mostly textual products which are immediately converted into graphical representations for clarity and brevity.  A graphical MDMP would eliminate the constant translation cost in time and errors transitioning plans back and forth between text and graphics at each echelon.Third, both the COP and Geographic Information Systems (GIS) are graphical.  GIS is the basis for intelligence processing around the world.  Planning in graphic and visual representations is a natural extension of these two major operations information sources.  Continuous operations demands graphical planning..  Finally, collaboration conducted in graphics-in-motion (time-sequenced graphics) is more rapidly understood and conducted.  If a picture is worth a thousand words, how much more are computer generated, moving graphical plans worth?  Technology is becoming more capable of supporting this shift in the planning process.  It’s time we claimed the capability for the future and designed BC Architectures required to enable it.CollaborationA review of the Joint Operating and Joint Functional Concepts documents reveals the Joint Staff collaboration discussion.  In its simplest form, collaboration is nothing more than recreating the dynamics of single-room teamwork by bringing distributed staffs and commanders together electronically.  In more robust application, electronically-enhanced collaboration exceeds single-room group dynamics by increasing common understanding and synchronization among commanders and staffs.In analog teamwork situations it is very difficult to have all the concerned staff physically fit into the operation center’s workspace.  This effectively limits the available talent to solve the problem.  With a distributed staff, each participant has their own view into the problem/situation/map; the number of problem solvers is limited only by organization and computers.  When all participants can “tab” to all workspace views of the common problem, each staff member can share his/her understanding of the problem.  This has the advantage of leveraging other thoughts without negative symptoms of single-minded group think.  The CPoF application best epitomizes an intuitive, electronically enhanced collaboration experience for distributed commanders and staff.  From recent experience in the operational development of the CPoF application, it is clear that current methods for enabling intuitive collaboration are bandwidth intensive.  An excellent example of why capabilities will drive future architectures.Intelligence, Sensors and Reconnaissance (ISR)The significant challenges in the realm of ISR are, in many ways, similar to the C4 portion of BC.  Obviously BC systems cannot support decision making without information provided by Intelligence, Sensors and Reconnaissance.   Without a common data model between the C4 and ISR portions of C4ISR, there will be stovepipe development and corresponding semantic, syntactic and translation problems.  Without some way to physically transport the data between multiple levels of security, the ISR feed to the C4 systems will not be responsive enough to affect the swiftly changing battlefield.  Without automated support to turn data to knowledge, the data produced by ever-increasing quantities of sensors will overwhelm commanders and staff.  It will increase the likelihood that critically important intelligence will be overlooked.  Transition of processed intelligence information into automated planning, processing and assessment tools must be provided to the BC staffs.Simply stated ISR must use the same common data, must be connected and interoperable, must process data into knowledge and rapidly provide that knowledge to the MDMP.  The intelligence information has to be in a form that commanders and staffs can act upon using their BC systems.Communications & NetworksBattle Command On The Move (BCOTM) is both a descriptive phrase and a title.  As a descriptive phrase, BCOTM connotes commanding a battle while moving.  Since we address “commanding a battle” in other locations, it is the “while moving” words that are addressed in this section.The first issue addressed by the “descriptive phrase” BCOTM, was directed at the backbone of the Force XXI terrestrial-based communications system. The terrestrial communications used net radio for voice communication, Mobile Subscriber Equipment for “backbone” telecommunications services (extended by the Mobile Subscriber Radio Terminal) and the Enhanced Position Location Reporting System (EPLRS) for packet switched data communications.     That system is a relic of the Cold War.  It does not support fast-paced highly mobile operations that OIF characterized. In fact, the three-layered tactical communication architecture became a deadly serious limitation that was overcome in OIF by the Blue Force Tracking (BFT) satellite-based position location system.The second issue and associated with the “title” of BCOTM is that of the command post communications.  While BFT solved the position location issue essential to Joint Blue Force Situational Awareness (JBFSA) for BCOTM, it did not bring a solution to the Brigade and higher command post requirements for high bandwidth.  Except for the V Corps and the 4ID Assault Command Posts (ACP), high bandwidth communications provided by ground to satellite transmitter/receivers were not capable of communicating while on the move[1,10,13].  Furthermore, BFT operated on a Sensitive But Unclassified (SBU) network while the upper tactical internet, transmitting a more robust COP, operated in classified mode only.The issues of multi-level security and higher-bandwidth mobile satellite communications enabled by the phased array antenna precipitated a unique communications architecture that had never been seen before.  There are quite a number of lessons learned.  Some of the successes are being reinforced by tactical network enhancements made in the context of the GIG.With the exception of the Information Systems staff (G/S-6), the commander and staff should never be required to understand and operate the “syscon” level of detail to use their BC systems.  This proved too often the case in OIF and essentially rendered many BC systems ineffective.Power to the UserThe US Army exists to prosecute Land Battle in support of US National goals.  If an Army activity cannot be linked to the prosecution of the Land Battle, it should cease.  BC systems support the prosecution of Land Battle through the OODA loop.  The OODA loop processes incoming information through the decision-making process to apply force. If a BC system cannot relate to the direct or indirect facilitation of the OODA loop at the “point of application (of force or forces)” then it should cease to exist.  The OODA loop encapsulates the commander’s MDMP (Orient and Decide) with sensor input (Observe) and execution (Act).   The OODA loop is directly affected by automated systems capabilities used by Commanders and their staffs.  The Random House College Dictionary defines the word “capability” as the ability to do something. Capability in the MDMP is the ability to affect military decision making and operations execution. Any capability that increases speed, certainty or flexibility within the OODA loop will enable commanders and staffs to decrease the time and increase the impact of decisions.  This is where future development of C4ISR capabilities must be focused.Even when automated systems do relate to the OODA loop, their technology is often focused on localized effects.  Increased effectiveness in a system is no guarantee that an increased SoS effectiveness will result.  With some notable exceptions, many systems employed in OIF are a testament to localized effectiveness lacking impact on overall SoS effectiveness.Future capabilities must facilitate commanders to easily convey their vision and intent.  Making this capability available directly within the medium used for the OPORD/PLAN without the need for additional staff work enables parallel processing among commanders and reduces OODA loop time.To develop effective C4ISR capabilities the DoD must apply the “point of application” perspective tempered with a sensitivity to overall SoS effectiveness.  Mission Threads, used in communications systems, testing, operational concepts and in a myriad of other applications, combine both the “point of application” and system of system effectiveness.  Mission Threads relate information sources (databases, sensors, intelligence centers, etc), information needlines (communications media) and OODA loop tasks (people, processes and hardware/software systems) together.  Each task has one-to-many Mission Threads that must be accomplished to complete the task.  Procedures performed as part of the MDMP will have a collection of tasks and therefore bundles of Mission Threads.  As we look at the bundles of Mission Threads supporting the MDMP, we are reminded of architectures, since architectures are defined as “things” and their relationships.  In fact, we assert that the bundles of Mission Threads supporting the MDMP is exactly a task-driven BC Architecture.  Since the tasks that comprise the MDMP consist of Soldier-executed processes supported by software/hardware automated systems, the BC capabilities at the “point of application” both facilitate and comprise these tasks.A Headquarters Department of the Army (HQDA) G-3 led BC Course of Action Analysis (COAA)/Mission Planning(MP)/Mission Rehearsal(MR) meeting in January 2004 identified among many others, the following capabilities:Automated Threat Detection and AssessmentAuto-compare Plan versus ExecutionMerge Subordinate Plans into Higher Echelon planEvaluate COAs against criteria established in Mission Analysis PhaseThese and the other capabilities that the group identified would seriously challenge future BC systems.  In the light of the recent “Good Enough” CSA decision and its basic philosophy of getting a minimally sufficient capability to all Army units, we believe the intermediate goal of BC should focus on usability.  Review of AAR from V Corps HQ [1] the TF1-15 Infantry White Paper [9], Testimony of LTG Wallace to the US Congress [10] and author participation in the Army G-3 OIF ABCS Operational Assessment reports and results consolidate to a simpler top priority capabilities list.  To this end, we suggest the following list of common-sense capabilities:Integration of all BAS overlays onto one Joint, Interagency and Multinational (JIM) digital map/COP.  J. From in [11] states: “friendly forces…, graphic control measures, enemy forces, unknown entities/non-combatants, civil military operations and geospatial information (terrain, weather, etc.) shall be integral components of the COP.”Simple, time-stepped animation of graphical (graphics-in-motion) plan representationsTransmitting animated graphical plan(s) to higher and lower echelonsJ. From in [11] states:“enabling the commander to view projection of combat power…up to 72 hrs out.”  Integration of data across upper and lower tactical internets and among BASs [1, 9]Windows based Graphical User Interfaces (GUI) [9]Intuitive interfaces for developing plans by graphic manipulations (as in MS PowerPoint…point, click, drag & drop)Tactical message construction that assist, rather than hinder, passing standard information [9]Wireless file transfer among BC systems (wired hardware unreliable and too expensive) [9]PDA-based BC software [9]Battle Command On The Move (BCOTM) to Brigade Command Post (CP) Level [9, 10].This list may appear to short change the power of automation to support BC and the MDMP, but it is exactly the ability to simplify planning and execution tasks that automation must tackle first.  This is where current BC systems have spectacularly failed.  BC systems must take the obvious advantages of superior SA and apply it to an old analog paradigm (sand tables anyone?) of graphical plans and operations execution.  Automating data transition behind the scenes and among different product and decision stages in the MDMP must be the highest priority beyond getting all US and Coalition Forces on one digital playing field.The conclusion we draw here is that SoS BC capabilities drive the BC Architecture and those capabilities are inextricably part of the OODA (MDMP) loop.  Give the commander and staff capabilities that increase the effectiveness of the OODA loop and those capabilities will define and drive all supporting architectures and the systems within them.Conclusions & RecommendationsWhile much has been done to bring the US DoD where it is today, much is yet to be done.  The concepts in place have taken years to mature and were fielded by people who knew that they must get it right within their bounds to do so.  Through those efforts we have learned much.  The field of recommendations is rich, primarily because there really is no lack of opportunity to succeed.  Room for GrowthThe authors believe that change brought about in the following areas will bring the greatest advances in increased speed, certainty and agility in the execution of the OODA loop.Graphical MDMP.  Digital systems must be harnessed to make the tasks intuitive and not more complex.  The advantages of digital SA must be integrated into the planning, collaboration and dissemination processes.  Using a graphics-based process simplifies and speeds the execution of the entire MDMP.  The simulation community has many lessons learned in supporting this paradigm and should be leveraged to leap ahead future C4ISR systems.After the Good Enough decision is implemented, the Army should focus on a JC2-based COP.  The COP has proven its worth in Joint, Interagency and Multinational (JIM) military operations.  The Army’s version of the COP, called the Common Tactical Picture (CTP), caused significant SoS problems, not just with SA but also for information sharing processes that are, and should be, based on a truly common COP.  Sharing information from/with intelligence sources and other JIM organizations dictates that the Army go with a JIM solution.Common Look and Feel.  Apply the beneficial experiences of using Windows GUIs to the computer systems that we will use for the MDMP.  Build on the common “look and feel” of Windows with functions common among the future BC systems.  Do the same tasks in different systems in the same way with common applications.  Jeffrey From in [11] stated “the necessity for the Army’s battle command system and its associated network to be “simple, robust, redundant, reliable, small, light and secure” is clear”.Build a SoS that commanders and staffs can use it in garrison and in battle.  Requiring units to use different systems for training than those they will take to war reduces familiarity and efficiency which translates to loss of life in battle.The Way Ahead RecommendationsWe have made recommendations on general capabilities to implement, in the previous subsection and specific BC capabilities in Section  REF _Ref67739406 \r \h 3.5,  REF _Ref67739406 \h Power to the User.  For BC capabilities to be effective in the overall SoS we cannot ignore capability enablers.  In fact, those enablers will determine the effectiveness of the BC capabilities.  This section contains recommendations which suggest the general way ahead sequence in implementing those capabilities with a SoS perspective.Codify authoritative data model(s).  Adopt the C2IEDM as the standard for DoD C4ISR Data Models in the JTA.  Even more effective, make the C2IEDM the authoritative data model across the entire DoD for all information systems using those data elements defined and described in the C2IEDM.  Common data models must be selected for other uses, such as common terrain data, not covered by the C2IEDM, but the DoD has gone long enough without standardized data models representing the basic elements of the world in which we operate.Focus on capabilities supporting the OODA loop.  Define the capabilities of future C4ISR systems in terms of software systems used by the warfighter which reduce the time and uncertainty in making decisions in the OODA loop process.  TRADOC Futures Center has the task to define those capabilities.  It must be started now for future systems, such as FCS, to have enablers and architectures effectively supporting and integrated with the architectures & systems .Connect BC capabilities to BC architectures through Mission Threads.  Define the BC architecture through the collection of Operational and System Mission Threads supporting the BC SoS capabilities.  Ensure Joint and Army Enterprise data sources are tied to the supported capability through those same Mission Threads.  In this way, all information systems architectures will be focused on the support tasks for the warfighting staff.Phase Development of Architectures.  Backward plan architectures supporting specific future BC capabilities, providing the SoS enablers just prior to capabilities deployment.ConclusionThe DoD is at a crucial time in the development of new automated information systems supporting Battle Command.  Perceived and organizational barriers to realized, effective change are being broken and reshaped in the image of truly Joint operations.  With bold and original thinking, future Battle Command systems can be developed with few impediments to a truly enhanced and intuitive MDMP.  The Army can use this new MDMP to get inside the opponents OODA loop and achieve military objectives and save US Soldier lives.AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to express deep appreciation to the many individuals who reviewed this paper and improved it with their thoughtful insight. Special thanks go to the war fighting Soldiers who provided frank, factual observations upon which this paper is primarily composed.  Special admiration and appreciation go to the officers of HQDA G3, Battle Command Division, who daily sacrifice whatever is required to support the views and needs of the Army operators and commanders.  While writing this paper, LTC Ron Sprinkle was a member of the HQDA G-3 Battle Command Division led by COL John “Sonny” Uberti.  Mr. Dick Brown was supported by the TRADOC Integrated Office for Battle Command (TPIO-BC) and is their representative to the Overarching Integrated Product Team for Simulation to C4ISR Interoperability (SIMCI OIPT).  Both authors acknowledge the positive influence of the SIMCI OIPT vision in the creation of this paper.ReferencesShaaber, M., Hedberg, S, Wesson, T, “V Corps: C4ISR Integration AAR”, May 2003, A Paper on the Information Systems Integration and Information Management challenges and successes training for, and achieving “VICTORY” in Operation Iraqi Freedom. Graham, D., “Mission Planning and Rehearsal System (MPARS)”, undated White Paper from the 101st Airborne Division Futures Directorate.C4ISR Architecture Working Group, Levels of Information Systems Interoperability (LISI), 30 March 1998.   HYPERLINK "http://www.defenselink.mil/nii/org/cio/i3/lisirpt.pdf" www.defenselink.mil/nii/org/cio/i3/lisirpt.pdf Wartik, S.P., Haugh, B.H., Loaiza, F. and Hieb, M.R. 2001 “Building in Interoperability: A Comparison of C4I Data Models and Simulation Object Models”, Paper 01S-SIW-021, 2001 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, March 2001.ASD NII C4ISR Integration Task Force, “Integrated DoD Architectures” undated brochure,  HYPERLINK "http://www.defenselink.mil/nii/org/cio/i3/AWG_Digital_Library/pdfdocs/brochure.pdf" http://www.defenselink.mil/nii/org/cio/i3/AWG_Digital_Library/pdfdocs/brochure.pdf.Hieb, M., Sprinkle, R., “Simulation Infrastructure for the DII COE Architecture: The Army Vision”, Paper 00F-SIW-035, 2000 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 2000.Furness, J., Isensee, E., and Fitzpatrick, M.: “Realtime Initialization of Planning and Analysis Simulations Based on C4ISR System Data”, in proceedings of the 2002 Command Control Research and Technology Symposium (CCRTS), Annapolis MD, 19-21 June 2001.DoD Net-Centric Operations and Warfare (NCOW) Reference Model (RM) Version 1.0 (v1.0) Overview and Summary Information (AV) 1. Charlton, J., “Digital Battle Command Baptism by Fire”, undated White Paper from the Commander of the 1-15 Infantry, 3rd Infantry Division (Mechanized).Wallace, W., “Statement by Lieutenant General William S. Wallace, Commanding General, Combined Arms Center, U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command before the Subcommittee on Terrorism, Unconventional Threats and Capabilities  Armed Services Committee United States House of Representatives on C4I Interoperability: New Challenges in the 21st Century Warfare”, October 21, 2003.From, J., “ABCS Commander’s Application” Information Paper, 16 July 2002.Whitehead, S.: “Balancing Tyche: Nonlinearity and Joint Operations”, Chapter 2, “National Security Challenges for the 21st Century”, October 2003,  HYPERLINK "http://www.carlisle.army.mil/ssi/" http://www.carlisle.army.mil/ssi/, Odierno, R. Erickson, E, “The Battle of Taji and Battle Command on the Move”, July-August 2003 Military Review.Author BiographiesLTC RON SPRINKLE is a Battle Command Division Action Officer in the Headquarter Department of the Army Operations (G-3).  With over 17 years as a U.S. Army Reserve Officer, LTC Sprinkle has served 8 active duty years, including 1-year activation for OIF in the HQDA G3, and 9 years reserve duty, including Company Command, Battalion Operations and Battalion Executive Officer.  During 14 years as a defense contractor, he has developed software and hardware systems on numerous programs to include the Line Of Sight Anti-Tank (LOSAT), the ARPA Reconfigurable Simulator Initiative (ARSI), Army Experiment 3 (AE3), the BattleLab Reconfigurable Simulator Initiative (BLRSI), Fire Support Combined Arms Tactical Trainer (FSCATT), the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS), Digital Battlestaff Sustainment Trainer (DBST) and as the Architect for Simulation to C4I (SIMCI) Architectures.   Ron Sprinkle is a graduate of Oregon State University with a Bachelors in General Engineering and of Southern Methodist University with a Masters in Computer Science Engineering.RICHARD F. BROWN is currently employed as a Senior Telecommunications Manager in the USA Training and Doctrine Command's Integration Office for Battle Command Systems where he works on requirements for Joint command and control systems. Over the last 30 years he has been a field artillery specialist in tactical fire control systems, and a designer and integrator of command posts for army units at all echelons.  Mr. Brown is a 1967 graduate of the University of Massachusetts with a BS in Experimental Psychology.  He was also commissioned a 2LT of Artillery from ROTC. He is a graduate w/Honors, US Army Command and General Staff College and a graduate w/ Honors, US Army Management Staff College.  Mr. Brown retired from the US Army Reserve as a LTC of Field Artillery in 1997.		Figure 1.3-1  The Context of Battle Command ArchitectureFigure 2.3-1  LISI Model Levels of InteroperabilityFigure 2.1-1  The OODA Loop