Cognitive Extensions to the Human FOM Starter Set Bret GivensTom HughesVeridian Engineering5200 Springfield Pike, Suite 200Dayton, OH 45431937-253-4770Bret.Givens@wpafb.af.mil Tom.Hughes@wpafb.af.mil Keywords:FOM, Human Representation.ABSTRACT: In January 1999, the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) organized a small working group of government and industry representatives to develop a starter Federation Object Model (FOM) for representing humans within the High Level Architecture (HLA) across the live, virtual, and constructive simulation domains. The Starter FOM was designed to be extendible so that it could serve as a common starting point for a variety of different simulation uses. This paper discusses ongoing efforts for the development of cognitive extensions to the Human FOM Starter Set. We have adopted the stage model as a baseline for defining the I/O interface between the components of the various components of a composite model of human cognition. The challenge of our effort will be to define the content of this I/O interface between each of the framework’s components. We also want to establish a dialogue that will support a broad range of domains. Therefore, the specific object models included in the starter set will be developed from a prospective that is independent of a specific context but be able to accept data that provides context specific information. This will require that the starter set object model be abstracted from context, providing a basic structure for the passage of data rather than the data itself. This paper discusses the development of cognitive extensions to the Human Starter FOM and the lessons learned to date. IntroductionThe realistic representation of human behavior has long posed a significant challenge to the modeling and simulation community.  Traditional legacy models have been relatively effective in developing representations of highly proceduralized, scripted human behaviors.  Detailed task decompositions coupled with access to vast human performance databases have resulted in relatively robust representations for these types of task situations.  Unfortunately, complex military operations and command decision-making rarely follow established scripts or established procedures.  The demand for highly adaptive human representation is probably best illustrated within the training environment.  In an effort reduce the costs and increase the effectiveness of training simulation intelligent agents have been created that command computer generated forces integrated into the simulated training environments.  The extent to which these computer-generated forces can behave like live actors, in large part, dictates their effectiveness as a training tool.  Oversimplified decision logic allows trainees to easily gain tactical advantage and defeat such agents.  The resultant training effect is minimal and may even promote negative training by re-enforcing undesirable behaviors.  Recent advances in artificial intelligence, cognitive modeling architectures and human behavioral representation methods have had a significant impact on the development of more robust representations of adaptive human behavior and decision-making.  The apparent success of the IFOR program during recent STOW exercises [1] seems to be evidence of this.  However, a second challenge facing the M&S community is ability to integrate cognitive extensions and human behavioral models into distributed simulation environments.  DMSO has spearheaded an effort to create the infrastructure to support large-scale distributed simulation through the development of the High-Level Architecture (HLA).  In preparing this infrastructure DMSO has also recognized the need to provide simulation organization with guidance for the development of the I/O interfaces between the various federates that will participate in a federation simulation.  The Federation Object Model (FOM) is the mechanism by which a federation establishes the structure of the data exchange that will occur during a simulation exercise.  To support federation developer in defining their FOM, DMSO has sponsored the development of starter FOMs to serve as starting points, or benchmarks as a point of departure. Human Starter FOMIn January 1999, the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) organized a small working group of government and industry representatives to develop a starter Federation Object Model (FOM) for representing humans within the High Level Architecture (HLA) across the live, virtual, and constructive simulation domains. The Starter FOM was designed to be extendible so that it could serve as a common starting point for a variety of different simulation uses [2].  Focusing on the physical characteristics of individual combatants the Human Starter FOM establishes position, movement, orientation, appearance and status data structures for human entities present in the simulated environment.While the current state of the Human Starter FOM addresses the physical aspects of human behavior it does not address aspects of human cognitive performance.  One might argue whether the need exists to address cognitive aspects of human behavior within the FOM.  Cognitive processes are internal to the entity and may not necessarily need to be passed to other entities.  However, while there may be many conditions that may drive the need to pass cognitive information; however, we will speak primarily to one.  As with any complex process, human cognition consists of multiple subprocesses.  This concept is best illustrated by the Modified Stage Model (MSM) [1] presented in Figure 1.  The Modified Stage Model provides a framework for use in the development of composite models of human cognition.  Within the framework of the model each stage (i.e., Sensory/Perception, Cognition, Motor Behavior and Long/Short-Term Memory) represents a critical component of human cognitive processing.  Over the past several years, various models of these information-processing stages have emerged, each capturing some aspect of human cognitive phenomenon at various levels of fidelity and detail.  Using the framework defined by the MSM we believe that it would be possible to link these models together in a distributed simulation environment to establish an integrated model of human cognition.Figure 1.  Modified Stage Model [1]Human FOM Cognitive ExtensionsWhile unified cognitive architectures such as Soar and ACT-R/PM provide many attractive features, it is unrealistic to assume that one architecture or one modeling approach will satisfy the broad range of anticipated modeling and simulation requirements [1].  A more likely scenario involves the continued use of the wide array of micro-models that current exist or are being developed.  For this discussion, a micro-model is any model that provides a representation of a single element of the stage model framework.  For instance, a perceptual model that is based on signal detection theory might provide a valid representation of perceptual processes but does not address subsequent situation assessment or decision-making processes.  The attractive feature of many of these micro-models is that they can often provide a high degree of fidelity for the specific information-processing phenomenon they are designed to represent.  Furthermore, the level of fidelity can often be easily manipulated to satisfy the unique requirements of a given simulation exercise.  However, what often makes these micro-models unattractive to simulation developers is that they are not easily integrated into a larger simulation environment.  If provisions could be made to easily integrate these component models together within a larger simulation environment they would become more useful to simulation developers.It is our belief that HLA could provide the necessary infrastructure to support the integration of these micro-models and provide some level of representation for integrated human cognitive processing.  Our current research is focused on investigating the use of HLA to integrate these models and define a common set of cognitive object models that could be fashioned into a human FOM starter set.While it is our objective to integrate component models into a composite representation of human cognition, our approach for this initial demonstration is to decompose an existing composite model into separate components and reintegrate using the HLA.  In other words, we would attempt to decouple a model that currently integrates the various components of the human cognitive process.  Once decoupled we would identify the specific I/O interfaces that exist between the components and develop object models that represent these I/O interfaces.  These object models would then be integrated into a FOM.  The federation would include as federates each component or micro-model represents a human information processing function.  For our initial demonstration case we have selected the Situation Awareness Model for Pilot-In-The-Loop Evaluation (SAMPLE) model developed by Charles River Analytics Inc.The SAMPLE ArchitectureOur reasons for selecting the SAMPLE modeling architecture for this initial demonstration are twofold.  First, SAMPLE is currently hosted within the SIMAF facility at Wright-Patterson AFB, providing agent behaviors for MIL-AASPEM air-to-air simulations [3]. Our simulation engineers are experienced in the use of both SAMPLE and MIL-AASPEM, which will is critical to ensure a successful demonstration of our concepts.  Second, SAMPLE’s architecture is easily mapped to the Modified Stage Model framework as illustrated in Figure 2.  In addition a knowledge base memory store SAMPLE’s modeling architecture consists of three modules each support a different component of human information processing; an information processor module, and situation assessor module and decision-maker/procedure selector module.  The following is a brief description of each of these modules and their implementation mechanization.  These descriptions are based on our interpretation of available documentation of the SAMPLE architecture.  We view SAMPLE’s information processor as analogous to the sensory/perception phase of the MSM.  The information processor module consists of two submodels, a continuous state estimator and a discrete event detector. Based on input from the simulated environment the estimator, acting as the agents sensory system, provides estimates of relevant vehicle/system state.  For an air-to-air engagement such as that modeled within MIL-AASPEM this would include values of aircraft position, attitude, altitude, velocity vector as well as state information regarding potential targets and threats. The estimator produces subjective probability estimates that can be used for event detection and situation assessment.  The estimator also produces a measure of uncertainty inherent in the estimated value that can be used to influence monitoring decisions.The event detector generates occurrence probabilities of mission-relevant events, as perceived by the pilot on the basis of his dynamic information base.  The inputs to the event detector are visual and auditory discretes picked up by the display processor, and outputs from the state estimator. SAMPLE uses fuzzy logic (FL) technology to implement event detection functionality. While some discrete event detection can be implemented using Boolean logic, most significant events required a more robust and flexible means of definition.Figure 2. SAMPLE Architecture [3]SAMPLE’s situation assessor module takes in the estimated states and the detected events, and generates an assessed situation state.  With Situation Memory SAMPLE maintains a fixed and pre-defined set of candidate situations.  Based on the current set of states, events or other active situations the situation assessor identifies the most probable situation.  Based on this situation a given course of action ore procedure execution is selected.  The situation assessor is implemented using bayesian belief networks for probabilistic reasoning in the presence of uncertainty. “They provide a comprehensible picture of the SA problem by indicating the dependent relationships among the variables, both high-level (symbolic) and low-level (numeric), relevant to the SA problem. This provides a clearer view (than a low-level neural network-based approach would, for example) of how each individual piece of evidence affects the high-level situation characterization. They allow the incremental addition of evidence, concerning any of the domain variables, as it arrives, thus allowing for real-time SA update. The method is consistent with probability.” [3]Based on the current situation state as defined by the situation assessor, the decision maker and procedure selector module generates a selected task or procedure, defined in the procedure memory shown. The definition of these procedures is an essential step in any task modeling effort, and it is important to note that the term procedure can apply to tasks in general; a procedure in these terms can have considerably more cognitive content than might normally be considered.Extension of SAMPLEOur current activities are focused on identifying the specific object models that can be defined based on the current SAMPLE architecture.  SAMPLE currently uses the Command and Control Simulation Interface Language (CCSIL) protocol to communicate between the various modules.  Therefore, an initial starting point for establishing appropriate object models will be to identify those CCSIL messages that are implemented within SAMPLE and define comparable object models that capture like information.  Using the Object Model Development Tool (OMDT) we will generate an initial human cognitive FOM Starter Set based on this initial listing of CCSIL messages.  We will be instantiating this FOM Starter Set using the FEDGEN tool and then execute the FEDGEN developed federate with the MIL-AASPEM simulation.  Follow-on activities will focus on extending the framework to include other human representational models to and assess the generalizability of the Starter Set concept.SummaryOur intent during this initial effort is not to develop a definitive cognitive extension to the Human FOM Starter Set but rather to investigate the feasibility of this concept and assess its potential utility to simulation developers.  One of the significant risks we must address is the issue of context sensitivity.  One could argue that it is impractical to attempt to identify a common set of object models for a human cognitive extension because the specific object models required for a given simulation must always be defined by the unique characteristics of the situational context being represented.   While this is certainly true, we feel that a critical assessment of these issue will provide the necessary insights that will allow use to define the limits to which such an extension can be established.  In addition, simulation developers are in desperate need of guidance regarding how to integrate models of human cognitive performance into distributed simulations.  If successful such guidance should be a natural artifact of this work.References[1]	Pew, R. & Mavor, A. (Eds) (1998). Modeling Human and Organizational Behavior: Application to Military Simulations. Washington, D.C.: Nat’l Academy Press.[2]	Pratt, S.M., Barham, P.T., Fulford, D.A. and Koechling, J. (1999).  Starting Points for Representing Humans within High Level Architecture (HLA): The Human Starter SOM and Human FOM Starter Set. 1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability  Workshop, Paper No. 99F-SIW-075, Orlando, FL.[3]	Mulgund, S.S., Harper, K.A., Zacharias, G.L. and Menke, T.E. (2000). SAMPLE: Situation Awareness Model For Pilot-In-The-Loop Evaluation. Computer Generated Forces Conference, Paper No. 9th-CGF-063, Orlando, FL