An Ontology of the Visual Domain for Synthetic Environments Barry BittersDepartment of Environmental StudiesUniversity of West Florida11000 University ParkwayPensacola, Florida  32514-5750850-936-1060 HYPERLINK "mailto:bbitters@uwf.edu" bbitters@uwf.edu Keywords:Ontology, taxonomy, thesaurus, 3-D models, synthetic natural environment, virtual reality.ABSTRACT:  Currently available feature classification systems have proven themselves to be inadequate in their ability to assist in the detailed description of cultural and natural environments.  Many existing feature classification systems were developed when limited display capabilities demanded economy in the database generation process.  Others are so limited in scope that they do not provide the feature specificity necessary for future display capabilities.  Based on current client requirements and the anticipated detail requirements of future synthetic environment databases, an alternate taxonomic structure must be available to database developers.  In a presentation at I/ITSEC-2002, we described a conceptual feature classification system, designed for use in the development of synthetic environments.  We described the potential uses and a conceptual design of a hierarchical data structure that could be used to store natural and cultural feature data.  The first version of this taxonomy is now available for public review and possible implementation in existing and future software systems.  The development of this new system was based on creating a logical union of many existing taxonomies, thesauri, ontologies and classification schema.  This new data structure now allows unambiguous inventorying of natural and cultural landscapes.  It can also assist in the unambiguous importing of disparate sources of feature data.  A significant portion of this research/production effort also involved the creation of a public-domain library of generic 3D models – models closely aligned to the concepts in the feature taxonomy.  These data structures and their availability are discussed in detail.  The trials and tribulations encountered during development, potential uses of the data structure, and future developments to be performed under this research effort, are also discussed.  1.  IntroductionIn the future, creating realistic synthetic landscapes will require the ability to inventory actual natural and cultural objects at the same level of detail as they exist within the real-world landscape.  With the continued call for higher detail in real-time simulation displays, producers of real-time databases must search for non-traditional sources of feature, elevation, and image data to meet ever increasing detail requirements.Today’s challenge is to develop advanced techniques to rapidly capture and display large volumes of non-standard geospatial data about a cultural or natural landscape.  The rapid assimilation of disparate sources of geospatial data is an attractive and potentially cost-effective future means of populating visual databases with high density feature detail.  However, for this to be a viable technique, standardized means for resolving semantic, syntactic and multi-lingual differences in data must be addressed.  To do this, a feature classification system that contains detailed categorizations of natural and cultural objects is essential.  However, using current feature classification systems, it is impossible to store geospatial feature information on many of the more common cultural features encountered on the landscape.  In the classification schemes commonly used in the Modeling and Simulation (M&S) environment, no categories are available to store feature information about the most common non-pavement highway features – regulatory and informational signs.  Try and find a classification code for a stop sign, or any other standard traffic sign.  Search in vain for a classification code for a covered bus stop, or a park bench.At the 2002 Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation & Education (I/ITSEC) Conference, Bitters [1] reported on a pilot project and conceptual design for the creation of a comprehensive feature classification schema of common objects within the visual domain.  Since that time, these development efforts have resulted in the production of an initial version of a taxonomic structure, the Visual Object Taxonomy (VOT) that allows a detailed categorization of cultural and natural objects.  In conjunction with the development of this taxonomy, an extensive collection of public-domain, generic 3-D models has also been developed.  What is unique about this research is that a direct relationship has been maintained between the collection of 3-D models and the concepts within the taxonomic structure.In this paper, we will examine the philosophical basis of classification and the perception of reality and how it bears on this research effort.  The design principles behind systematic taxonomy development will be discussed followed by a discussion of the methodology used to create this taxonomy.  A brief overview of the taxonomic structure will then be presented and the potential uses of the data structure will be discussed.2.  BackgroundOntology refers to the theory of existence, what exactly the world is or contains.  This philosophical discipline asks the fundamental question: What exists?  The answer to this question will determine what is accepted as "fact" and what can be known of the realities around us.  Long-standing ontological debates concern the nature of human perception of reality.  Traditionally, the two opposing extremes of this debate have been the realist view and the nominalist view.  To the realist, reality is external to the individual and imposes itself on individual consciousness. In this philosophical position it is a given that objects exist and that they occupy space.  To the nominalist, however, reality is considered to be a product of individual consciousness, a product of one’s own mind or of ones individual cognition.  Nominalism questions whether humans can effectively and objectively view, define, and recognize the realities around them because all stimulations of the senses are filtered and interpreted based on an individuals past experiences.For example: If an English-speaking man, a French-speaking woman, a robot, and a dog were all standing around looking at a piece of cheese; the man might think of cheese and its taste.  The woman might think of fromage and its taste.  The dog also might think about the taste and might have mentally verbalized a concept name in “dog-speak”.  The robot would just recognize the existence of an object with a certain chemical or physical makeup and as a result equate that to the concept of cheese.  They each would recognize that an object exists and possesses certain qualities.  They each would generalize the objects existence and recognize the object relative to all other things in the universe.   What is important is that each individual perceives the same object and they conceptualize the object in a similar fashion.  It is not important that they categorized the object differently; i.e. cheese or fromage.  This is a differentiation based on linguistics not based on concept definition.  In the broadest sense, the language difference is not significant since each individual arrived at the same concept.  2.1  Perception and Classification.Aristotle investigated the theory of classification by studying marine life intensively and grouped different living things together by their nature, not by their resemblance. This form of classification was used until the 19th century.  Aristotle's teacher, Plato had defined reality based on ideas or eternal forms, knowable only through reflection and reasoning. However, Aristotle saw ultimate reality in physical objects, knowable through experience.  Objects, including organisms, were composed of a potential, their matter, and of a reality, their form; thus, a log -- matter -- has the potential to assume whatever form a carpenter gives it.In the 18th Century, Carolus Linnaeus described a hierarchical classification system using seven taxonomic categories, or taxa (Kingdom, Phylum, Class, Order, Family, Genus, and Species) to describe the plant and animal kingdom.  The Linnaean taxonomic structure, although constantly evolving, is used to this day to describe the evolutionary, genetic, and physical characteristics of all living things.However, in some philosophical sectors, there has been a distinct mistrust of the generalization process used in the development of taxonomic and ontological structures.  This line of though might be difficult for some to fathom since every time a proper noun is used in speech or writing, the same generalization process takes place.  Ontologies, taxonomies, thesauri, classification systems, synonym rings - whatever name is used, are all data structures by which we can generalize our environment into a more easily understood form.  Each of these is a controlled vocabulary - an organized list of words, phrases, concepts and/or notation systems for a specific subject domain.Much of the philosophical concern discussed above has been focused on the use of language to accurately express thoughts, emotions and the general state of the world around us.  Ludwig Wittgenstein [2] treated language as a formal system.  He felt that the world around us consists entirely of facts.  Human beings are aware of these facts by virtue of mental representations or thoughts.  These thoughts can be expressed in propostitions that accurately portray the nature of reality.Martin Heidegger [3], on the other hand, rejected the views of Wittgenstein and treated language as an activity embedded in social practices, an activity that resists precise representation of any kind.  Michael Foucault [4], in his book, The Order of Things, likewise seems to construe knowledge and language as inherently social/political phenomena rather than something absolute which progresses as science modifies it.Today, the ideas of Heidegger and Foucault persist and some philosophers would have us believe that our perception of objects is not accurate enough to create a detailed and functional classification schema.  Hay [5] observes that “Human geography is engaged in the construction of some form of representation of human society and the built environment.  This representation is inevitably simplified and abstract.  More controversially, it is also invariably partial, fragmented, subjective and capable of multiple interpretations.”   This suggests that because each of us as individuals have a set of preconceived notions about the world around us, it is impossible to accurately classify objects in a repeatable fashion by different individuals.   However, when properly documented, a formal classification system provides the basis for a relatively uniform and standardized nomenclature, thereby simplifying and standardizing the exchange of data and ideas.  The key to the effective use of knowledge in ontological form is the concise and detailed documentation of the ontological system.Postmodern philosophers would have us believe that the creation of such a hierarchical structure is an impossible task.  They have a distinct distrust of any form of narrative or discourse and any system that generalizes the real world is considered to be scientific narrative.  The postmodern theorists would argue for a return to the local, the rejection of grand theory and a privileged position for science and its narratives, and an acknowledgment of the inherently political nature of all narratives.  They would consider a formal taxonomy to be a politically motivated structure, and for this reason, it would be an inaccurate representation of knowledge. On the other hand, Golledge [6] notes that geographic knowledge has been hampered because the discipline has not developed a widely accepted and documented vocabulary.  We must “acknowledge the existence of a common set of primitives and concepts that span both the physical and human sides of the discipline” Golledge [6].  Why Is Classification Essential?  In essence, this entire discussion has, so far been an analysis of subjective views of reality versus objective views of reality, and this debate has persisted since ancient times.   A classic example of subjectivity in language can be seen in the phrase “There is a pink lizard.”  This sentence is subjective in that it does not use succinct and unambiguous terms.  What shade of pink - hot pink or crimson?  What exactly is a lizard?  Some might call the creature a toad!  A more objective means of phrasing the same sentence would be, “There is an animate object of the form Prynosoma cornutum with a visible wavelength of 124,94,94 on an RGB scale of 255,255,255.”  Although this would be considered an absurd way of conveying an observation in casual conversation, in the modern digital environment this type of detailed and explicit definition of fact is essential to ensure total and explicit understanding between two parties.  Without total and explicit understanding, communication fails.Further, to enable systematic research in any research discipline, there is a need for a common language and the development of a taxonomic structure is an integral part of the formulation of any such language.   For this research effort, we have assumed the existence of a real world, populated by real entities that occupy regions of space.  Language, when properly employed, allows sentient beings to explicitly and understandably express ideas, concepts, and thoughts.  However, spoken, written, even non-verbal languages are all in a constant evolving form.  The exact meaning of words and phases changes over time and regional variations in word meaning also vary.  To counteract the evolving nature of linguistics, it is essential to document any formal ontological structure with concise and explicit definitions.Further, we take the perspective that the real world is structured, that there is a certain geometry into which all the worldly objects are hierarchically expressible.  This hierarchy of objects reveals the relationships between these objects in a way that makes their existence explicit and more easily understood.3.  Taxonomic Design PrinciplesTolk [7] raises four challenges that must be dealt with when mediating heterogeneous data sources and these all must be resolved when developing a systematic taxonomic structure:Semantic Conflicts: the concepts of the different schemata do not match exactly, but have to be aggregated or disaggregated. Descriptive Conflicts: there are homonyms, synonyms, different names for the same concept, different attributes or slot values for the same concept. Heterogeneous Conflicts: the methodologies being used to describe the concepts differ substantially, e.g., one concept is described in the Unified Modeling Language (UML), the other in a relational data model. Structural Conflicts: different structures are used to describe the same concept, e.g., in one local schema an attribute is used, in the other schema a reference to another concept is used to describe the same part of the view of “reality”. The effective use of a standard reference model can resolve most descriptive, heterogeneous and structural conflicts and eliminate many of the problems inherent in the handling of disparate data sources.  However, semantic conflicts and some descriptive conflicts will remain, even with the most robust model-based data management.  The purpose of a feature classification system is to resolve many of the semantic and descriptive conflicts that arise when working with disparate sources of feature data.  Removing, or reducing these conflicts, allow a smooth and systematic categorization of feature objects using a generalized set of class objects.  By creating a logical and orderly grouping of classes and subclasses, it is possible to identify relationships about objects contained in the categories.  A taxonomic structure is an accepted means of generalizing domain knowledge into an ordered set of class objects.The approach taken in this production effort has been that a properly developed taxonomy must have the following qualities:An explicitly defined domain that limits the set of items to be categorized.Distinct categories based on visually recognizable properties.Mutually exclusive categories.Exhaustive and unambiguous categories.Explicitly defined categories.Formulated in a single language.If the categories of a taxonomy lack any of these properties, then a classification performed by one individual may not be precisely repeated by another, or even by the same person at different time.  Without repeatability, the taxonomic structure becomes useless.3.1  An Explicitly Defined Knowledge Domain. A taxonomy must have a knowledge domain with defined limits.  This in effect identifies the extent of the allowable categories that can be included in the final data structure.  For this research project, the limits of the knowledge domain have been defined as “all objects within the visual domain.”  To say the least, this encompasses a very broad set of objects.  For this reason, we have limited the domain extent based on the current state of the art of military modeling and simulation and other cartographic endeavors.   For the purposes of the object model being developed, those objects that are typically inside buildings and other structures, are generally excluded from the domain of knowledge included in the VOT.  This effectively eliminates household furnishings and fixtures, commercial and industrial furnishings, and equipment that would be found inside structures.Distinct Categories - What Constitutes a Valid Concept?   In the context of this research effort, the declaration of a valid concept is based on the distinct and unprecedented visual appearance of an object, its functional characteristics, and on the assertion of its uniqueness within another ontological data structure.  It is intuitively obvious that the visual appearance of a chair is markedly different from that of an automobile.  However, many of the concepts developed from and transferred into the VOT from heritage ontological structures, may not possess apparent and distinct differences in visual appearance.  For instance, what is the difference between a pinnacle, a, butte, a mesa, or a plateau.  By definition, a plateau is larger than a mesa, which is larger than a butte, which is larger than a pinnacle.  Except for their size, each of these objects can be visually similar.  However, each term/concept is considered to be a definitive geographic feature based on their existence in several heritage ontological systems.  For the purposes of this project, if a term is defined in a heritage taxonomic structure, and the functionality and the visual appearance described in the definition make it a unique concept, then it will appear as a unique concept in the VOT.3.3  Mutually Exclusive Categories.   The existence of concepts in the VOT indicates that there is enough differentiation in meaning to constitute a unique category.  Mutual exclusivity of categories means that at the same level within the hierarchy there will be no duplicate categories.  In other words, at the same level within the hierarchy each concept definition will define a set of qualities that are not duplicated in any other concept at that same level.		3.4  Unambiguous Categories.   Ambiguity in a concept definition within a taxonomic structure is a direct violation of one of the basics tenants of taxonomy development.  In the past, taxonomies were often developed based purely on a concept idea as expressed by the concept name.  Even when a definition was included in heritage taxonomies, assumptions were often made that everyone would know what was meant!  This is a bad assumption since words result in a mental image that may not be the same for different individuals.  As an example, an individual in the southwest US desert may conjure up a different mental image of a “tree” than an individual living in the northeast US.  For this reason, to insure unambiguity, we have attempted to include graphic, photographic, or 3-D model representations of all concepts.  In this way, there is no mistaking the meaning of definitions.3.5  Explicitly Defined Categories.   The notion of the explicitly defined category has never been expressed so well than when H. G. Wells [8] said:“Think of the arm chairs and reading chairs and dining-room chairs, and kitchen chairs; chairs that pass as benches, chairs that cross the boundary and become settees, dentist’s chairs, thrones, opera stalls, seats of all sorts, those miraculous fungoid growths that encumber the floor of arts and crafts exhibitions, and you will perceive what a lax bundle in fact is this simple straightforward term.”This quotation would lead one to believe that there is no such thing as a “chair” – but that there are all sorts of things that approximate the concept of a “chair”.  If the exact meaning of an object is not explicitly defined, then the philosophical concepts of Heidegger and Foucault take over.  Each individual would conceptualize the “chair” based on there own life experiences.  In this situation, precise communication has broken down.Differences in size, shape, and material should not contribute to the functionality of a class.  We can all conceptualize the concept of a “chair”.  However, as Wells has illustrated, the exact material idea of that ‘chair” can and will vary from one individual to another.  To remedy this situation, if the “epitome of a chair” is defined and described in detail - both literally and graphically - then there can be no mistaking what the precise definition of the object is.  In the past, many taxonomy developers have ignored the requirement to precisely define concepts.  Many existing heritage taxonomies rely solely on the understanding of a stand-alone concept name – a concept name without an explicit and precise definition.  The trick to defining an explicit class concept is to both graphically and literally identify a particular instance of an object as the prototypical example of that class.  Our intent in this research effort is ultimately to develop explicit and definitive class concepts for all categories.  The definitions have been developed based on an ordered vocabulary to reduce the potential for future linguistic confusion.  Further to insure full understanding and recognition of concepts, when ever possible, class definitions will be accompanied by an illustration or photographic image of a prototypical example of the category.   Later in this project, we will expand the definition understandability to include definitions developed based on a first-order predicate calculus – a recently developed set of languages for knowledge representation. In this way, definitions will then be readily understandable in the computer environment - not just parsable in the computer environment.Several knowledge representation languages are currently available; i.e. DARPA’s Knowledge Representation Specification Language (KRSL), University of Maryland’s Knowledge [9] Query and Manipulation Language (KQML), and Stanford University’s [10] Knowledge Interchange Format (KIF).  However, none of these machine understandable languages/interchange formats are in exclusive wide-spread use.   Because we do not want to be guilty of making a choice similar to the BetaMAX versus VHS dilemma in the video recording industry, we have delayed the decision on which language to use.  Hopefully, in the near future one of the currently available knowledge representation languages will become a wide-spread and accepted standard.3.6  Formulated in a Single Language.  Multi-linguistics adds a major complication to taxonomy development.  Direct translation of concept names from one language to another introduces a significant difficulty into the development process.  First, to be successful at translating explicit concepts into another language, an intimate knowledge of both languages is required.  Even with an intimate knowledge of both languages it is often difficult to arrive at an exact translation of terms.  The subtle differences in meaning and fine distinctions that must be determined during the translation process make this process difficult.  To make matters worse, the same problems arise when attempting to develop an ontological structure that spans dialects of a single language.  After a detailed analysis of both non-technical and technical terminology in the Oxford and Webster’s dictionaries, significant differences have been found in word meaning.  If it is difficult, often times impossible to agree on word definitions between dialects, then the situation will be exacerbated when attempting the same processes between different languages.  For this reason, we have restricted our taxonomy development efforts to the Webster’s version of the English language.  And, this will not totally eliminated the problem of precise word definition since, in the United States there are major regional differences in word meaning. 4.  MethodologyOver the last 10 years, numerous academic and governmental scientific organizations have advocated the development of broad-based ontological structures to describe major knowledge domains.  However, because of the daunting size of such tasks, outside the information technology discipline, there have been only limited attempts at the development of such knowledge bases.  Under the auspices of the University Consortium for Geographic Information Systems (UCGIS), Mark, et al [11] has proposed as a research priority the development of an exhaustive ontology of the geospatial domain.  This ontological structure would precisely “define geographic objects, fields, spatial relations, processes, and their categories.  It would be accompanied by translation algorithms, mapping the ontology into the basic data models and representations necessary for scientific computing about geographic phenomena.”At first glance, a project of this magnitude might seem to be not only an overly ambitious venture, but also an insurmountable task.  However, as Mark goes on to say, a task of this sort must be performed incrementally and by a number of different research teams all working in concert toward a common goal.  In our research effort, we have taken on only a portion of the overall task identified as a UCGIS research priority.  Before a complete ontology of the entire geospatial domain can be created, a detailed ontological knowledge base must be developed that systematically identifies all the physical (and non-physical) objects that comprise the geospatial domain.  The taxonomic structure developed in this research effort is a first attempt at this task.The basic tenet in this research has been that there exists an abundance of domain-specific English language taxonomic structures that describe some portion of the objects in the geospatial domain.  An assumption has also been made that these heritage taxonomies were designed and developed by subject matter experts.  Based on this assumption, each heritage taxonomic structure would constitute an authoritative assemblage of defined objects within that domain.  Therefore, if enough heritage taxonomic structures could be located, taxonomic structures that would provide “coverage” of concepts across the entire gamut of the visual domain, then the union of these heritage taxonomies would serve as the basis for a broad-based taxonomy of the visual domain.  After significant research, 151 different English language heritage taxonomic structures have been identified.  These range from formal ontological domain studies to taxonomic structures developed for purely information technology purposes.The initial attempt to combine these heritage structures into a single unified and logical taxonomy failed.  In this initial attempt, all concepts for all 151 heritage taxonomies were merged into a single data file without any preprocessing.  The result was a data file containing 30,000 concepts in no logical order. The second attempt at combining these 151 heritage taxonomies involved a five phase process that limited the total number of newly introduced concepts that would be incrementally added to the finished structure.  As each new increment of features was added, these new concepts were logically merged into the new data structure and the entire data structure was logically re-sorted to accommodate the additional concepts.  To perform these incremental additions of new concepts, the following five-phase process was performed:   Top-level Assignment of Heritage Feature ClassesHierarchical Sorting Synonym ControlDefinition DevelopmentRelationship DefinitionPhase 1, Top-level Assignment of Heritage Feature Classes involved the assignment of approximate hierarchical classification designations to each concept within all heritage taxonomies.  After all concepts of each heritage taxonomic structure were assigned an approximate hierarchical classification designation, then each heritage taxonomy was merged into the VOT.  At the point where approximately 1000 new heritage classes had been added to the VOT taxonomy, then Phase 2 processing was performed.Phase 2 - Hierarchical Sorting involved individually within each top-level class arranging all subordinate categories into a preliminary logical sequence.  This process of rearranging each individual top-level class hierarchy was performed iteratively after the introduction of each set of 1000 new heritage classes.  When building a hierarchical structure, all terms must be arranged based on a BT-NT, or “broader term/narrower term”, relationship.  The advantage of this approach is that users can better understand this arrangement, and as a consequence, are able to more efficiently navigate through the structure.  By performing this BT-NT sort incrementally, there was less confusion then what was encountered in the failed first attempt. Phase 3 - Synonym Control.  Because multiple, often overlapping ontological structures were used in the development of the VOT, it is only natural that duplicate concepts would be present.  For the same reason synonymous concepts – same meaning with different names – would be present   Also, for the same reason partial synonyms are also present.  Partial synonyms are ambiguous concepts that have an overlapping meaning; i.e. the term “river/stream” and the term “river”.  For each of these situations, a decision must be made as to whether two distinct concepts exist or if the two terms are in fact completely synonymous.  Phase 4 - Definition Development involved the formal adoption of a definitive definition for each final concept.  This process is ongoing. Most of the definition protocols used in the SEDRISTM Environmental Data Coding Specification (EDCS) [12] have been adopted for use in the VOT.  In fact, the basic starting definition set was and remains the most recent version of the EDCS concept definitions.  After all concepts have been assigned a final English language definition, as was mentioned earlier, each English language definitions will be translated into a machine-understandable form.  This last step will involve the use of a knowledge representation language based on first-order predicate calculus.Phase 5 - Relationship Definition.  The last phase in the formal taxonomy development process is to define the taxonomic relationships between each concept and other concepts within the taxonomy.  Besides the identification of synonyms, homonyms and derivatives, 5.  The Data StructureHierarchies are the most ubiquitous organization structure used for taxonomies. The hierarchical structure is also intuitive to users, and provides a means to show the relationships among content items according to their specificity or generality.  The hierarchical structure allows the implicit definition of a set of scaled concept categories based on observation distance from the object.   For instance, while flying in a high altitude aircraft it is often possible to see an area of distinctly industrial use.  It may not be possible to identify particular characteristics about that industrial operation.  However, as one moves closer more characteristics become discernable.  Based on the configuration of buildings and some knowledge of the terrain, a more detailed definition of the primary function of the industrial operation reveals that it is a mining operation.  As one moves even closer, building configuration will reveal the exact nature of the mining operation as, for instance a copper mine.  Imbedding this scaled specificity/generality relationship implicitly within the hierarchical structure, duplicates the same principle that is currently used in image generators to instance features – the closer the observer is to an object, the higher the level of detail and the more knowledge about the exact nature of the object is revealed.  The hierarchal structure of the VOT attempts to preserve this scaled specificity/generality relationship.The current version of the VOT is stored as a relational database using Microsoft Access.  Figure 1.1 shows the ultimate structure of the VOT data set.  Individual data bases have been developed for each heritage taxonomic structure used in the project.  The relationship of each record in these heritage taxonomic structures has been preserved for later use in developing “lossless” import routines.  For those heritage taxonomic structures that contain definitions, theses definitions are used as a starting point in developing VOT compliant definitions.  Because the master VOT database was developed from multiple and disparate data structures, the master database contains extensive duplicate concept records.  To remedy this situation, Access query capabilities are used to automatically extract and reformat data into several different final formats.  A VOT Class description document is a formal database description document that identifies and defines each class in the taxonomy.  Three formal object models will also be extracted and reformatted to be used in ArcGIS© produced by Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI), in TerraVista© software developed by Terrex Inc., and in the Creator Terrain Studio (CTS) software developed by MultiGen Paradigm, Inc.The 3-D model library contains individual 3-D model files for over 1500 different objects/concept, all in standard OpenFlightTM format.  There is also a separate directory that contains several thousand different texture maps, all in Silicon Graphics (SGI) image format (in either .rgb, .rgba, .int, or .inta format.) 6.  Future DevelopmentsBased on future user feedback and through review by subject matter experts, we will be refining the current data structure over the next two years.  We hope to expand the current taxonomy to include more concepts from other heritage ontological and taxonomic structures – heritage data structures that were not included in this initial version of the taxonomy.  At the same time, we will continue the expansion of the model library, eventually to provide representative 3-D models for a significant number of the VOT feature categories.  In the real-time simulation environment the more 3-D models that are available, the more variety, detail, and specificity will become possible in future simulation display systems.Another major undertaking that will take place over the next two years is the transfer of the VOT concept base and their associated definitions into the SEDRISTM EDCS system [13].  An initial submission to SEDRIS was performed to validate the feasibility of exporting non-duplicated VOT concepts into a form suitable for submission into future revisions of the EDCS.  This is a feasible option and will be exercised over the next two years.One of the by-products that have resulted from the development of the VOT data structure is a set of cross-reference tables of heritage feature classes to VOT feature classes.  Using these cross-reference tables, it will be relatively simple to produce a software suite that will allow lossless import of various supported source data formats.  In a cooperative development effort with several software vendors, this lossless data import software will be developed.We are currently exploring the feasibility of adding additional levels of detail into the VOT by adding two or even four decimal places to the hierarchy.  This would allow the expansion of the system to include many common additional objects that would be encountered – objects currently outside the scope of this research.  This could allow the future expansion of the VOT to encompass common object at a  much higher level of granularity than it currently provides 7.  ConclusionThere currently exists on the Internet ( HYPERLINK "http://vissim.uwf.edu/" http://vissim.uwf.edu/) the initial version of the Visual Object Model (VOT) and its accompanying 3-D model library.  Currently, the VOT contains over 7000 feature classes that provide unambiguous feature categories of objects below the Earth’s surface, on the Earth’s surface, in the atmosphere, and in space.   Additionally, at the same URL, the current version of the public-domain, VOT 3-D generic model library is also available for download.  Currently this model library contains an assortment of over 1,500 3-D models that are associated with categories in the current taxonomy.The VOT is intended as a data structure that will be the basis for unprecedented interoperability within geographic information science discipline, the cartographic production environment, and future modeling and simulation efforts.  Because the VOT significantly expands the potential for detailed inventorying and storing of geographic objects on, above, and below natural and cultural landscapes, any discipline that is involved in the mapping of any form of geographic phenomenon could profit from its existence.  Automated mapping capabilities of the future, will have the ability to discern, capture and store positional and attribute information of a much wider variety of features than is currently available.  The VOT data structure is intended to serve as the data structure to make the storage of this expanded data possible.  In the M&S discipline, as in the past, we can expect that customer demands for higher detail will continue to direct the future development of processing and display capabilities.  The VOT data structure in consort with future expanded versions of the 3-D model library will encourage the improvement of image generation (IG) capabilities by allowing the storage and display of more detailed feature information.  Every simulation site will have access to the same model library- therefore correlated visual displays in High-Level Architecture (HLA) and Distributed Interactive Simulations (DIS) environments will be enhanced.8.  AcknowledgementsA significant portion of this research effort has been funded by and performed under the U.S. Air Force’s Special Operations Force (SOF) Aircrew Training and Rehearsal Support (ATARS) program.  Without the understanding, tolerance, and cooperation of the command and staff at the 19th Special Operations Squadron, SOFPREP, and USSOCOM this research would not have been possible. Ongoing development of the expanded feature classification taxonomy and the 3-D modeling effort has been made possible by a generous grant from the National Geospatial Intelligence Agency’s (NGA) University Research Initiative (NURI) program. 9.  References[1]  Bitters, B. (2002). Feature Classification System and Associated 3-Dimensional Model Libraries for Synthetic Environments of the Future.  Proceedings of the I/ITSEC 2002 Conference. Orlando, Florida.[2] Wittgenstein, L. (1922). Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. Routledge: New York.[3]  Heidegger, M. (1962) Being and Time. Harper: San Francisco.[4] Foucault, M.. (1970). The Order of Things: An Archeology of the Human Sciences. Pantheon Books: New York.[5] Hay, I. (Ed.), (2000). Qualitative Research Methods In Human Geography. Oxford University Press: Melbourne.[6]  Golledge, R. G. (2002). The nature of geographic knowledge. Annals of the Association of American.  Geographers, 92:1-14.[7]  Tolk, A. (2004).  Moving towards a Lingua Franca for M&S and C3I – Developments concerning the C2IEDM.  Proceedings of the SISO 2004 European Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW).  Edinburgh, Scotland.[8]  Wells, H. G. (1908). First and Last Things. London.[9]  Finin, T.; Fritzson, R., McKay, D., and McEntire, R. (1994) The Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM'94), ACM Press.[10] Genesereth, M. R.  (1998) Knowledge Interchange Format (KIF), draft proposed American National Standard (dpANS), NCITC.T2/98-004.  [11]  Mark, D., Egenhofer, M., Hirtle, S., and Smith, B.  (2002).  UCGIS Emerging Research Theme: Ontological Foundations for Geographic Information Science. [12] SEDRIS (2004) Environmental Data Coding Specification (EDCS).   HYPERLINK "http://www.sedris.org/" http://www.sedris.org/ [13] ISO/IEC (2002). JTC 1/SC 24/ WG 8:  HYPERLINK "http://www.sedris.org" http://www.sedris.org Author BiographyBARRY BITTERS has worked for the last 11 years in industry as a senior software engineer in support of real-time simulation efforts.  He is now on the faculty of the Environmental Studies Department, University of West Florida as a Senior Research Scientist. In this capacity, he teaches and also serves as the Principal Investigator for a U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) research grant concerning the development of a feature taxonomy and virtual object models for future simulation and mapping systems. He is a retired Army Warrant Officer with a mapping, computer science, and military intelligence background.  He has a Masters degree in geography and recently completing a Ph.D. program at Florida State University where his primary research topic was geographic information and remote sensing technologies as they apply to real-time simulation. PAGE   EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1.1  A schematic of the Visual Object Taxonomy (VOT) Microsoft AccessTM database .structure.