		MSDL Study Group Meeting Minutes		Euro 2005 SIW – Toulouse, France				29 June 2005Welcome & AgendaLTC John Surdu, Study Group Chair welcomed everyone and explained the meeting agenda. This is the third meeting of the Study Group. The main meeting objective is to deliver the documents that are committed by the SG: Interim Report and the Table of Contents of the Final Report. Other objectives to accomplish are: reviewing the action items status, continuing the planning for Fall 05 SIW, continuing defining the products for PDG. DiscussionsDr. Robert Wittman gave the MSDL Overview to the audiences. There were questions about the MSDL schema:Q&A: Is MSDL application independent? YesQ&A: Does MSDL schema focus on entity level simulation?MSDL includes platform level attribution; however, OOS’s import capability relies heavily on the unit level attribution.MSDL is using the US military standards such as 2525B, not NATO.Q&A: Question was raised about other business rules (unit, etc.), metadata, who creates these data?There are several programs that are collaborating MSDL such as MATREX, COMBAT XXI, etc.. The Study Group would like to work with international programs.Q&A: Does MSDL schema include time ordered events?It is included under Plan & COA schemaMSDL SG is working with tasking language with C-BML in order to have a single grammar and to de-conflict MSDL & C-BMLLTC Surdu presented the Interim Report.No participation of Navy at this time. Received point of contact for Navy in relating to scenario generation, Roy Scrudder.Another meeting will be setup prior to Fall 05 SIW, on August 3, 2005 at George Mason University in VA.Next meeting will be coordinated with C-BML and invitation will be sent.Status of the action items that were generated from previous meeting was discussed.Version 1.0 focuses on NATO and LandBegin working with tasking grammar with C-BML to identify the points of commonality and uniqueness.Q&A: Will initial schema include threat? Yes, but it is up the receiving application to execute that task.Q&A: How far down is the aggregation level? MSDL goes to the individual soldier or platform level. OOS, does not utilize all of the entity level information at this time.OneSAF is considering entity placement in buildings and could allow receiving applications to determine what happens to the entity when imported.Use of the 2525B standard for unambiguous enumeration and allow, “Walk up the hierarchy”, but it caused concern that in some cases (i.e. Osprey) will not support the hierarchy walk. The solution is to maintain the schema separate from the enumerations; but the risk of each application creates its own set of enumeration and can lead to creation of “Tower of Babble”.The MSDL SG process was reviewedNo comments received on the initial review. Would like to incorporate WebRT when the MSDL web site is available. This will allows member to create requests that will be evaluated and implemented using the currently OneSAF process.Q&A: How will comments dispositioned? Face-to-face meeting? Voting? During the Study Group phase, desire is to use the SISO webboard to disposition the comments electronically, unless a consensus cannot be reached, other methods will be used.Q&A: What are the products resulting from the SG besides the schema? Rules, etc.?The interim report (provided at Euro-SIW), a final report due at the Fall SIW.  Major accomplishments to be reported include the creation of a MSDL specification review process, a MSDL specification form, and a MSDL domain interest spreadsheet.  Q&A: How will balloting occur?The MSDL proposed MSDL definition spreadsheetUse the MSDL – MATREX survey worksheet.Q&A: What is the significance of the Grey Columns? Should add a column for rationale for submission? Also add dependency column?Definition of Core, Common and Custom was discussed. Roy Scrudder and Chris Black will provide the examples.The proposed outline of the Final Report was presented to the audiences for inputs and consensus.Q&A: Why does the ‘Definitions’ appear twice in the Outline? One is the SISO definition, other is MSDL related.Follow up meeting is set for the afternoon, 3 August 2005.CONCLUSION from Major Kevin Galvin, Vice Chair:Need for participants to understand that initial report starting point is US. However, the final will reflect an evolution toward NATO standards. Will being to identify the guiding international standards.Action ItemsNo.ActionsOwnerStatus1Create slide to show the C-BML, Common and MSDL. Working with tasking grammar with C-BML to identify points of commonality and uniquenessRob WittmanIn Progress2Define phases and task packages for FY06 & F07 – update the process documents (presentation & final report) to show FY07Rob WittmanCompleted with PPT. Still need to update the Final report Word document3Contact SISO to setup the MSDL web page. NOTE: SISO was contacted again, but the web page cannot be setup yet until SISO administrator completed the training and given the permission to make live changes to the WebBoard. No date was given; SG documents are continuingly posted via reflector.Rob WittmanIn Progress4Contact Katherine Morse about the replacement for Dave Perme, Technical Activity Director. Meantime, James Montgomery is the backup TAD.Doug ParsonsTAD designation pending SAC decision.5Coordinate the next SG meeting. Meeting to be held at the back end of the C-BML meeting on August 3 at the George Mason University, VA. Information and invitation to be sent out to membersWendy LamCompleted6Consider keeping MSDL schema separate from enumerations on entity and unit types. Also verify if XML does go down to the entity level and only OOS interprets at the unit level. May have problem with hierarchical decomposition of units and entities. Have to resolve multiple inheritances.Rob WittmanIncluded as specification comment.7Look at SIMCI 2002 OIPT website for definitions of core, common, and custom. Chris Black and Roy Scrudder provide information.Add the definitions into the spreadsheetRob WittmanComplete8Consider using description and definition in spreadsheet vice multiple uses of definition.Rob WittmanIncluded as Spreadsheet comment.9Cross link MSDL SISO website with BMLs.Rob WittmanIn-progress: Pending SIW access to Web functions10Continue developing process scheduleRob WittmanIn-process11 Contact James Montgomery for the latest product formatWendy LamCompleted12Contact James Montgomery for the latest Study Group report formatWendy LamCompleted13Advertise for more international flavor (App 6 Alpha international standard)Rob WittmanNot Started14Identify international guiding standards as an activity and product within final report.Rob WittmanNot Started15Discuss with Farid Mahmingani in reference to TCRS. Call at our convenience.Rob WittmanNot Started