DRAFT ToR for the HPRP SGName of proponent(s) and contact information (in alphabetical order):Randy Saunders	R.Saunders@ieee.orgJohns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Lab11100 Johns Hopkins RoadLaurel, MD 20723PHONE:  +1-443-778-3861FAX:  +1-443-778-5910The following individuals have volunteered to participate in the SG.  Additional volunteers will be solicited at all meetings, and anyone is welcome to participate.NameeMailOrganizationRandy SaundersR.Saunders@ieee.orgJHU/APL (edu)Steve Boswellsboswell@bbn.comBBN (ind)Doug FlournoyRFLOURNO@mitre.orgMitre (gov)Bill Helfinstinebill.helfinstine@lmco.comLockheed Martin (ind)Katherine MorseKATHERINE.L.MORSE@saic.comDMSO/SAIC (gov)Trevor Pearcepearce@sce.carlton.caCarlton (edu)Keith Snivelyksnively@d-a-s.comDAS (ind)Ben Watrousbwatrous@mak.comMÄK (ind)Roger Wuerfelrwuerfel@dctd.saic.comSAIC (ind)Standing:Recommendation of the HLA Performance Workshop.  Presented at Spring 2005 SIW, and accepted by the CFI Forum.  This submission is to review the ToR and charter the Study Group for a kickoff at the Fall 2005 SIW.Rationale:We propose to establish the HLA Performance Recommended Practice (HPRP) Study Group (SG) to conduct an investigation on the best practices for maximizing High Level Architecture (HLA) performance.  The issues associated with performance, and performance optimization, have been discussed in numerous SIW papers without the emergence of a widely shared body of knowledge.  The purpose of establishing the HPRP SG is to examine how these best practices could be collected and made more available to the community.  Among the alternatives are: 1) a SISO balloted Recommended Practice; 2) an interactive web product, probably in the form of Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ); 3) an overlay to the FEDEP, analogous to the recently completed V&V overlay.  The HPRP Study Group shall commence on the date of the SISO Standards Activity Committee (SAC) approval.Tasks:The Study Group shall execute the following tasking:Research the best practices of performance in the HLA community: Complete the bibliography of performance papers developed for the HLA Performance Workshop.Identify key stakeholders (organizations and companies).Perform analysis and prepare a draft set of recommendations to define the scope of the eventual product.Evaluate the most appropriate product to bring the best practices to the HLA community.Products:Products resulting from the establishment and execution of the Study Group shall include:Kickoff meeting at Fall SIW 2005Interim Progress Reports Spring SIW 2006, Euro-SIW 2006 and Fall SIW 2006.Table of Contents for Final Report (Due Spring 2006)Final Report of Study Group (Due Fall 2006), including:Description of the appropriate best practices.Description and analysis of issues and proposed alternative solutions to disseminate the recommended practices.Recommendation for changes to the HLA (Evolved).Recommendation to SISO on the topics and issues described in this ToR, and (if appropriate) an accompanying Standards Nomination.Performance Period:The Study Group shall formally begin work on the date of SAC approval, presumably between the Spring SIW 2005 and the Fall SIW 2005.Kickoff meeting at the Fall SIW 2005.Completion at the Fall SIW 2006.Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO)Terms of Reference (TOR) for the SISO Study Group (SG) on:HLA Performance Recommended Practice (HPRP)SISO SG TOR HPRP, 2005-002-16	Page  PAGE 1 of  NUMPAGES 2