MSDL Study Group Meeting #5 MinutesFall SIW, Orlando, FL22 Sept. 2005Welcome & AgendaKevin Galvin, MSDL Co-Chair welcomed everyone and explained the meeting agenda. This is the fifth and final meeting of the Study Group. The meeting’s objectives were threefold: to present MSDL-related MSDL simulation initialization work, to summarize the status of the study group and the products developed to date, and to discuss the transition to a Product Development Group and set the next meeting date. DiscussionsThree MSDL-related presentations were given. Initialization of Distributed Simulations: A Better Way (05F-SIW-073) presented by Dave Prochnow.MSDL’s Relationship to Exercise Management – invited presentation – presented by Jeff Abbott.A C2IEDM Based Approach to C4I and Simulation Initialization and Synchronization (05F-SIW-068) presented by Bruce Carlton.Product Nomination StatusJames Montgomery briefly discussed SAC comments on the MSDL product nomination.  The SAC commended both the MSDL and C-BML study groups for provided concise summary briefings of their activities.  In order to ensure consistency the SAC will not decide on the Product Nominations of either group until the final reports of both groups have been delivered to the SAC.  The final MSDL report is expected to be submitted during the first week of Oct. pending final editorial comments from MSDL Co-Chair Kevin Galvin and the inclusion of the final meeting minutes, Status of Study Group Products:  The study group generated five baselined products.Review ProcessDefinition ListDomain Spreadsheet MSDL Specification Comment FormMSDL Specification Version .01Next StepsThe Study Group is expecting to transition to a Product Development Group and hold the kickoff meeting at I/ITSEC.  I/ITSEC is scheduled for Nov. 28 – Dec. 1, 2005 at the Orange County Conventions Center, Orlando, FL. HomeworkRevise MSDL Spec evolution schedule to account for PDG kickoff at I/ITSEC and the follow on maturation and balloting process. (Co-Chairs)Update MSDL Spec to include Electronic Order of Battle Information, explicit bidirectional traceability of tasks to units, MSDL work-flow segmenting information, MATREX Attack Guidance Matrix information, and entity and unit strength information. (Co-Chairs)Review Posted Information (Community)Establish PDG Executive Council (Co-Chairs)Call for PDG Membership (Co-Chairs)Develop agenda for PDG Kickoff meeting (Co-Chairs)Reserve Room at I/ITSEC (Co-Chairs)Complete Final Report and send to Jim Montgomery by 10/3/05. (Co-Chairs)Post Minutes of Sept 22 meeting (Co-Chairs)Post Jeff Abbott’s briefing (Co-Chairs) 