Walking with Orcs and Demons: Learning from the Success of Commercial Video GamesRyan P.Z. BruntonDavid L. DrakeJustin BuschScience Applications International Corporation10260 Campus Point DriveSan Diego, CA 92121858-826-6872bruntonr@saic.com, drakedavid@saic.com, jbusch@saic.comKeywords:Simulation, Video GamesABSTRACT: Stunning technical achievement, intense stories, and massively multi-player worlds have all contributed to the success of the modern video games industry, with 2004 revenues topping $10 billion. These games require the development of strategic evaluation skills, fast reflexes, and team communication, and their infrastructures support complex physics, near-photo-realistic graphics, and networked worlds with more than a million active participants. Looking to the future of military modeling and simulation, this paper will discuss what lessons we can learn and apply from commercial game developers, from non-linear story development to massively multi-player network infrastructures; lessons that will be critical in developing simulations for a generation of fighting men and women who have grown up expecting this level of performance from interactive software.IntroductionCommercial games have had a profound and undeniable effect on modern culture, an effect that cannot be ignored within the military Modeling and Simulation (M&S) community [1]. Men and women entering the armed forces today have all been exposed to commercial video games designed to engage them in compelling virtual worlds through intense graphics, detailed stories, and complex strategy. In order to reach this next generation of soldiers, sailors, and pilots, the M&S community must learn from the commercial gaming world and apply the lessons learned over the past three decades of gaming innovation.This paper focuses on three areas in which lessons from the commercial game development community can best be utilized by the M&S community: design paradigms, training, and development techniques. In section two we analyze the high priorities placed upon such areas as art work, story design, and planned emotional response present in commercial games, and how such design decisions affect product usability. In section three we focus on those aspects of game design that keep players actively engaged and learning, and look at how they can be applied in the area of simulation-based training. In section four we present tools and techniques used extensively in game design that could be utilized to facilitate future M&S development to make it more accessible. We also examine work currently being done within the M&S Research and Development (R&D) community to apply these techniques and tools, most notably focusing on ongoing work at the University of Southern California Institute for Creative Technologies.  Our final section presents our conclusions regarding the future overlap between commercial gaming and military M&S.Issues With the Current Military Simulation Design ParadigmThere are several areas in which the military M&S community’s practices lag behind those adopted by the commercial gaming industry, some of which are due to economies of scale, and some of which are due to suspicions that games represent an immature or unrealistic approach to the simulation domain.Allocation of ResourcesSuccessful commercial video game engines can be expensive to build – a June 17, 2005 report by MSNBC reporter Tom Loftus placed the average development cost of a new game for the PlayStation 2 or Xbox consoles at $5 million to $7 million, with some development budgets reaching the $30 million range [2].  By contrast, numerous DoD simulation programs will spend $40-50 million in 2005 alone [3].  Many of those programs run over the course of several years, meaning that the total cost of a military simulation can be 10-20 times higher than a commercial video game. Additionally, the prioritization of resources is quite different, with commercial game developers allocating substantially larger percentages of their budgets towards development of high-quality graphics, music and sound effects, and mass marketing whereas government simulation efforts place a higher priority on achieving realistic physical and behavioral models and meeting government documentation requirements.  Because of these discrepancies between the two business models it is difficult to compare relative costs in a meaningful fashion, though both are within the same general cost range.Attempts have been made to rationalize costs in the modeling and simulation world – OneSAF was created to be a single platform for generic force-on-force simulation “to meet a broad spectrum of simulation needs across multiple modeling and simulation domains” [4]. While this helps reduce the cost of developing simulations, by creating a common rule engine, OneSAF still leaves substantial rendering tasks in the hands of simulation developers.  REF _Ref519865180 \h Figure 1 and  REF _Ref519865195 \h Figure 2 show two different simulations both based on the same underlying OneSAF platform, but employing completely different graphics engines. The lower-resolution graphic comes from a mapping project done by NIST; the higher-resolution graphic from a project done at the University of Southern California’s Institute for Creative Technologies.  Figure 1 reflects a project where only minimal resources were allocated to rendering graphical content [18], while figure 2 reflects the allocation of additional resources to integrate existing gaming tools and provide a higher-quality visual experience [19].  It is important to note that the ICT project did not require the development of an entire graphical system including modeling language, rendering engine, and time for artists to create visuals with the new tools, but rather was able to leverage existing engines and models to provide the heightened realism on display.Within the game development world, rule engines such as that deployed for OneSAF are often integrated with rendering engines, and the task of preparing specific visual elements offloaded to specialized graphics tools such as Maya or 3D Studio. Adopting greater standardization of implementations for larger sections of games has allowed game developers to focus on advancing the state of the art in more narrow specializations, such as artificial intelligence or object-unique physics. Equally importantly, the reuse of rendering engines allows greater allocation of resources towards the development of more immersive audiovisual content. As the disparate OneSAF renderings indicate, this push towards maximizing reuse of standard implementations could go considerably further in the military simulation domain.Figure  SEQ "Figure" \*Arabic 1: NIST Implementation of OneSAFFigure  SEQ "Figure" \*Arabic 2: ICT implementations of OneSAFCreation of Art WorkIn the government modeling and simulation business, there is a concentrated focus on achieving the most realistic simulation of the behaviors of individuals or forces. Resource constraints relegate the development of artwork and sophisticated graphics to lower priorities in the simulation development lifecycle.In contrast, commercial video games are developed with a high priority placed not only on realistic behavior modeling, but also on high-quality graphics and art.  REF _Ref519866029 \h Figure 3 and  REF _Ref519866036 \h Figure 4 illustrates the contrast between the JSAF simulation for tank warfare [20], and Codename: Panzers, a commercial tank simulation [21];  REF _Ref519866127 \h Figure 5  and  REF _Ref519866141 \h Figure 6 contrasts the graphical capabilities of a simulation prepared for Marine fire team training as part of the DVTE program  [22] with similar training from Close Combat [23].Figure  SEQ "Figure" \*Arabic 3: JSAF Screen ImageFigure  SEQ "Figure" \*Arabic 4: Codename: Panzers Screen ImageFigure  SEQ "Figure" \*Arabic 5:DVTE Screen ImageFigure  SEQ "Figure" \*Arabic 6: Close Combat: First to Fight Screen ImageThe Big Question: Is the Goal to Replicate Life or Inculcate Skills?The military M&S community has not achieved a consensus on the relative importance of the various dimensions of simulation quality. Writing in a report prepared for the Naval Education and Training Command, McLean and Riddick (2004) defined three separate metrics for simulation quality: fidelity, interactivity, and immersion [5]. Fidelity, “the accuracy of PC simulation object representation when compared to the real world,” is held by these authors to correspond to increasing physical realism, and is constrained in their model as a tradeoff between cost or bandwidth and ever-greater frame rates, pixel counts, or other measures of correspondence with the real world. Interactivity is placed on a scale of increasing replication of real-world tasks, ranging from “hierarchical interactivity,” defined as “navigat[ion] through … domain-knowledge representations” via menus, hyperlinked text, and other non-physical-world objects, to “simulation control interactivity,” defined as “the ability to simulate several aspects of the real world in a realistic and highly representative way.” Immersion is measured by the ability of a game to require “complete attention, intense mental effort, absorbed, or engrossed.”While we have noted that graphical content is important to the development of successful commercial simulations, and McLean and Riddick draw a correlation between fidelity and immersiveness, it is far from clear that graphical improvements translate directly into improvements in immersiveness. Speaking at a Microsoft-sponsored forum on the role of gaming in education, industry veteran Howard Philips noted [7] that “Gamers play games in order to experience a sense of mastery … People will accept lower graphic quality if the game control and quality of game play are high.” In a similar vein, rather than identifying technical achievements as drivers of game acceptance in learning, Shaffer et al. [6] determine the effectiveness of gaming in the way in which users are pulled into existing as a fictional character: “Games bring together ways of knowing, ways of doing, ways of being, and ways of caring: the situated understandings, effective social practices, powerful identities, and shared values that make someone an expert.” These considerations, regarding the development of meaningful personas as opposed to hyper-realism, reflect the importance of what we will label emotional impact. In order to achieve emotional impact, it is not enough to achieve immersiveness through high fidelity – a player must come to accept a personal stake in the desired game outcome, whether through the successful accomplishment of a reconnaissance mission or the absorption of facts and skills needed to perform in a workplace.A personal stake is most obvious when the survival of an avatar or the well-being of a community is placed at stake. The attractiveness of earning survival in combat situations is obvious enough, but the discipline of bringing a team through danger can produce much the same emotional impact. Shaffer et al. cite the Full Spectrum Warrior manual like so: “The Instruction Manual that comes with the game makes it clear from the outset that players must take on the values, identities, and ways of thinking of a professional soldier to play the game successfully: ‘Everything about your squad,’ the manual explains, ‘is the result of careful planning and years of experience on the battlefield. Respect that experience, soldier, since it’s what will keep your soldiers alive.’”Emotional impact from communal interaction can transfer to real-life activities as well. Writing about the interactions of gamers outside of game-internal communities, Shaffer et al. observe that: “Classroom work rarely has an impact outside of the classroom; its only real audience is the teacher. Game players, in contrast, develop reputations in online communities, cultivate audiences as writers through discussion forums, and occasionally even take up careers as professional gamers, traders of online commodities, or game modders and designers.” Enhanced social status and job opportunities in the real world serve as incentives to acquire skills from games, by creating a persistent community not present in present-day military simulations, and making the skills valuable to that community, as well as to the player.In a 2003 paper, Squire demonstrated that emotional impact can be achieved without any one-to-one relationship between a player and an onscreen avatar, through experiments performed by integrating the historical simulation Civilization III into the social studies curriculum at an elementary school in a disadvantaged neighborhood [8]. Squire and Jenkins describe the results as follows: “Several minority students were totally uninterested in playing the game until they realized that it was possible to win playing as an African or Native American civilization. These kids took great joy in studying hypothetical history, exploring the conditions under which colonial conquests might have played out differently. What if smallpox disease hadn’t wiped out millions of Native Americans? What if they had resisted the first wave of European settlers rather than embracing them? [9]” As this result shows, emotional impact does not necessarily depend on identification with the survival of some individual character, but can come about from other sources, such as player recognition that acquiring skills needed to win the game can be life-altering.As a final note on emotional impact, there is an additional element of game play that is not normally found in military simulations, namely a musical score. Since real-world tasks do not normally involve ongoing background music or sound effects other than those incidentally resulting from the performance of the tasks, military simulations do not normally take advantage of the emotional effects that music can inspire. However, music serves purposes in gaming beyond mere entertainment – it also can be used to emphasize specific emotional reactions at appropriate times, and to deemphasize the game’s defects relative to reality. Without musical scores, players might be more inclined to focus on jagged lines, impossibly smooth facial features, and other distortions that draw attention to the limitations of the graphical environment. Musical scores heighten the sense of drama and urgency associated with game-world tasks at precisely those moments when it is most important not to be distracted from the goal of knowledge transfer.TrainingCurrent approaches to training with simulations and games often take one of two approaches. The first uses the simulation as an after-thought to traditional teaching techniques. The student is first presented with classroom or computer-based instructional content, including any quizzes or tests. They are then presented with a simulation where they can apply the lessons learned by rote, and their results are scored, often by a human instructor. The second approach is to recreate traditional learning content in the form of a game, so called “edutainment” titles. Both scenarios rely heavily on a pedagogical teaching tradition, teaching and testing facts independent of context or experience. While the first technique does provide an additional degree of experiential testing, it is often through a contrived scenario that learners can easily “game,” which is the vernacular for getting through to the end goal with a minimum of effort and learning. In the next section we will examine shortcomings in the traditional schooling method, and how lessons learned from commercial games can be utilized to create more effective training.Strengths and WeaknessesRecent research into successful games has led to the following categorization of good game design, where good means the game will be played extensively over time rather than started and set aside [12]:There are clear, meaningful goalsGoal structures are well definedThere is regular, structured feedbackThere are multiple levels of difficultyThere are random elements of surpriseThere is an over-arching, appealing fantasy scenarioIn contrast, traditional schooling fares poorly [13]. Where good games provide structured goals and the freedom to explore different avenues to achieve those goals, the traditional schoolroom environment gives the student little, if any, control over the direction of the learning experience. The regular, structured feedback required by the open-ended nature of games is replaced by the shallow, vague feedback of the classroom (e.g., percentages, correct / incorrect marks). In games, feedback is constantly occurring, with every user action having some tangible effect on the game world. This is not so in the classroom, where the student is more a passive receptacle for information than an active participant, and feedback is given in response to infrequent questions and tests results.A classical shortcoming of pedagogical teaching methods is that material must be presented at a set pace. Frequently this results in the brightest students losing interest due to lack of challenge, and the slowest students failing to keep up as teachers try to reach the majority. Good games overcome the dual issues of boredom and panic by designing for multiple levels of difficulty. Players who have mastered lower levels are presented with increasingly difficult scenarios as the game progresses. At each new level of play, new aspects of gameplay (e.g., new enemies, different available allies, and added powers) are added, keeping the player engaged and actively problem solving. It is clear that players are in fact actively learning as the game progresses, as they need to master new skills in order to overcome the additional challenges offered by each new level.Finally, there is the issue of the appealing fantasy scenario. This concept can be generalized to say that a well designed game has an internally consistent symbology, rules, and culture. Dr. James Paul Gee [11] uses the term “semiotic domain” to refer to the set of symbols, culture, and context which define a particular role, whether that be a professional role (e.g., soldier or scientist) or a fantastic game role (e.g., orc or elf). He then goes on to posit that active, critical learning can not occur unless one is fluent in the design grammar of that domain. The potential for critical learning is therefore present in the game through an engrossing fantasy setting in a way that is difficult, though not impossible, to reproduce through classical techniques. Ironically, it is often easier for a game player to accept the role of an elven character they see on their monitor than it is for a student to see himself or herself as a scientist or philosopher while sitting in a classroom.LessonsSo, how can these game design techniques be used to improve current, computer-based learning? First, simulations designed for training need to be taking advantage of non-linear scenario development that allows users to explore different potential solution paths. During their exploration, the simulation must keep students focused on an end goal through regular, structured feedback. While some skills are likely to still require rote learning, many are better trained through the development of problem solving skills specific to the semiotic domain being modeled in the simulation. As students develop skills through experience, and some degree of trial and error, they are allowed to move at a pace appropriate to their skill level and understanding of the underlying material. While it is unlikely that most skills can be trained just through well designed simulation scenarios, such scenarios can act as a complement to traditional learning materials and classroom time, replacing the highly linear, instructor led simulations in use today for this purpose.Additionally, scenario design should reflect the basic human need for a compelling story. This compelling back-story has been an integral part of some of the most successful games in the commercial world, games which otherwise didn't distinguish themselves from similar titles. The Warcraft series by Blizzard Entertainment [14] is an excellent example. The original Warcraft titles are classed as Real Time Strategy (RTS) games, providing the player with a top-down view of units and resources that are used to combat human and/or computer opponents. While lacking some of the control mechanisms and complex tactical options of competing titles, the Warcraft games wove a consistent and compelling story line through each game that engrossed players. This led to two successful sequels of the first title, each with expansion sets, a successful Massively Multiplayer Online Roleplaying Game (MMORPG), and an upcoming console title. This lesson can be easily applied to training simulations without resorting to the creation of fantastic worlds. Current scenario development which focuses exclusively on placement and size of opposing forces could be updated to include a narrative explaining the nature of the enemy, the place a mission has in a fictional campaign, or any number of other variables which make the scenario more of a virtual world and less a contrived tool.Finally, training simulations need to be made less predictable. Adaptive AI, changing terrain, and semi-random enemy encounters are all techniques used in commercial games to maintain replay value. These changes are magnified by the availability of different difficulty levels, which allow players to experience the same, or similar, scenarios again with more obstacles to completion (e.g., lower health, stronger enemies, less time, etc.). Making scenarios less predictable does not necessarily make them unsuitable for training that requires scoring and remediation, though it does make such scoring more difficult to normalize across uses. The question that must be asked when examining this concept is: what is being trained and tested? If the answer is a body of knowledge with easily quantifiable parts, then the aforementioned edutainment titles may be adequate to the task. If however the focus is on a body of skills and the student’s ability to synergistically apply them toward achieving some goal, performance metrics may be qualitative enough to allow for the changes recommended here.Opportunities to Integrate Current Gaming Solutions into the Simulation CommunityMany of the existing commercial game titles provide opportunities for military training, virtual battle space, and modeling.Making use of game tools and techniquesThere are two fundamental approaches that can be employed to leveraging game industry tools and development techniques in the short term. First, simulation contractors can engage commercial game developers and attempt to license code from their games to serve as a baseline for development of military applications. Second, simulation builders can make use of existing level editors, modification tools, and development libraries in order to build their own more involved worlds.The game America’s Army illustrates how the first paradigm can work. In its original form, the game was developed by the Naval Postgraduate School’s MOVES Institute as a recruiting tool, based on the Unreal game engine, which was licensed for approximately $300-400k per year [10]. Modification of the game for purely military use involved bringing on a development team of up to 26 people, and ran at a budget of $2.5 million per year for development costs, and $1.5 million per year in operating costs. This was sufficient to bring the game up to commercial quality standards and deploy as a recruiting tool, although it did not include any of the additional course management features that might be desired in use for military training applications. In order to recoup some of these costs, the Army has licensed expansion of the game into commercial console development, and while commercial publisher Ubisoft will manage development, control of the game’s content will remain with the Army [11]. In this approach, it is easy to see how simulation developers might leverage their own abilities to extend their products beyond military deliverables, and make use of more advanced game development platforms, while adding the potential for commercial resale.The second approach is less likely to result in additional resale potential, but can cut development costs significantly. Games like Doom, Unreal, and Rainbow Six offer modification tools, including map and level editors, and the option to import models created through commercial graphics tools such as Maya or 3D Studio. Simulation developers wishing for greater customization can make use of development libraries such as Delta3D in order to have access to the core gaming rules, and rendering pipeline. These tools can be used to rapidly prototype new simulation layouts, although depending on the level of access granted (level editors provide little ability to change game logic), they may provide less customization.The Need to Integrate Between Commercial Games and Military SimulationsConnecting tools like OneSAF and Unreal Engine requires the use of additional integration code, and development of new skills not generally possessed by military simulation developers. For example, in order to integrate OneSAF with Unreal, Prasithsangaree et al. had to go through the following process to bring terrain data into their system: “The OTB, the most current version of the Mod-SAF platform, continues to use the CTDB (compact terrain database) format. We subject this data to a chain of translations through different formats (CTDB->OpenFlight->3DS->UNR) to produce a corresponding terrain in UNR (UT terrain format) [10].” Experience with other common gaming libraries such as clanLib, DirectX, and SDL, will also become critical to integrating games with current simulation engines.Likewise, game developers rarely have experience with standards-compliant M&S technologies such as the HLA and DIS.  Moving from a commercial game engine to something usable within large scale joint simulations would require refactoring the proprietary networking stack and event queues to be compliant with messaging paradigms common in distributed M&S.Work clearly needs to be done to facilitate interoperability.  What form this work takes will depend on the needs of particular simulations and how communication channels between traditional M&S contractors and the commercial game companies develop.  One thing is clear however: current one-size-fits-all, top-down technology mandates are unlikely to meet with the needs of the gaming industry.  By their very nature such technology mandates attempt to meet the needs of a broad range of simulations, and therefore are often less than optimal for specific applications, making them unacceptable in an industry where minute performance advantages can make the difference between a best selling title and the bargain bin.  While formidable, these philosophical differences between the M&S and gaming communities can be overcome through more open dialog and market forces.Future OraclesUntil now this paper has focused on the need to deploy gaming design techniques and development tools and methods to military M&S. While this is not a new idea, we have attempted to focus on specific points that could bring value to M&S and offered suggestions on how such changes could be accomplished. We now change our focus to illuminating several ongoing projects that indicate the manner in which gaming and M&S may begin to merge in the near future.America's ArmyWhile America's Army [15] is not strictly speaking a military simulation in that it is not meant for use internally by military personnel, it's high profile and groundbreaking release demand coverage here. America's Army is the most visible example of the re-purposing of commercial gaming technology for military use. Growing out of work begun in the late 1990s at the Naval Postgraduate School (NPS) in Monterey, America's Army was the result of collaboration between NPS graduate students faculty and staff. Utilizing the Unreal game engine, America's Army leads players through scenarios that model basic and advanced Army training, teaching teamwork and tactics. While no official studies have been done to illustrate its effectiveness, the Army has utilized this game as part of a comprehensive outreach and recruiting effort to current game players, and possibly tomorrow's soldiers. Judging from the game's popularity (5.5 million registered users have put in more than 50 million hours of online game play) the effort seems to be having a positive impact.USC ICTThe Institute for Creative Technologies at the University of Southern California [16] is applying virtual reality and immersive environment technologies to create simulations to train U.S. Army personnel. Their end goal is the creation of an Experience Learning System (ELS) combining state-of-the-art AI, graphics, and sound with the cooperation of the commercial gaming companies and movie studios.Far from an abstract think tank, ICT has produced a number of games and simulators that are currently deployed or will be soon. The OneSAF GUI, a graphical user interface built for OneSAF using a commercial game engine (Figure 1) is an excellent example of the potential to reuse existing investments in M&S while making them more accessible to today's gamers. Other projects released by ICT are Full Spectrum Warrior, developed for military use and released commercially (also voted Best Simulation Game and Best Original Game at the 2003 E3), and the Joint Fires and Effects Trainer System (JFETS), a battlefield training simulation currently deployed at Fort Sill and soon to be installed at forward bases around the world.An additional benefit of the ICT approach, beyond the products themselves, is the positive publicity gained by successful product launches. The JFETS project garnered a multi-page story on ICT and military simulation development in the popular magazine WIRED, and the positive publicity of the E3 awards propelled Full Spectrum Warrior to over a million sales in the first year after release. This latter point could be critical for future M&S efforts to deal with the phenomenal cost of developing state of the arts games and simulations. While the current business model often has the military underwriting the full product development cost, future partnerships may result in parallel commercial game offerings that allow developers to profit from the gaming market and therefore accept some of the development burden themselves.MIT Education ArcadeFinally, the MIT led Education Arcade [17] project is an academic effort to finally answer through empirical studies and experiments the question of how to most effectively convey training through games. Coupled with parallel efforts at the University of Wisconsin, in the United Kingdom, and elsewhere, these programs will help guide future training simulation developers with hard facts and best practices which will greatly increase the effectiveness of their products.ConclusionThe technical future is bright for the use of commercial gaming techniques, and the reuse/repurposing of commercial games, in military simulations. Despite philosophical and technological differences, the gaming and M&S communities have enough common ground to facilitate more collaboration.  As more well-documented, high-performance game design libraries become available and commercial companies offer reasonable licensing terms for their existing engines, we will see a convergence of gaming technology and interactive military simulations.  With the lessons learned to date by the on-going efforts in this arena, military simulation may make a significant advancement in usability and, dare we say, playability.References"Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment & Defense," Editors: Michael Zyda and Jerry Sheehan, National Academy Press, September 1997, ISBN 0-309-05842-2, 181 pages.Loftus, T.: “Top video games may soon cost more,” MSNBC.com, June 17, 2005, <http://msnbc.msn.com/id/3078404/>.Department of Defense Budget, Fiscal Year 2006,  <http://www.dod.mil/comptroller/defbudget/fy2006/fy2006_r1.pdf>.OneSAF Frequently Asked Questions, <http://list.onesaf.org/html/modules.php?name=FAQ&myfaq=yes&id_cat=3&categories=OneSAF+Frequently+Asked+Questions>.McLean, C. and Riddick, F. 2004, “PC Modeling and Simulation Guidelines: Volume 1 – Overview,” report produced for the Naval Education and Training Command, August 2004.Shaffer, D., Squire, K., Halverson, R., and Gee, J., “Video games and the future of learning,” report produced for the Academic Advanced Distributed Learning Co-Laboratory, December 2004.Rickard, W. and Oblinger, D. “Unlocking the Potential of Gaming Technology,” Proceedings of the Microsoft Higher Education Leaders Symposium, 2004.Squire, K., “Replaying History: Teaching Social Studies with Civilization III,” paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association in Chicago, IL, April 2003.Squire, K. and Jenkins, H., “Harnessing the Power of Games in Education,” Insight (3)1, 5-33.“UTSAF: A Simulation Bridge between OneSAF and the Unreal Game Engine,” <http://usl.sis.pitt.edu/ulab/pubs/utsaf-smc03.pdf>.Gee, James Paul, “What Video Games Have to Teach Us About Learning and Literacy,” Palgrave, McMillan, 2004.Malone, T.W., “What Makes Things Fun to Learn? A Study of Intrinsically Motivating Computer Games,” Report CIS-7, Palo Alto, CA, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center, 1980.Bowman, R.F., “A Pac-Man Theory of Motivation: Tactical Implications for Classroom Instruction,” Educational Technology 22(9), 14-17, 1982.Blizzard Entertainment, <http://www.blizzard.com>.America's Army, <http://www.americasarmy.com/>.Institute for Creative Technologies, <http://www.ict.usc.edu/>.Education Arcade, <http://www.educationarcade.org/>.Scrapper, C., Takeuchi, A., Chang, T., Hong, T., Shneier, M. “Using A Priori Data for Prediction and Object Recognition in an Autonomous Mobile Vehicle,” Proceedings of the SPIE Aerosense Conference, Orlando, FL, April 21-25, 2003, <http://www.isd.mel.nist.gov/documents/scrapper/AprioriSPIE2003.pdf>Institute for Creative Technologies, <http://www.ict.usc.edu/gallery/games/onesaf/index.php?pic=2>Avramides, M. and Ritter, F. “Using Multidisciplinary Expert Evaluations to Test and Improve Cognitive Model Interfaces,” Proceedings of the 11th Computer-Generated Forces and Behavior Representation Conference. <http://acs.ist.psu.edu/papers/avraamidesR02.pdf>CDV Software Entertainment, <http://www.panzers.com/index.php?page=screens.en.phase2>U.S. Marines Training and Education Command, <http://www.tecom.usmc.mil/techdiv/vbs-1_pics.htm>Destineer Studios,  HYPERLINK "http://www.firsttofight.com/" http://www.firsttofight.com/Author BiographiesRyan P.Z. Brunton is a Software Engineer with SAIC and is a Vice Chair for the SISO XMSF Profiles working group. He received his B.S. in computer science (2001) from the University of California, San Diego. Prior to completing his B.S. he worked at the MOVES Institute at the Naval Postgraduate School.  After graduation he worked on commercial security software, various DoD M&S and ADL projects, and is currently actively participating in the development of web-enabling technologies for the HLA.  Mr. Brunton’s key areas of expertise are modeling & simulation, object-oriented design and development, and the extreme programming methodology.David L. Drake is a Program Manager with in SAIC working in the area of Modeling and Simulation infrastructure development. Mr. Drake has 26 years as a computer professional in simulation, computer security design, implementation and evaluation at companies including SAIC, Computer Sciences Corporation, and the MITRE Corporation. At SAIC, he has been a senior computer scientist and a manager for the Commercial Security Products Research and Development Division. While at the MITRE Corporation, he was lead developer for the Practical Verification System, a formal specification and automated verification. Mr. Drake received a Bachelors degree in mathematics from State University of New York at Buffalo and did graduate studies there in artificial intelligence. Mr. Drake received additional computer science training at Stanford Research Institute in California, Northeastern University, and Wang Institute in Massachusetts. He has published articles and given speeches on security and risk assessment topics and has a patent pending on the process for enterprise-wide intrusion detection.Justin E. Busch is a computational linguist who has been with SAIC for over 5 years. He holds a bachelor's in linguistics from Claremont McKenna College and a master's in computational linguistics from the University of Southern California. Mr. Busch also holds a patent for the design of a concept-based search engine. At SAIC, his work has included ontology design and automated question-answering under various DARPA and ARDA-sponsored programs, and development of training materials for the DVTE program.