XMSF Profiles Study Group MeetingFall 2005 SIWSeptember 22, 2005Attendees:Jane Bachman HYPERLINK "mailto:jane.bachman@navy.mil" jane.bachman@navy.milMark Biwer HYPERLINK "mailto:mbiwer@cnttr.dtra.mil" mbiwer@cnttr.dtra.milCurt Blais HYPERLINK "mailto:clblais@nps.edu" clblais@nps.edu Ryan Brunton HYPERLINK "mailto:bruntonr@saic.com" bruntonr@saic.com Dannie Cutts HYPERLINK "mailto:DCutts@aegistg.com" DCutts@aegistg.comJean-Louis Garza HYPERLINK "mailto:JeanLouis.Igarza@free.fr" JeanLouis.Igarza@free.fr David Hansen HYPERLINK "mailto:scott.hansen@ngc.com" scott.hansen@ngc.com Scott Holben HYPERLINK "mailto:scott.holben@lmco.com" scott.holben@lmco.com Katherine Morse HYPERLINK "mailto:katherine.l.morse@saic.com" katherine.l.morse@saic.com Bernadette Robinson HYPERLINK "mailto:bernadette.robinson@jfcom.mil" bernadette.robinson@jfcom.milChristopher Scannell HYPERLINK "mailto:christopher.scannell@nrl.navy.mil" christopher.scannell@nrl.navy.mil John Schloman HYPERLINK "mailto:john.schloman@jhuapl.edu" john.schloman@jhuapl.edu Roger Wuerfel HYPERLINK "mailto:rwuerfel@dctd.saic.com" rwuerfel@dctd.saic.com Meeting Notes:Katherine reported out on Study Group final report (refer to paper 05F-SIW-013, “XMSF Profile Study Group Final Report,” and its presentation slide set)Add list of candidate exemplars to the XMSF Profile final report briefing.Add information about second profile exemplar provided by GMU.Add XMSF web site URL for people to access.  Should add a slide with screen capture of the opening page of the site.Think about more recent example of “getting ahead of technology” than VHS vs Beta video formats.From paper 013, “the SG concluded that actually drafting the standard was out of scope for an SG, and that more progress could be made by trying to document some exemplars with our preliminary content and structure rather than attempting to exhaustively define the content and structure requirements. While some progress has been made on the documentation of some exemplars, not as much has been made as hoped. At the 2005 Fall SIW, the SG will decide whether to pursue more work on the exemplars, or if there is sufficient interest and progress to develop a Product Nomination for a Product Development Group.”Ryan presented Web-Enabled RTI XMSF Profile prototype (refer to paper 05F-SIW-093, “Documenting the Web Enabled RTI – An XMSF Profile Prototype,” and its presentation slide set)DocBook 2.0 specification needs an editor if anyone is interested in volunteering for that.Both examples created so far are infrastructure products, so additional examples would be useful for additional lessons learned.Rational Rose and Popkin have been exchanging XMI for DoDAF products.  Katherine: Actually exchanging CADM representations.  Would like to be able to take such products and mark them up for profile work.  Needs to be a mapping from this to CADM.  Still have a graphical representation problem.  DoDAF – export to CADM and then import to one of those other tools.Future Work: resolve XMI encoding issues; define the set of DocBook tags used; create DocBook extensions for M&S meta-data artifacts (e.g., BOMs); establish transforms from XMSF Profiles to DoDAF artifacts; collect more exemplars to further community collaborationRecommendations of the XMSF Profile Study GroupOptions: Turn in final report as required and say we are done, may be back later.  Similar thing happened with the BOM group – came back when people were ready to embrace the idea.Go to Standards Activities Committee (SAC) and request more time to fill in areas that were not completed: define XMSF-specific requirements; identify necessary interoperability information; identify applicable documentation mechanisms.Additional candidate exemplars should be produced.Move forward to prepare a Product Nomination and establish a Product Development Group (PDG).  Note that as a member of the SAC, Katherine would not be able to serve as Chair of the PDG.Need to have an identified group of people to become the drafting committee.  May not have a sufficient team at this time.Consensus that this is not ready to move toward PDG at this time.Become a Standing Study Group – no time limit but required to submit an annual report to the SAC on progress made during the year.  If the remaining work will take more than a year, would be better to do this than asking for an extension.Group consensus that this is the best approach.Greater activity now in thinking in terms of Global Information Grid (GIG).Should modify original Terms of Reference (TOR) to remove areas completed and update for current situation.ACTION: Katherine will take first cut at modifying the TOR and will post it to the reflector for community review/comment.  Will solicit community participation in additional exemplars.