Simulation Needs in Support of Net Ready Key Performance Parameter (NR-KPP) Test and Evaluation (T&E)Robert D. AaronArmy Test and Evaluation Command4501 Ford AvenueAlexandria, VA  22302(703) 681-2744 HYPERLINK "mailto:aaronrobert@atec.army.mil" aaronrobert@atec.army.milPeter H. ChristensenThe MITRE Corporation2750 Killarney Dr. Suite 100Woodbridge, VA 22192(703) 580-4384 HYPERLINK "mailto:pchris@mitre.org" pchris@mitre.orgKeywords:Net Ready Key Performance Parameter (NR-KPP), Integrated Architectures, Net-Centric Operations and Warfare Reference Model (NCOW-RM), Information Assurance (IA), Test and Evaluation  (T&E) ABSTRACT:  Joint Vision 2020 will be achieved with the introduction of a wide range of new capabilities from the Joint Tactical Radio System to Network Centric Enterprise Services.  The Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System (JCIDS) is intended to guide the Joint Staff in cooperation with the service acquisition and testing organizations to ensure newly developed capabilities are interoperability and supportability certified prior to fielding.  Several NR-KPP products, including integrated architectures, drive the interoperability certification process.  These NR-KPP products can be complex and interdependent.  New strategies are required to develop, test and evaluate these products and material solutions they spawn.  The focus of this paper is to describe several areas where new T&E simulation products could be valuable for evaluating the NR-KPP.1.	IntroductionJoint Vision 2020 has established a goal for the Department of Defense (DoD) to achieve full spectrum dominance of all warfare domains, land, air, sea, space and information by 2020.  Principal enablers of Joint Vision 2020 include the annual DoD Strategic Planning Guidance (SPG) and other supporting guidance such as Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) initiatives.  The recently established published OSD Roadmap for Testing in a Joint Environment defines that “NR-KPP will impact interoperability testing and thus the attainment of Joint Vision 2020”.  [1] Therefore, to support the NR-KPP and interoperability testing new methodologies, tools and interfaces must be developed.  Help from the Modeling and Simulation (M&S) community is needed to develop new testing methodologies.For example, an important requirement identified in the OSD Roadmap for Testing in a Joint Environment Roadmap states “a persistent, robust modern networking infrastructure for systems engineering, Developmental Test and Evaluation (DT&E), and Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E) (including Initial OT&E (IOT&E)) must be developed that connects distributed live, virtual, and constructive (LVC) resources, enables real-time data sharing and archiving, and augments realistic OT&E/IOT&E of joint systems and systems-of-systems”.  [2] This requirement presumes first that robust LVC resources are available to connect and second that they have been developed to be able to communicate across the network infrastructure.Nearly every significant weapons system in development includes Information Technology (IT)/National Security Systems (NSS) as an integral component.  Therefore, in order for these systems to accomplish the mission they must be in some way connected to either tactical or enterprise networks.  NR-KPP policy requires that all IT and NSS systems whose Milestone (MS) B is 1 May 2004 or later, must develop a NR-KPP that defines the systems threshold and objective Net Readiness.The impact of NR-KPP on the T&E community is significant.  In the past, the majority of T&E focused on individual platforms.  Now that almost every weapon and sensor is connected to the Warfighter’s network, each new system must be designed, tested and evaluated within the network.To better understand NR-KPP and its impacts on T&E, the United States (US) Army Test and Evaluation Command (ATEC) Technical Director, and the Joint Interoperability Test Command (JITC) Technical Director commissioned a study group composed of members from each of the Operational Test Agencies (OTAs).  At this writing, the group has completed two of its six study sessions.  Despite the fact that the study is in the early stages, it is clear that better M&S tools are required to test and evaluate the NR-KPP.  The relationship between JCIDS and NR-KPP is necessary to understand simulation needs of the T&E community in this new capabilities and net centric environment.2.	Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System (JCIDS)JCIDS drives the acquisition process and thus the key objectives of T&E.  A key focus of JCIDS is to facilitate transition to capabilities based net centric environment.  This new environment will allow for posting data to shared spaces as early as possible and provide users with an improved capability to pull whatever data they need, whenever they need it, from wherever they are!  That data must be protected and IA control measures must be applied effectively not just for an individual system but for the entire enterprise.  The supporting infrastructure must provide timing and synchronization services at all operational echelons from tactical up to the overarching enterprise.  In the short term, JCIDS process and the NR-KPP policies and concepts are necessary to complete force transformation and Net-Centric Warfare.JCIDS establishes the linkage between the Joint concepts, the analysis needed to identify capabilities required to execute the concepts and the systems delivering those capabilities. [3]  JCIDS documents ensure integration is documented via Initial Capabilities Document (ICD), Capabilities Development Document (CDD), Capabilities Procurement Document (CPD) and the Information Support Plan (ISP).  In addition to other required information, these documents must include specific DoD Architectural Framework (DoDAF) views of the integrated architecture (as discussed in Section 4).3. Net Ready Key Performance Parameter (NR-KPP)The NR-KPP is the tool used to ensure IT and NSS are architected and engineered to integrate into a net-centric environment.  As currently stated in Joint Staff Guidance, “the NR-KPP assesses information needs, information timeliness, information assurance and net ready attributes required for both the technical exchange of information and the end-to-end operational effectiveness of that exchange.  The NR-KPP consists of verifiable performance measures and associated metrics required to evaluate the timely, accurate and complete exchange and use of information to satisfy information needs for a given capability.  The NR-KPP is comprised of the following elements:Compliance with the NCOW-RM,Compliance with applicable Global Information Grid (GIG) Key Interface Profiles (KIPs),Verification of compliance with DoD information assurance requirements,Supporting integrated architecture products required to assess information exchange and use for a given capability.” [4]These four pillars are interrelated in that compliance with each is required but not in itself sufficient to achieve net readiness.4.	The Four Pillars of Net Ready Key Performance Parameter (NR-KPP)Integrated Architecture“The architecture describes the enterprise’s operation in both (1) logical terms, such as interrelated business processes and business rules, information needs and flows and works location and users, and (2) technical terms, such as hardware, software, data, communications and security attributes and performances standards.  It provides these perspectives both for the enterprise’s current or “as is” environment and for its target or “to be” environment, as well as a transition plan for moving from the “as is” to the “to be” environment.”  [5] Integrated architectures are the most critical component of the NR-KPP because they establish both the operational and systems context for information exchange and describe common technical standards and data formats.Integrated architectures are developed and documented using the DoDAF, which provides templates for 27 distinct views.  Each view is described in a unique format that directly relates to other architectural views.  Operational Views (OV) describe the operational echelons and the information and data that are passed between these echelons.  Corresponding Systems Views (SV) map specific systems to operational nodes and describe the systems data exchanges and data formats required to support the corresponding operational information and data exchanges.  These architectural views often include matrices and diagrams that relate timing/locations.  Initial attempts to characterize interoperability emphasized “one-to-one” information exchanges between operational echelons.  The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction (CJCSI) 6212.01B required several simple architectural views (OV-1 and OV-2) that identified operational nodes and the Information Exchange Requirements (IERs) (OV-3) that must be exchanged between them.  Corresponding SV-1 identified the systems required to support information exchange between nodes.DoD is now moving to a NCOW environment where all elements of the DoD are networked and able to seamlessly share information.  Several additional architectural views are required and the importance of technical standards mandates additional Technical Views (TV-1 and TV-2).  DoD’s Net Centric Data Strategy is a key component of this initiative and requires Warfighter mission area communities of interests (COIs) to coordinate with Program Managers (PMs) and systems owners to establish guidelines for tagging data assets with discovery metadata to facilitate data sharing.  This new strategy recognizes the importance of data and additional data strategy guidance adds the need for additional architectural views, the OV-7, Logical Data Model and SV-11, Physical Data Model, as mandatory architecture products for applicable programs.Development of more complex, interdependent architectures is difficult and potentially prone to error.  Application software can be used to assist in configuration management, facilitate integration with other application programs, and identify and correct inconsistencies between views.  Effective management of the integrated architecture can not guarantee but will certainly assist in the successful implementation of the ultimate material solution.Key Interface Profiles (KIPs)KIPs are tools to help standardize and manage interface to networks, services communication pathways.  Initial attempts to manage interfaces required identification of specific interfaces between each and every system in which an operational interchange of information was required.  Net-Centric Vision requires a paradigm shift one to one interfaces to one to many interfaces.  KIPs are the key to enabling that shift.  KIPs describe “an operational functionality, systems functionality and technical specifications [and a] description of the Key Interface”.  The profile consists of refined Operational and Systems views, Interface Control Document/Specification, Engineering Management Plan, Configuration Management Plan, Technical View with SV-TV Bridge and Procedures for Standards Conformance and Interoperability Testing.  [6]The Joint Staff initially classified key interfaces into four categories:  communication, computing Net-Ops and applications with 17 explicit interfaces.  As the concept of key interfaces has evolved, the Joint Staff refined the four interface categories, communications, computing enterprise services and Net-Ops and expanded the number of interfaces beyond the initial 17.  At this time the supporting documentation for many of the KIPs are in development, however draft KIPs are available as of June 2005 and final versions are expected to be completely developed by the end of the December 2005. Net-Centric Operations and Warfare Reference Model (NCOW-RM)“The NCOW-RM describes the activities to establish, use, operate and manage the Net-Centric enterprise information environment to include:  generic user interface, intelligent-assistant capabilities, Net-Centric service capabilities (core services, COI services, environment control services), and enterprise management components.  It also describes a selected set of key standards that will be needed as the NCOW capabilities of the evolving DoD Enterprise network (Global Information Grid) are realized. The NCOW-RM represents the objective end-state for the GIG; “a service-oriented, inter-networked information infrastructure in which users request and receive services that enable operational capabilities across the range of military operations:  DoD business operations and Department-wide enterprise management operation.  The NCOW-RM is a key compliance mechanism for evaluating DoD IT and the Net Ready Key Performance Parameter”.  [7]The NCOW-RM is composed of 14 DoDAF views.  These views closely correlate with the DoDAF views required by JCIDS programmatic documentations to the KIPs.Information Assurance (IA)IA is a subset of Information Operations (IO), which refers to the actions taken to protect and defend information and information security (IS) by ensuring their availability, integrity, confidentiality, authentication and non-repudiation.  IA includes providing for the restoration of IS by incorporating protection, detection and reaction capabilities into those systems.From a NR-KPP perspective, IA is mostly a DoD Information Technology Security Certification and Accreditation Process (DITSCAP) compliant requirement and DoD Directive 8500 Information Assurance requirement.Two most important components of IA are the Mission Assurance Category (MAC) and the Confidentiality Level (CL).  [9]The MAC reflects the importance of information relative to the “warfighter’s combat mission.There are three MAC categories.MAC I applies to information that is determined to be vital to the mission effectiveness and requires the most stringent protection measures.MAC II applies to information that is important to the support of deployed and contingency forces. The consequences of loss of integrity are unacceptable.  Loss of availability is difficult to deal with and can only be tolerated for a short time.  MAC II requires additional safeguards beyond best practices.MAC III applies to information that is necessary for the conduct of day-to-day business, but does not materially affect support to deployed or contingency force in the short-term.” [8]The CL of a system is intended to identify the need to protect against unauthorized disclosure information.  [8]Specific IA controls must be implemented based upon MAC and CL.  The objectives of the interoperability and IA are sometimes in conflict with each other.  Interoperability seeks to present information to the warfighter whenever and wherever they need it.  The goal of IA is to ensure the confidentiality, availability and integrity of that same information.  The controls implemented to protect information may adversely impact getting it to the warfighter.  The end result is that in order to achieve net readiness a balance must be achieved between information interoperability and information security which subsequently complicates system design and network complexity.  The DITSCAP process must be executed to achieve this balance.5.	Net Ready Key Performance Parameter (NR-KPP) Four Pillars and Test and Evaluation (T&E)The concept of Net Ready lacks relevance to the Warfighter unless operational utility in combat can be clearly demonstrated.  Unfortunately, before combat utility can be proven, the technical underpinnings must be properly specified, correspondingly engineered and subsequently exercised in development.  T&E of the NR-KPP must be conducted during both initial developmental and in mission oriented operational testing.  The objective of Developmental Testing (DT) should be to ensure that the technical requirements have been properly satisfied.  The objective of Operational Testing (OT) is to ensure that material solution provides the needed capability to the Warfighter!   Service OTAs conduct service interoperability testing to demonstrate warfighting capability. JITC testing is typically focused on testing and certifying Joint Interoperability. There is often overlap between the two. The challenge is for the services to work closely with JITC to identify what aspects of interoperability and the NR-KPP need to be tested and evaluated, what data is required and then how to allocate T&E responsibilities between DT and OT. Figure 1.  JITC Interoperability Test Certification Process6.	Test and Evaluation (T&E) and Net Ready Key Performance Parameter (NR-KPP) Certification Interoperability Test Certification of the NR-KPP is a requirement for all IT and NSS.  These systems must be evaluated and certified by JITC.  JITC certification is based on Joint Staff J-6 certified NR-KPP and other approved requirements.JITC identifies a four step process to achieve Interoperability Test Certification as shown in Figure 1.  The process begins with identifying requirements, then developing certification approach (planning), then actual T&E followed by actual certification and status reporting.  Progress towards Interoperability Test Certification must be reported early in the program.  The JITC process can not be successful without early and proactive involvement by the testing community with JITC and the program manager.The JITC Four Step process is essentially the execution of Scientific Method and the issues, criteria and measures appropriate for testing vary by organization and system under test.  The top level issues and criteria that support NR-KPP evaluation are dependent upon the OTA that is executing the test.  At the lowest level the specific data requirements for interoperability testing are driven by the detailed integrated architecture products that are developed to support the NR-KPP.Detailed planning involving JITC, the PM and the OTA is required to ensure sufficient data is developed to support interoperability test certification.  The PM is responsible for executing systems engineering processes that will deliver the material solution.  Often the Contractor is required to provide data which demonstrates functionality in plant as part of government acceptance testing.  The PM uses that contractor testing and DT to verify performance thresholds of the material solution prior to OT.  The OTA independently tests the materiel solution to generate additional data.  JITC will participate in the T&E Planning process and attend Operational Test Readiness reviews (OTRR).  JITC endeavors to use data from all of testing sources to ultimately evaluate interoperability and the NR-KPP.  Throughout all phases of testing the government and JITC must be involved, to ensure adequate government oversight has been provided and that the data will be acceptable to JITC for interoperability test certification.The simulation needs for interoperability testing and NR-KPP Certification fall into three general categories:  live, virtual and constructive.  Simple definitions follow:Live Simulation:  A simulation involving real people operating real systems.Virtual Simulation:  A simulation involving real people operating simulated systems.  Virtual simulations inject human-in-the-loop in a central role by exercising motor control skills (e.g., flying an airplane), decision skills (e.g., committing fire control resources to action), or communication skills (e.g., as members of a Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I) team).Constructive Model or Simulation:  Models and simulations that involve simulated people operating simulated systems.  Real people stimulate (make inputs) to such simulations, but are not involved in determining the outcomes.7.  Simulation Needs to Support Test and Evaluation (T&E)Need 1) Constructive Architecture Verification Simulation:  The NR-KPP is based in large part on DoDAF compliant architecture products.  These architecture products establish the operational, systems and data context for information exchange.  Architectures drive the ultimate data requirements for interoperability test certification.  These architectures can be very complex, with a significant number of interrelated views that can be difficult to interpret.  The services are developing Operational Enterprise Architectures such as the Navy’s Force Network (FORCEnet) and Systems Architectures such as the Marine Corps Integrated Architecture Products (MCIAP).  Commercial products are available such as Popkin Systems Architect ®, System Architect ® and Enterprise Architect ® that can be used to develop Enterprise Architectures.  The challenge is unless the architecture products are built using a common tool, such as Popkin, they are difficult and potentially impossible to verify.  Inconsistent, inaccurate or incomplete architectures will adversely impact NR-KPP evaluation.  The services need a readily accessible, easy to use architecture verification simulation that can be employed by all of the services and JITC to accomplish the following:Identify required capabilities Validate DT and OT Test data requirementsIdentify operational and system threads required to support testConfirm NCOW-RM ComplianceConfirm Core Architecture Data Model ComplianceDevelop Mission Scenario to support data requirementsA readily accessible product verification tool can also be used for configuration management and to support documentation development requirements such as design requirements and test plans.Need 2) Live, Virtual and Constructive C4I Test Beds:  All of the services, JITC and Joint Forces Command are developing C4I Test beds that support testing.  For example, the United States Marine Corps (USMC) has developed a Systems Integration Facility (SIF) at the Marine Corps Tactical Systems Support Activity (MCTSSA) that has been verified validated and accredited to support DT and OT.  The SIF replicates the Marine Air Ground Task Force C4I systems normally encountered at the Command Element Headquarters, Ground Combat Element, Air Combat Element and Combat Service Support Element, the challenge is that these test beds although connected, tend to be limited in scope and are not exploited by Program Managers and testers to the full potential.  Given that the architectural products developed are robust and verified and that the data requirements for testing are well understood, linked C4I test beds would allow for a significant amount of test data to be generated continuously along the systems acquisition life cycle.  The potential to reduce risk, create efficiency in testing and better meet the warfighter’s requirements are clear.  C4I test beds could be used to accomplish the following:Capabilities DevelopmentConformance testingKey Interface Profile TestingNetwork Centric Enterprise Service (NCES) TestingTactical NCES TestingTest Data InteroperabilitySimulate operational echelons to support testStimulate system threads required to support testMission Scenario GenerationFigure 2 provides a snapshot of some of the DOD C4I Test Beds and Networks in the Continental United States (CONUS).   Linking these test beds and networks together could provide the distributed environment to support C4I testing and some evaluation needs.  And of course, the virtual environment and supporting models must be developed under the DODAF to avoid duplicative development and ensure interoperability.   Figure 2.  OSD C4I Test Beds in the Continental USNeed 3) System-of-System Analysis Methodologies:  The acquisition community is experienced with platform analysis methodologies for developing, testing and evaluating systems.  As the DoD moves from platform focused acquisition to capabilities focused acquisition and network oriented system development, experience with analysis methodology for system-of-systems needs to be as common as platform analysis methodologies.  This is most relevant as it relates to requirements development process.  For instance, the complex relationship of the “ilities” (reliability, survivability, human factors, transportability, etc.) as they relate to system performance and system-of-system capabilities is seldom specified, much less analyzed from a system-of-system perspective.  If the criteria for evaluation is not known prior to development or not clearly articulated, developers are challenged to understand what they are developing.  In order guide simulation based acquisition, these methodologies must be developed and incorporated into the simulation process so real time analysis can occur. 8.	Conclusions and Road Ahead The expectation is that the NR-KPP and the technical underpinnings will continue to evolve and mature.  M&S in support of Net Ready will also need to mature to meet the needs of not just the T&E community but also the user organizations that establish the NR capabilities and the operations and training communities. The needs of the T&E community can not be met without involvement from the M&S community.  In support of Net Centric testing, the M&S Community must step forward to develop new capabilities, methodologies and standards which will effectively support the emerging needs as identified above. The T&E Community will need tools that will support automated and real-time analysis of operational and systems architectures that will be instantiated to support all phases of testing. The interface of Service C4I Test Beds (see Figure 2) and the integration of the LVC simulations residing therein are critical needs.  For example ATEC envisions that future simulation environments will need to support Brigade/Unit of Action (UA) sized, Future Combat Systems (FCS) OT events starting in 2012 and continuing through 2016.   9.	AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to thank the participants in the ATEC/JITC lead OTA Commander’s Conference NR-KPP Study Group for there invaluable contribution through discussion and formal participation.  In particular, we’d like to especially thank Mr. Dwayne Hill (Science Application International Corporation (SAIC)), for his expertise on the NR-KPP, Mr. Stu Brock (JITC) and Mr. Don Crittenden (MCTSSA) for graphics and Mr. Brian Barr (ATEC), Mr. Don Timian (ATEC) and  Mr. Tom Ullrich (MITRE) for editorial consulting.10.	References[1]	Director, Operational Test and Evaluation, “Testing in a Joint Environment Roadmap Strategic Planning Guidance Fiscal Years 2006-2011”, p. 15[2]	Director, Operational Test and Evaluation, “Testing in a Joint Environment Roadmap Strategic Planning Guidance Fiscal Years 2006-2011”, p. viii[3]	Chairman of the Joint Chief of Staff Instruction 3170.01D, “Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System”, 11 May 2005[4]	Chairman of the Joint Chief of Staff Instruction 6212.01C, “Interoperability and 	Supportability of Information Technology and National Security Systems”, 20 November 2003, p. GL-17[5]	Government Accounting Office, Report GAO-02-6 “Enterprise Architecture”, p. 4, 28 March 02[6]	Chairman of the Joint Chief of Staff Instruction 6212.01C, “Interoperability and Supportability of Information Technology and National Security Systems”, 20 November 2003, p. GL-7[7]	Chairman of the Joint Chief of Staff Instruction 6212.01C, “Interoperability and Supportability of Information Technology and National Security Systems”, 20 November 2003, p. GL-16[9]	DoD Information Technology Security Certification and Accreditation Process (DITSCAP), DoDI 8500.1, 24 October 2002, p. 21[8]	DoD Directive Information Assurance, DoDD 8500.1, 24 October 2002Author BiographiesROBERT D. AARON is a Senior Analyst in the Test Technology Directorate at the ATEC Headquarters in Alexandria, Virginia and has 15 years T&E experience.  He has a Bachelor of Science degree in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Maryland, a Master of Science degree in Management from the Naval Postgraduate School, and is currently pursuing a Doctorate in Management from the University of Maryland.PETER H. CHRISTENSEN is a principal Staff with the MITRE Corporation.  Pete currently supports several Army and USMC customers including the Army Test and Evaluation Command, the Marine Corps Systems Command Deputy Commander for C4I and Integration and the Marine Corps Operational Test and Evaluation Activity.  Pete is a Graduate of the Computer Science Curriculum at the US Naval Postgraduate School, a Certified Information Systems Security Professional (CISSP) and holds a Security Management Certificate from Capitol College.  Pete is also an Adjunct Professor who teaches courses for Capitol College in the Masters Degree Program for Network Security. PAGE  