BOM PDG Minutes    MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD: 20 September 2005SUBJECT: BOM PDG Meeting20 September 2005, 1330 - 1700 ESTSIW Fall 2005 held at Orlando, FL 1. ATTENDEES:(a) PDG members: Larry Root (Chair), Bob Lutz (Vice Chair),	Jane Bachman (Secretary) and Chris Rouget (TAD).(b) DG members: Paul Gustavson (DG Lead Editor), Jake Borah      Roy Scrudder, Björn Löfstrand and Tram Chase.Total:  36   (Participants during the BOM PDG meeting) 2. TOPICS:Larry Root opened the BOM PDG meeting with a welcome to attendees.  Larry reviewed the BOM history, a two-n-half year effort.  In 1996 was when Bob Lutz first coined “piece parts”.  There have been 162 members of the BOM PDG.  Larry recognized the BOM PDG officers, DG Team and Assigned Reviewers.  He extended appreciation to all of the participants in the BOM PDG effort.Larry briefed on the BOM PDG goals and activities and the process that was used in the development effort for the BOM PDG.  Review rounds have taken approximately four months.  12 April 2003 was the start of the BOM PDG.Larry explained the overall schedule.  Currently awaiting SAC approval of the balloting group and development of the circulation package.There are many BOM products in existence: a Web-based survey, a blog, a website, a tutorial, resource CDs, RPR BOMs, and tools – the BOMworks™ and theVisual OMT™.Moderator of the panel is Chris Turrell, DMSO support.  Chris introduced the panelists:  Bob Lutz, Roy Scruder, Björn Löfstrand, Paul Gustavson, and Jake Borah.  Alternates are Tram Chase, Larry Root and Jane Bachman. Paul Gustavson presented a “BOM What – Why – How”.  He reviewed how BOMs are used as “Building Blocks”.  “BOMs are designed for enabling composability, providing extensibility, facilating interoperability, improving manageability, and encouraging understandability.”  Two documents have been developed. ` The ballot pool consists of 38 members.Bob Lutz presented “A Historical Perspective”. He explained the relationship between the BOMs and the FEDEP; identifying the FEDEP steps where the BOM is useful.Roy Scrudder presented BOM Metadata.  He brief on how we tagged the metadata for BOMs.  Collection of data to describe the events of data.  Helps with discovery of BOMs –which is potential use and allows the BOM user to understand the content of the BOM and why it may be useful to the user.  Dublin Core is in industry and within the U.S. Defense is the DoD Discovery Metadata Specification, which is an extension of the Dublin Core.  VV&A Recommended Practices Guide was examined and a few metadata was incorporated into the BOM metadata.  Björn Löfstrand’s specialty is in architecture and design.  He presented BOM Development and XML Schema.  BOMs are a mapping between conceptual model and federation.  He provided an example, The Restaurant”.Jake Borah has a broad background in trainer and interest in the conceptual models.  He presented Conceptual Modeling Relationship with BOMs.  He briefed on the problems of Conceptual Modeling and extended into the relationship with BOMs.Chris called for questions. Chris thanked the panelists for their presentations and he thanked the sponsor of composability effort.Larry briefed on the balloting process schedule –moving to block 3.  The ballot pool has been established and is before the SAC.  Next is to establish the circulation package.  April 2006 is predicted date for release of the standard. Larry recommended balloters to use the online comment tool; however, if that is not accessible, another means will be provided.  He briefed the initial balloting rules.The PDG reconvened after the break.  Attendance was 26 SISO members.Three papers were presented:1530 - Kurt Blias / Dr. Hieb's presentation (05F-SIW-041) - which specifically identifies linkage of C-BML and BOMs1600 - Dr. Morse's XMSF Final Report presentation (05F-SIW-013) – which identifies a linkage with BOMs 1630 - Dr. Dahman's presentation (05F-SIW-121) – Matrix Mapping Tool (MMT)Larry adjourned the BOM PDG meeting by thanking all that attended for their responses and participation.3. ACTION ITEMS:(a) NEW:   (0) Formulate the BOM circulation package for submitting to SAC.	Assigned to Primary: Larry Root(b) OLD: (0) Publish Nationality Profile of PDG as numbers (i.e., Canada: x; US: y; France: z;) / pie chart	Assigned to Primary: Larry Root4. COMPLETED ACTION ITEMS:5. NEXT MEETING:   TBDRespectively Submitted,Jane BachmanBOM PDG Secretary