A Process for Developing Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS) – From Knowledge Acquisition to Knowledge UseMarianela García LozanoVahid MojtahedFOI, Swedish Defence Research Agency164 90 StockholmSweden+46 8 5550{3133, 3705}{garcia, vahid.mojtahed}@foi.se KeywordsCMMS, Knowledge Acquisition (KA), Knowledge Engineering (KE), Knowledge Representation (KR), Knowledge Modelling (KM), Knowledge Use (KU), Ontology, Standardization, Substantive Interoperability, composability, reusability, VV&AABSTRACT: Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS) was originally introduced by the US DoD in 1995 in the Modelling and Simulation Master Plan (MSMP). The vision was to achieve interoperability, composability and reusability of knowledge for modelling and simulation in the military domain. Unfortunately the concept never got completed and all activities seemed to end around the end of the millennium. FOI, the Swedish Defence Research Agency, found the concept interesting and began its own work with the CMMS concept in 2001. Since then FOI has strived to develop the concept to implement and fulfil the promises of the vision. The FOI CMMS project discovered early that the CMMS process was vague and unfinished, so a large part of the work done since the start, has been to develop a basis for a common methodological framework. In this paper we will present our approach and discuss our CMMS process from the start of the knowledge acquisition phase to the end phase where the formalized and modeled knowledge can be extracted and reused. We will also discuss the necessary components, their relationship and techniques that are needed to implement it. The importance of a VV&A presence throughout the CMMS process will also briefly be discussed. Introduction to CMMS The increasing use of modelling and simulation puts demands on how knowledge is used and managed. Major challenges are how to acquire, maintain and validate knowledge and how to do it as effortlessly as possible.With the purpose of structuring the modelling and simulation work the US Department of Defence presented in 1995 a vision called the Modelling and Simulation Master Plan (MSMP). The aim was to build an architecture and infrastructure that could increase the reuse and interoperability of simulation models. CMMS – Conceptual Models of the Mission Space is one the three basic components of the technical framework presented in the MSMP. CMMS is often described as the first abstraction of the real world. It is a framework for the development of models and it captures the characteristics of objects in a domain given by a scenario, such as their features, interactions, and behaviour. The models, or rather Mission Space Models (MSM) strive to be generic and applicable to as many scenarios as possible without any loss of critical knowledge. MSM:s are implementation independent conceptual models of objects and activities in the military domain.CMMS tries to address three problems that commonly arise in model development:Authoritative information is not readily available. Knowledge acquisition is incomplete and sometimes ambiguous. The knowledge that has been acquired (often at considerable expense) is not stored and maintained for future use.  The potential uses and users of CMMS are many, for example, developers of simulation models use MSMs to get a tool to understand the involved entities, tasks and actions in military operations. By having a validated view of a domain provided by an authorised source the likelihood of producing consistent, interoperable and reusable models and simulations increase. The FOI CMMS StorySince its introduction in 1995 the CMMS has been replaced by other initiatives (such as FDMS and KIRC, see [1]), but presumably connections can be made to these other concepts, since we believe that they share a common goal as well. For the sake of simplicity we only refer to CMMS in this paper. The Swedish Defence Research Agency, FOI, carried out a prestudy of CMMS in 2001 to learn more about the CMMS-process, see to which extent and under which circumstances it could be of interest. The study yielded both increased interest and confusion as the available specifications [2, 3] were perceived as vague, partly unfinished and ambiguous. Some of our findings were presented in [4]. Since we in our studies found the CMMS-concept to be interesting and with high potential, our work with it was continued. In 2002 an extended study of available material and methods was conducted and a plan for future work was laid out. 2003 the work focused on the early phases of the CMMS-process such as Knowledge Acquisition. The year after, in 2004, we continued our work and focused on the following phases. During this work we found that a lot of the CMMS–process, components and tools to be uncharted territory and therefore we had to basically start from the beginning. We soon discovered that a fundamental piece missing was a structure by which to model the MSMs. We made a proposal for such a structure and called it the Knowledge Meta Meta Model (KM3). The KM3 represents one possibility to capture system structures and behavior in an object-oriented and rule based way. This model is described in the paper [5]. All of our work done so far has been summarized in our reports [6, 7, 8]This year our work has mainly focused on making MSM prototypes and following through with the process to see if it is feasible and to gather experiences. With this work we have also been able to further identify necessary tools, methods and techniques.  In our work we have found Conceptual modelling, the Semantic Web, Model Driven Architecture, VV&A, computational linguistics, Ontologies, etc. very helpful.This paper focuses on the CMMS-process and how information is analysed, represented and modelled to suit our needs. The different analysis methods, necessary components, people involved, and process steps are described. The importance of a VV&A- and Inspection-presence throughout the CMMS process is also discussed. The original CMMS-process In the CMMS Technical Framework document, see [9], the CMMS concept, process and tools were outlined. The document described the framework, a number of different technical standards, administrative procedures, and layout of the infrastructure needed to build conceptual models. Some parts were described in more detail but others were vague and ambiguous. The description of the CMMS-process was only laid out on a high level were only the main parts were described. The process was described as a two phase process, where the two phases where Knowledge Acquisition (KA) and Knowledge Engineering (KE). In the KA-phase there were two main steps were the development of a focused context is the first and the gathering of information the other. The KE-phase consisted similarly of two steps were the formalizing of data and construction of MSMs and CMMS was the other.The description of the CMMS-process was very useful as a starting point, but it did not tell us further how to proceed to develop our own conceptual models. Some tools were also described in the document but it proved very difficult to get access to them. Therefore we saw the necessity of developing and studying a new process, methods, technologies and tools.Overview of the FOI CMMS-ProcessIn the FOI CMMS process we have split the Knowledge Engineering phase into two. We have chosen to call them Knowledge Representation and Knowledge Modelling. This was done because we found that the engineering phase was very complex and needed breaking down. In order to do so, we analysed the steps and saw that there were two main parts, where the first had to do with the formalising and representation of the acquired knowledge and the second had to do with the modelling of the acquired knowledge. Last but not least is the Knowledge Use phase. Therefore the FOI CMMS process consists in large of four main parts, see Figure 1. By the end of every phase there are one or more products that are used as input in the next phase. The process is not completely sequential, between the different steps in and between each phase there is constantly an iterative process going on. There is especially an exchange when the experiences from the use-part go back into the CMMS-system. Figure 1: The four main parts are KA, Knowledge Acquisition, KR, Knowledge Representation, KM, Knowledge Management and finally, Knowledge Use, KU.In order for the information to be useful for our purposes it must undergo a process where it is analysed, formatted, modelled and then used. The different steps of the CMMS-process aim at doing that by logically modelling natural language from a computational perspective, see Figure 2. We will not dwell on the finer points of computational linguistics but present a brief description of the different kinds of areas and types of analysis, representation and modelling that the information undergoes in the CMMS process.Phonetic analysis – the phonetic analysis is done when information is gathered by interviews, discussions, talks or anything that is spoken. This is done quite unconsciously and allows us to interpret what is being said. This analysis is based on previous experience and may therefore lead us wrong sometimes. This is what helps us to determine if what was said was rudder or robber, hat or hot and so on. Lexical analysis – the lexical analysis is like the phonetic analysis but for written information.Morphological analysis – this is what allows us to distil useful and plausible information. It helps us identify the internal structures of words and thus allowing us to further understand what is being said or written. This is also done quite unconsciously if one knows the language well.   Figure 2: The information is processed in several steps before it may be useful from a CMMS-perspective.Syntactic analysis – is used to decide how words are combined and arranged to form grammatically correct sentences.  This helps us see how something is expressed and decide whether words are nouns, verbs, adjectives and so on which makes it easier to look them up and see what they are implying.   Semantic analysis – is used to decide the meaning of words and how they are combined to form meaningful sentences. It has more to do with the use of words than the nature of the entity being referenced by the word (this is the task of an ontology).Semantic Representation and Modelling – this helps us with the representation and modelling of the meaning of the world, and indirectly the meaning of a statement or sentence along with its surrounding context. Pragmatics – this is how language, sentences or knowledge is used, in different contexts. It helps us decide what actions to take or how to respond to information in a certain situation. For our purpose it helps us decide what knowledge is suitable for a certain need.  Read more about linguistics and the individual areas in [10].The borders between the different phases are a bit fuzzy and it may sometimes be difficult to tell exactly where one phase starts and the other ends. The phases are used to present an overview and abstraction of the process steps discussed in Section 3, see Figure 3.Knowledge Acquisition, KAThe purpose of the Knowledge acquisition phase is as the name suggests - to acquire knowledge and information. Preferably, the sources used have been authorised by some organisation beforehand.There are three main steps in this phase: The focused context, i.e. the definition of the purpose, the limitations and the need of the knowledge.The identification of suitable and authorised knowledge sources.The acquiring and documentation of information.When acquiring information it is important to follow some well documented method that suits the purpose. This is especially important when the information is gathered by interviews, where great care must be taken to avoid unintentional influence by the interviewer. Examples of methodologies for knowledge acquisition that we have studied are: CommonKADS, Generic Tasks and DESIREE. Ideas from these methodologies have influenced our design of the KA-phase. For more information on the different methodologies and our study of them, see [7, 11, 12, 13].In the KA-phase there are two important processes that occur in the background when gathering knowledge. There is first a phonetic or lexical analysis depending if the information is acquired by interviews or by written form. Words or expressions that are in a different language or from another domain are translated or mapped to the current language or domain. The second thing that happens is the morphological analysis of the received information. That is, the information that is not relevant to our context is removed, documented in another context or simply not documented at all. Syntactic and semantic analysis is also done by the Information gatherer. The persons involved in this phase need to have a deeper understanding of the problem domain and preferably experience in certain areas, for example: Authorisation Agency – Identification of suitable knowledge sources, authorising them and describing themInformation gatherer – experience in gathering and compiling informationSME - domain knowledge  Interviewer - knowledge acquirement methodsKnowledge Representation, KRThe aim of the knowledge representation phase is to make information that until now only has been human readable also machine readable. In order to make this possible, the information that has been documented in natural language must be formatted and represented in a machine readable way. The formatting should be done in such a way that no (or little) information is lost in the process and preferably so that the formatted knowledge can be traced back to the source. Formatting a text can be done with several methodologies; the important issue is how the formatted text is to be further processed. At FOI we have looked at two methods; SPO and 5Ws.SPO stands for Subject, Predicate and Object. This is a generic method that can be applied to almost any domain. In the semantic web framework, SPO is used to structure information. In essence, the written text is analysed and formalised by following the formula of SPO. Read more in [8, 14].The other method that could be applied is the 5Ws–format, WHO is doing WHAT, WHERE, WHEN and WHY. 5Ws is also used in writing in journalism and for telling a story in literature. Read more about it in [15, 16]After, or at the same time that the formatting is done, the information should also be mapped to a suitable ontology. The ontology gives the context of the domain, the terms and their relationships and interactions. We have studied a number of existing ontologies and have found these two to be suitable for our purposes; IEEE’s SUMO and NATO MIP’s JC3IEDM. Read more in [17, 18]. We have also seen the necessity of more specialised domain ontologies. Some of those used are predefined and some we have constructed ourselves. In this phase the information is put through a mainly syntactic and semantic analysis process. In this phase there are also many different roles that require expertise and experience.Formatting - experienced in the appropriate formatting analysis method and technique.VV&A-agent – experienced in the VV&A-process and methodologyOntology expert – knowledge in the used ontology, experience in mapping and interpretation of information to the ontology as well as knowledge in how to further develop and extend ontologies.   Knowledge Modelling, KMAfter the Knowledge Acquisition and Representation phases the resulting products may be usable for some applications. For example, if specific knowledge instances are of interest for a certain application then no further generalization is needed. But, if the aim is to make general and reusable knowledge models then further knowledge modelling is needed. In the CMMS–project we have during the last two years been designing a model with which we could supply constructs and rules to structure the knowledge. As previously mentioned in Section 1.1 we have called it the Knowledge Meta Meta Model (KM3), see [5]. The biggest difficulty in the knowledge modelling phase is to structure a machine readable formatted text, in for example the 5Ws format, to the KM3 and obtain one or more MSMs. This is in no way trivial and work is currently in progress to try and solve this task. The result of this procedure may be that more information is needed and a return to the KA-phase may be needed. When the KM3 modelling is finished, the last task is to try and merge these new MSMs to the previously modelled MSMs from the same domain already present in the CMMS Data Base (CDB). The CDB is the collection of acquired MSMs. To make MSMs as reusable as possible we have thought in the lines of divide and conquer. By breaking down the knowledge in the MSMs to smaller components these knowledge components could then be reused in different configurations producing new MSMs. There are a number of advantages to this course of action: a) it is more flexible and easier to reuse components b) they may be reused for other purposes than they originally were created for and c) components on different levels of abstraction could be combined. The challenge lie in creating well defined interfaces, descriptions and ontologies for the components.    In this phase the information goes through a semantic analysis, representation and modelling process. Knowledge Use, KUThe final phase of the CMMS- process is the use of the MSMs, knowledge instances and components. In this phase the reuse of knowledge is done either as a part of the KA-phase when knowledge is acquired or as a part of the KM-phase when the KM3-modelled knowledge is merged with previous knowledge.In this phase the connection to the end-user is the strongest and therefore it is of great interest that the knowledge can be visualized in different ways depending on the domain and the user’s purpose. As previously mentioned, the CMMS-concept was originally suggested as a framework to facilitate modelling and simulation. For that reason there has long been the question of how the connection between an MSM and an implemented simulation model is. The MDA concept, Model Driven Architecture, has been found to a possible candidate for this connection. The concept is based upon the idea that from one and the same conceptual model, code can, trough several transformation steps, be obtained for several platforms and languages. Read more about MDA in [19]. MDA is a complex concept that probably complements the CMMS concept very well. This matter needs further study, tests and evaluation.Other fields of application for the MSMs could be as references for VV&A-efforts, context sensitive reference manuals or even for the identification of services within the Network Based Defence.  This phase deals mostly with the Pragmatics of the modelled knowledge. Figure 3: The steps of the FOI CMMS-ProcessThe steps of the FOI CMMS-ProcessEach phase in the CMMS-process is decomposed into a number of steps and this section describes them. The steps are drawn as boxes in the flowchart; see Figure 3. Description of the NotationThis is a brief description of how to interpret the objects, colours and arrows in the process figure. The Yellow box is the start of the process.Green diamonds are control and decision stations to check whether to move forward in the process or return and iterate some steps. The arrows are green if the answer is yes (proceed) and orange if no (return to a previous step).Blue boxes are process steps where work is done. Pink boxes and database, they are not really a part of the CMMS-process but a part of the CMMS-conceptThe dark yellow hexagon is an organizational unit.The white boxes and broken lines denote parts that are not part of the CMMS process but that are interesting from a user perspective.The Process stepsThe CMMS-process starts when the need of knowledge for some purpose arises. Often it may not be quite clear exactly what is needed, what the delimitations are, or what the exact domain is. An identification of this must then first be made before any information is acquired i.e. a focused context must be developed. In Figure 3 the process starts at the top left corner in the yellow box.In order to obtain authorized information, suitable information sources must first be found. These sources can be anything from interviews with subject matter experts, SME:s, search in available literature on the web or elsewhere, to search in the CMMS Data Base (CDB) where previously acquired information is stored.  The CDB should be the first logical point of search for information. If nothing is found there or only part of what was required was found, it is necessary to move on in the process and try to acquire information through the other available channels. A clear notion of what is missing or required is necessary; one could say that the most important step in acquiring information is to identify what is missing. When it is known what is missing, the proper authorized knowledge sources may be identified and chosen. The suggestion and choice of appropriate knowledge sources should be accredited by a VV&A-agent or some other accredited authority. When information has been gathered by, for example, interviewing SMEs, all of the obtained information should as far as possible be documented and then presented to the SME for approval. If there have been several interviews on different occasions the information from each one could if suitable be merged. The documentation of information will help ensure traceability throughout the process and help us with the feedback and approval from authorized sources. As previously mentioned in Section 2 all information in the CMMS-process undergoes an analysis consisting of several steps, for example the documented information from an interview has undergone both a phonetic and morphological analysis by the interviewer. All such analysis phases are prone to introduce some errors in the information and these errors should preferably be caught as soon as possible.  When the documentation has been done and approval given, the information should be analyzed and formatted to a common format thus expressing the information with a common syntax and semantics. This format could be of different kinds such as SPO or 5Ws, as previously mentioned in Section 2.2, depending on what the final purpose is. One further advantage is that a common format makes the information easier to make machine readable and thus easier to automate certain steps. Since any analysis or formatting implies a certain loss or modification of knowledge, there should also be a control mechanism here to minimize the loss or distortion. The feedback and approval should be given by the interviewed SME or some other accredited person. If the analysis or formatting has not been done correctly and cannot be approved an iteration of previous steps in the process is required. Each iteration through the process is costly in both time and money and the number of iterations should therefore be minimized.    For the analysis and formatting to work, they should always be done with a chosen domain in mind. Ontologies and dictionaries are invaluable tools that provide terms, structures and relations for a specific domain and thus make it easier to interpret the information. For each domain there may be several ontologies on different abstraction levels or with different focuses but the ones best suited for the purpose should be chosen. We will not discuss how to build ontologies in this paper but there are some well known methods, see [20]. The analysis, formatting and mapping of the information to the chosen ontologies is usually done in parallel. The feedback, control and approval are done by different persons and instances. As previously mentioned the SME gives feedback to the interpretation and analysis of the information, the ontology expert approves the ontology mapping and the VV&A-agent approves that the analysis has been done from the point of view of the initial purpose.  The next step is to build the MSMs. The Knowledge Meta Meta Model provides rules and constructs for the creation of the MSMs. The KM3 can formally be seen as a model specification, consisting of object oriented concepts aimed at primarily capturing dependencies in and between activities.  In our work with the CMMS process we have realised the limitations of focusing on military processes as a way of reusing knowledge. We have therefore chosen a more component oriented approach where we pay more attention to the actions that a process is comprised of.  This is further discussed in [4]. The formatted knowledge is structured according to the KM3. Unfortunately, to create reusable components, the formatted and ontology mapped information is not enough. Usually not all necessary information is available at this stage. With the KM3-modelling new requirements arise and more acquisition of knowledge may be needed and if so new iterations would be required. Throughout the process all products that have been the result of different steps are placed in the CMMS Data Base. This gives a higher degree of traceability and possibility to reuse and make components interoperable.If the purpose is to make reusable knowledge components the information may sometimes need to be de-identified before it can be integrated with previously submitted KM3-modeled information. This means that information that is specific to a certain person or situation is generalised and brought to a higher abstraction level or specified further. For example, a recognizance mission is done differently according to the object of interest, the environment, the time of year and the available equipment and situation. The pragmatics is an important factor in this step. Work is still in progress in this area, but naturally some kind of VV&A is also needed here.Visualization of knowledge is a difficult and challenging area. In our work we have not focused on this part yet, but it is vital step needed to convey knowledge. VV&A The observant reader has noticed that traceability and VV&A have reoccurred as a common feature throughout the entire CMMS-process. In several steps there is some kind of feedback to earlier steps if there has been any missing, misinterpreted or ambiguous information. It can also be that the analysis, formatting or modelling hasn’t been done correctly and therefore needs more work before approving. Sometimes it has been an SME that has had to approve and sometimes a VV&A-agent or some other authorised person.As described in the CMMS process description there are many different roles and functions that are involved in different steps. Further analysis of their authority and necessary competences should be done. For VV&A-agents the CMMS process and the final product (MSM:s) can be a great aid in the VV&A-process. The question of how cooperation can be done and how the connections between the two fields of VV&A and CMMS look like, should also be analysed and clarified. Another important connection is to remember what initiates a run through the CMMS-process, the need of information for some specific purpose. Regardless of whether the sought information can be retrieved from previously acquired knowledge in the CMMS Data Base or not, new models are created by performing the steps of the process. VV&A has a natural role here in securing that the correct information is acquired, that the correct model is produced, that it is valid for the purpose and used in the correct way.     Ongoing and Future WorkPrevious years we focused mainly on the Knowledge Acquisition phase and performed some experiments in acquiring information in a systematic way. We studied some methodologies and got some ideas from them. We then moved on to tools and language related issues such as formatting methods and ontologies. This year we have focused on the later phases of the process by trying to make prototype MSMs. We have applied the CMMS-process on a hypothetical scenario thus testing the developed tools and theories. We have discovered a number of issues, for example the methodology as it is today is heavily dependant on the formalisation of the scenario.  If two method experts analyse and formalise a common scenario description they will likely end up with two different formalisations. Future work involves designing stricter guidelines for the analysis and formalisation of information. In our approach we chose a hierarchy of ontologies with SUMO as the top level ontology and JC3IEDM as the middle level ontology. We found that mapping the formalised information into this ontology structure is difficult. It is difficult because of the discrepancy in information content between the ontologies and the formalised information. This could be solved by further knowledge acquisition or a better alignment between the ontologies and the formalised information.The KM3 has been limited to using it as an analysis tool and its full potential as a foundation for the reusable knowledge library has not been fully explored yet.  All steps in the proposed CMMS-process have been done manually and we are looking into where and what tools are needed to automate the process to the largest possible extent. All of our ongoing work will further be described in a report by the end of this year.Discussion and ConclusionsWith our work in the CMMS field we have found the CMMS concept to be a good idea worth pursuing. We have also found the task to be very large and if true knowledge reuse is to be achieved more have to join in on the work with it. One very simple conclusion one already can draw is that much more effort is needed if we seriously wish to reach our highly placed goals. Nevertheless we need to point out that if true interoperability between simulation models built on conceptual models is desired then a real international cooperation in this field is necessary. What we have tried to do is to analyse the CMMS process regardless of domain or available tools. We have identified several steps that need to be taken in order to reach the goal. For these steps we have also studied some methodologies and techniques that can be used, thus laying the foundation for the process. Presented in this paper is the main design for the FOI CMMS-process. With the aid of this process many necessary tools and methods have been identified. Some of the involved organisational roles, structures and functions have also been identified with this work, for example VV&A. This means that we at least need a knowledge transfer between CMMS and VV&A. We have found that a large part of the methodology presented in this paper may also be used in other areas requiring Knowledge Management as well. Most of our reports are in Swedish, but a detailed report of the proposed CMMS-project in English is planned for the end of this year. More details of the process, components and our current work will be described there. References[1]	Functional Description of the Mission Space, https://www.dmso.mil/public/transition/fdms/[2]	DMSO, “DMSO 1995 Master Plan”, 1995, https://www.dmso.mil/public/library/policy/guidance/500059p.pdf[3]	“Conceptual Models of the Mission Space – Technical Framework”, DMSO, revision0.2.1, 1997 http://www.dmso.mil/briefs/entereff/doc/ cmmstf.pdf[4]	M. Lundgren, M. García Lozano, V. Mojtahed, “CMMS under the Magnifying Glass – An Approach to Deal with Substantive Interoperability”, Conference proceedings FSIW’04, 2004, 04F-SIW-010, http://www.sisostds.org[5]	B. Andersson, M. García Lozano, V. Mojtahed, “The Use of a Knowledge Meta Meta Model (KM3) when Building Conceptual Models of the Mission Space”, Conference proceedings FSIW’05, 2005, 05F-SIW-040, http://www.sisostds.org[6]	V. Mojtahed, M. García Lozano, J. Ulriksson, G. Holm, (In Swedish)”CMMS – Konceptuella Modeller av Militära Operationer”, FOI Stockholm, 2001, FOI-R—0629—SE[7]	V. Mojtahed, M. García Lozano, J. Ulriksson, M. Lundgren, (In Swedish) ”Analys av CMMS-konceptet med fokus på Kunskapsanskaffning (KA) och Kunskapsbearbetning (KE)”, FOI Stockholm, 2003, FOI-R—1049—SE[8]	V. Mojtahed, M. García Lozano, (In Swedish) “Kunskapsrepresentation (KR) och Kunskapsmodellering (KM) i CMMS-konceptet”, FOI Stockholm, 2004, FOI-R—1433—SE[9]	DMSO, “Conceptual Models of the Mission Space Technical Framework”, USD/A&T-DMSO-CMMS-0002, Revision 0.2.1[10]	The wikipedia linguistics site http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linguistics[11]	F. Brazier, J. Treur and N. Wijngaards, “The Acquisition of a Shared Task Model”, Artificial Intelligence Group, Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1081, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1995[12]	B. Chandrasekaran, et al., “Generic tasks and task structures: History, critique and new directions”, Second Generation Expert Systems (pp. 232-272). Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1993.[13]	G. Schreiber et al., “Knowledge Engineering and Management: The CommonKADS Methodology”, A Bradford Book; The MIT Press Cambridge; London; England,.2000[14]	Semantic Web site http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/[15]	A. Tolk, et al. ”Coalition Battle Management Language”. Conference proceedings FSIW’04. Paper 04F-SIW-103, Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, http://www.sisostds.org[16]	Interview with James Stovall http://www.secondaryenglish.com/stovall.html[17]	Suggested Upper Merged Ontology http://www.ontologyportal.org/[18]	MIP site http://www.mip-site.org/[19]	OMG Model Driven Architecture http://www.omg.org/mda/[20]	M. Fernández, “Overview of Methodologies for Building Ontologies”. Workshop on Ontologies and Problem-Solving Methods: Lessons Learned and   Future Trends. (IJCAI99). August. 1999. http://sunsite.informatik.rwth-aachen.de/Publications/CEUR-WS/Vol-18/4-fernandez.pdf AuthorsMARIANELA GARCIA LOZANO is a ResearchEngineer at the Department of Systems Modelling at the Swedish Defence Research Agency (FOI) and she has been a part of the CMMS project since its start in 2001. She holds a Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering and she is currently working on her Ph.D. in the area of Embedded Simulations. Her research interests are in the areas of Conceptual Modelling and Distributed Computing. VAHID MOJTAHED is a senior research officer working at the Department of Systems Modelling at the Swedish Defence Research Agency (FOI). He has been working on modelling and simulation for the past ten years and has led the CMMS project at FOI since 2001. He holds a Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering from Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden. His research interests are in the area of Conceptual Modelling, Simulation Framework and Information Operations and Warfare.