 EMBED PBrush  PDG / SG“Simulation Conceptual Modeling (SCM)”FINAL REPORTSubmitted to:The SISO Standards Activities Committee (SAC)Date:  ________________SISO-REF-nnn-2005Submitted By:Jack “Jake” BorahTable of Contents TOC \o "1-3" \h \z \u  HYPERLINK \l "_Toc109018593" 1.0	Introduction / Overview:	 PAGEREF _Toc109018593 \h 3 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc109018594" 2.0	PDG/SG Officers:	 PAGEREF _Toc109018594 \h 3 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc109018595" 3.0	PDG/SG Member List:	 PAGEREF _Toc109018595 \h 3 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc109018596" 4.0	Task Descriptions from the PN / TOR:	 PAGEREF _Toc109018596 \h 3 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc109018597" 5.0	Product Descriptions from the PN / TOR:	 PAGEREF _Toc109018597 \h 3 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc109018598" 6.0	Significant Results and/or Achievements	 PAGEREF _Toc109018598 \h 3 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc109018599" 7.0	Summary of Technical Findings	 PAGEREF _Toc109018599 \h 3 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc109018600" 8.0	Recommendations for Future SISO Actions - The Way Ahead	 PAGEREF _Toc109018600 \h 3 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc109018601" 9.0	References	 PAGEREF _Toc109018601 \h 41.0	Introduction / Overview:The Simulation Conceptual Modeling Study Group was to be formed in order to conduct a preliminary investigation on the best practices of simulation conceptual modeling and to establish recommendations for pursuit of the topic within the scope of the SISO, if appropriate.  A simulation conceptual model is an abstraction from either the existing or a notional physical world that serves as a frame of reference for further simulation development by documenting simulation-independent views of important entities and their key actions and interactions.  A simulation conceptual model describes what the simulation will represent, the assumptions limiting those representations, and other capabilities needed to satisfy the stakeholder’s requirements.  It bridges between these requirements, and simulation design.     2.0	PDG/SG Officers:Jack “Jake” Borah, ChairJean Louis Igarza, TAD3.0	PDG/SG Member List:AnokerGöranAsplundPerAuthMatthewBachmanJaneBadalLauraBaillifSebastienBergenthalJeffBergholtzMarcusBlaisCurtisBlakeDonnaBonadoLorenzoBosherPaulBostrōmMattiasBowersAndyBradeDirkBrindisiJoeCantotPascalChapmanBobChristakosJohnChristopherMaryCordnerTimothyCrushDaranDiRienzoVicDobeyVirginia T.DrakeDavidDrakeEllenDruidLarsDuckAndrewDumbleMackDunbarRichardEirichPeterElliottBobErlenbruchThomasFabianBillFigartGraydenFogleJeffFook NyenChoongForemanJoeGarcia LozanoMarianelaGirardotDanielGranlundKristinGrossDavidGuan ChuanLeeGuilleritJean-BaptisteGustavsonPaulHamberBobHarmonScottHerrePhilHuGilbertHughesGeorgeIgarzaJean-LouisJohanssonUlfKagaHitoshiKarrClarkKeenerRosemarieKenningMichelKok SengLowKonwinCrashLagerströmHåkanLarsenKimLauderdaleGraceLeePaulLehtovaaraKajLewisRobertLindoWayneLofStaffanLöfstrandBjörnLutzBobMcCrackenJimMcGlynnLanaMetzMichaelMillerRobinMojtahedVahidMorhackAndreaMorseKatherine L. MoulPaulMurlafaDincNordquistTommyOatesWilliamÔhlundGunnarOrg SeowMengPaceDaleParsonsGeorge MartyPorterKenRayDanRootLarryRougetChrisScannellChristopherSchowGregScrudderRoySeng JooThioSenkoBobSeveringhausRickShanksGrahamShellmanRaySmithNeilSolickSusanSollerJeromeStåhlPärStarkPatrickStellMarkStrandJohanTimianDonTranCamTrbovichSarahTurrellChrisVasendJerryWåågKristinaWaiteBillWallaceJimWisnudelJeffWoodyardJohnYoungbloodSimone4.0	Task Descriptions from the PN / TOR:1.  Research the use of conceptual modeling in the M&S or related information technology domains:Make a data call for readily available empirical evidence, with the intention of creating a set of best (most-effective) practices by leveraging successful and unsuccessful conceptual modeling experiences.2.  Perform exploratory work into the establishment of best practices for simulation conceptual modeling: Identify and evaluate prospective significance of the topic to the scope of the SISO and the interests of its members, addressing particularly the implications of conceptual modeling best practices for modeling and simulation.Refine existing conceptual modeling terminology, draft a taxonomy of concepts, document relevant techniques, and beneficial procedures.3. Consolidate the findings of the topical committees and establish recommendations for persistent management of the topic within SISO.5.0	Product Descriptions from the PN / TOR: Interim Progress Reports to Euro-SIW and Fall SIW.Topical committee reportsTable of Contents for Final Report Final Report of Study Group including:Final reports of any study topical sub-groups formed (including terminology),Best and most effective practices–OR-Recommendations on how to better collect data (if too little data returned), Recommendation to the SISO on the topic, and (if appropriate) an accompanying Program Plan.6.0	Significant Results and/or AchievementsThe SCM SG produced several persistent products for SISO and the M&S community.  These products were produced to achieve the SCM SG goals:The first product generated by the SCM SG was a magazine article which appeared in the SISO Simulation Technology (vol 6 issue 3 sep 03) magazine.The second product created was a SCM Bibliography which listed conceptual modeling documents (e.g. conference papers, books, web accessible slide presentations) relevant to the use of conceptual modeling in M&S.The third product was a set of foundation documents for a SCM Product Development Group.  This set of documents consisted of the SCM Introductory Statement, the SCM Topics Listing, the SCM Terminology for Definition, and the SCM Taxonomy of Concepts. 7.0	Summary of Technical Findings7.1  SCM BibliographyThe SCM bibliography does not use a traditional format to present the referenced information.  This was done intentionally for several reasons.   One of problems confronting novice conceptual modelers is a distinct lack of authoritative information detailing how to perform conceptual modeling in an M&S domain.  A key concept behind creating a “bibliography” was to provide to novice conceptual modelers a ready reference of conceptual modeling documents for their use.  An additional idea for the bibliography was to have each bibliography entry annotated by members of the M&S community.  The annotation of a bibliography entry was intended to summarize the contents of an entry for the novice conceptual modeler as well as indicate the entry’s significance in M&S conceptual modeling.  A final reason using a unique format for  the SCM Bibliography was the anticipated scope of the documentation which would be included in the bibliography.  The idea was to reference as much documentation as could be found on the topic M&S conceptual modeling.  The documentation was nominally expected to consist of conference papers and other published works.  However, useful documentation could also take the form of workshop presentations, or online web pages.  The format of helpful information was not going to become a barrier its inclusion.  7.2 SCM Introductory StatementA vision statement for SCM is required as the cornerstone upon which to base a set of recommended SCM practices.  The SCM SG began development of a vision statement to unifying the diverse stakeholder perspectives represented in the SCM SG.  People attending the SCM SG came from many differing parts of the M&S community.  M&S sponsors/users, requirement managers, simulation designers, software developers, and VV&A agents have joined the SCM SG.   The SCM Introductory statement is as follows: A simulation conceptual model is an abstraction from either the existing or a notional physical world that serves as a frame of reference for further simulation development by documenting simulation-independent views of important entities and their key actions and interactions.  A simulation conceptual model describes what the simulation will represent, the assumptions limiting those representations, and other capabilities needed to satisfy the stakeholder’s requirements.  It bridges between these requirements, and simulation design. This vision statement has gone through two review cycles within the SCM SG.  7.3 SCM TopicsA second foundation element that is required for the development of a set of recommended SCM practices is the scoping of the topics that the SCM best practices should address.  The members of the SCM SG nominated a lengthy list of topics that should be examined by a SCM PDG.  The suggested topics have been grouped into the following three general topics areas:1.  JustificationThe identification of the stakeholdersThe impact of conceptual models upon those stakeholdersAn indication of the value added by a conceptual model (business case for CM)Suggested methods to keep the M&S designer and the M&S developer on trackThe ability of conceptual model to address relevancy of real world componentsConceptual model only artifact to document relevancy of real world upon interactions where otherwise not recognizedPart of KA and simulation / model validation process 2.  MethodologyThe advancement of the understanding of a conceptual model, their creation and use process, goal to increase stakeholder’s requirements in final solution.An examination of the variety of formats (UML, animated Powerpoint, Word documents) needed communicate  between stakeholdersThe characterization of archivable products, persistent for communityThe establishment of a common thread of components of well-formed conceptual models (tools, critical mass of end user content, strategy and manage reusable items, training)An investigation of the reuse of legacy simulators The provision of a roadmap to reverse engineer conceptual model for legacy simulationsThe establishment of a vision of the future utility of a conceptual modelAn investigation of the reuse of systems/simulation engineering processes and productsThe consideration of a Bottom-up or top-down development  model for conceptual models The documentation of the rationale for layering of conceptual modeling (national, commercial security interests)The establishment of the boundaries of conceptual model (conceptual, design, implementation)3.  RelationshipsThe capability to provide support for VV&AThe investigation of the applicability of proposed SCM best practices to M&S communities broader than the DoD audience (game developers)The definition of the relationship to other SISO PDGs (BOM and VV&A Overlay)The documentation of the relationship to high level simulation development processes (e.g. IEEE 1516.3 FEDEP Recommended Practices Guide)The suggested topics and the grouping of those topics has gone through two review cycles within the SCM SG without comment.  7.4 SCM Terminology for DefinitionA third foundation element that is required for the development of a set of recommended SCM practices is the definition of the terminology used in conjunction with the SCM best practices.  The members of the SCM SG nominated a list of terms that should be defined by a SCM PDG.  The similar terms have been grouped together in the following list:ModelModelingSimulationSimulation conceptual modelPurpose(s)RequirementsIdentifyAudiencesStakeholdersDomain spaceReferentRepresentationAbstractionCaptureDescribeAssumptionsLimitationsResolutionFidelityConsistencyComposabilityInteroperabilityPattern(s)LayeringValidation of conceptual modelWell-formed CMCredibilityLegacy simulation/simulatorEvolutionThe suggested terms and the grouping of those terms has gone through two review cycles within the SCM SG.  7.5 SCM Taxonomy of ConceptsA fourth foundation element that is required for the development of a set of recommended SCM practices is the establishment of a taxonomy of SCM concepts.  Once more the members of the SCM SG nominated a list of concepts that should be arranged in a taxonomy by a SCM PDG.  The similar concepts have been grouped together in the following list:Stakeholder perspectivesRequirements artifact vs design artifactFormal vs informalRequirements definition and traceabilityMethodology of establishing credibilityConfiguration management of CM (timestamping)Evolutionary nature of CM (changing uses for CM over time)Support to ancillary documentationTypes (formats capture and presentation) of SCMs Range of conceptual model usesPurposes of SCMsScope of SCM, e.g. federation vs federate (stand alone or associated execution)Common frame of reference for SCMFidelity resolution (level of detail / level of abstraction / decomposition of M&S domain space)Attributes or characteristics of a SCMCommunication pathways internal and external (technical and management)Coherence (consistency) between SCM viewsAssumption of composability for SCMIndependence from implementation vs. application specificityThe suggested concepts and the grouping of those concepts has gone through two review cycles within the SCM SG.  8.0	Recommendations for Future SISO Actions - The Way AheadThe SCM SG has established the following long term goals for the SCM topic within SISO:Formulate a SCM Recommended Practices Guide as a balloted community product as an extension of the FEDEP.Provide input for the DMSO VV&A Recommended Practices Guide web site.Provide a sound foundation for related SISO development groups (e.g. VV&A FEDEP Overlay PDG, BOM PDG).It is the recommendation of the SCM SG that a SCM Standing Study Group be formed to continue the progress that has been made by the SCM SG as simulation conceptual modeling is an important and necessary enabler of simulation interoperability. 9.0	ReferencesPlease provide the list of references applicable to the PDG/SG’s activities and products.SISO-REF-nnn-2005SISO PDG/SG Final ReportSISO-REF-nnn-2005SISO PDG/SG Final Report