05F-SIW-106Live, Virtual, and Constructive Asset MergeFor Joint Red FlagJoe SorrocheASRC Communications, Ltd.USAF Distributed Mission Operations Center (USAF DMOC)4500 Aberdeen Dr., SE, Building 942Kirtland Air Force Base, NM 87117505-853-0372, DSN 263-0372joe.sorroche@kirtland.af.milKeywords:DMOC, PDU, Entities. ABSTRACT: The Joint Red Flag (JRF) Exercise conducted in March 2005 combined 5 different service training events and linked several facilities across the U.S., and included coalition force training.  Live assets were incorporated into the virtual and constructive environment, as well as Army, Navy, and Marine units, providing the first Joint Services Live, Virtual, and Constructive (LVC) Training event. For the Virtual and Constructive parts of each event, the data transferred among simulations incorporated many protocols, including Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS), High Level Architecture (HLA), Test and Enabling Network Architecture (TENA), North Atlantic Treaty Organization-Exercise data (NATO-EX), Tactical Digital Information Link – J (TADIL J), Video Tele-Conferencing (VTC), and scenario playback capability for exercise brief and de-briefs. Many different WANs and LANs were used to exchange the different protocols between simulators.  The network design was very complex, and involved different types of software tools, such as gateways, filters, and transmission conversions.  All were used simultaneously, and provided successful data exchange throughout the JRF event.  One specific Live, Virtual, and Constructive training requirement was using a Virtual Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (VSTARS) at Robbins Air Force Base to provide ground awareness data for the Red Flag Live Fly training event.  All mission training objectives were accomplished as though the Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (JSTARS) aircraft participated in the Red Flag event. This paper first describes the technical approach, issues, and engineering solutions in managing the distributed network data, and then describes the JRF Live Fly training LVC merge.1.	IntroductionJoint Red Flag 05 (JRF 05) was a Joint Services approved training exercise involving Army, Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps and Special Operations Forces (SOF), and three coalition countries in a combined theater of operations.  U.S. Air Force Air Combat Command was the executive agent for planning and executing the joint services training event.  JRF focused on horizontal and vertical interoperability among functional components and tactical forces.  The services selected specific Joint Tactical Tasks (JTTS) for emphasis during JRF05.  JRF05 was conducted to enhance joint interoperability and training by providing joint context and enhancements for the selected JTTS.  JRF05 combined several distributed exercises.  They were:  Red Flag 05-3.2, Air Warrior 050-5, Virtual Flag 05-3, Roving Sands 05, Joint Service Training Exercise (JSTE), and a Combined Air Operations Center (CAOC) exercise.  The exercises were combined into a single transformational joint event.  In addition, forces from other nations were provided opportunities to train in the joint environment.  All training events were incorporated into one common environment, providing the first Joint Services Live, Virtual, and Constructive (LVC) Training event. Data transferred among simulations incorporated many protocols, including Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS), High Level Architecture (HLA), Test and Enabling Network Architecture (TENA), North Atlantic Treaty Organization-Exercise data (NATO-EX), Tactical Digital Information Link - J (TADIL-J), Video Tele-Conferencing (VTC), and scenario playback capability for exercise brief and de-briefs. Many different Wide Area Networks (WANs) and Local Area Networks (LANs) were used to exchange the different protocols among simulators.  The network design was very complex, and involved different types of software tools, such as gateways, filters, and transmission conversions.  All were used simultaneously, and provided successful data exchange throughout the JRF event.  One specific Live, Virtual, and Constructive training requirement was using a Virtual Joint Strike Target Attack Reconnaissance System (VSTARS) at Robbins Air Force Base to provide ground awareness to the Red Flag Live Fly training event.  All event training objectives were accomplished as though the Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (JSTARS) aircraft participated in the Red Flag event. This paper presents the technical approach, issues, and engineering solutions in managing the distributed network data, and then describes the Red Flag Live Fly training LVC merge.  The WAN requirements, technical approach, issues, and engineering solutions in managing the distributed network data are presented first. DMOC WAN RequirementsJRF required connection with over 25 sites across the United States, which included Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine assets.  The DMOC JRF WAN connections are shown in Figure 1.  The Joint Test and Experimentation Network (JTEN) WAN was the primary JRF WAN that provided connectivity between several sites.  The JTEN was used extensively to provide all simulation protocol data to JRF sites.  JRF sites that did not have a JTEN connection were able to connect using existing networks connected to the DMOC, such as the DMON, DREN, MDANET, and many T-1s.The JTEN WAN was divided into four separate Virtual Networks:  The Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Network, the Collaboration Network, the Command, Control, Communications, Computer and Intelligence (C4I) Network, and the Brief/De-Brief (B/DB) Network.  These networks are described next.Modeling and Simulation NetworkThe M&S network contained all simulation “truth” data, that is, contained data that simulations exchange when participating in a distributed event.  M&S data protocols are described in Section 1.3.  The M&S network was one of four different networks that were configured on the JTEN WAN.  One JTEN WAN requirement was that all data on the M&S network would be the HLA protocol, and sent using multicast transmission.  The DIS protocol uses a broadcast transmission.   For sites and simulations requiring use of the JTEN and using DIS, TENA, or DMON Portal M&S protocols, gateway conversions between protocols and how they are transmitted were required.  The DMOC was the central location where M&S data was converted as required.   Figure 1.  JRF DMOC WAN ConfigurationCollaboration NetworkThe Collaboration network was used to send JRF operational data between sites.  Operational data consisted of the Air Tasking Order (ATO), the Air Combat Order (ACO), Special Instructions (SPINS), and non-M&S protocol message exchange from the CAOC to all JRF participants.  The Collaboration network was setup to segregate non M&S data, as well as provide a distributed network for coalition participants.  C4I NetworkThe C4I network contained all tactical data, including TADIL J, TIBS, TRAP, and USMTF messages.  The network provided a way to exchange tactical data between distributed sites that could not otherwise use the M&S network.  For example, TADIL J could be sent on the C4I network or the M&S network, depending on the specific simulation capabilities.  Previously, tactical data was sent using a serial interface and STU IIIs.  However, the amount of STU IIIs required for tactical data exchange exceeded what was available.  A separate C4I network met the requirement of JRF tactical data message exchange. Brief/De-Brief NetworkJRF training events required crew briefs and de-briefs between many sites.  A Brief/De-Brief (B/DB) network was set up for VTC data exchange between sites.  Sites that were connected to the JTEN could participate in any and all JRF event briefs.DMOC LAN DescriptionAll JRF WANs connected to the DMOC were connected to the DMOC Common LAN, a 100 Mbps internal network.  A typical Common LAN configuration is shown in Figure 2.  The network is configured for Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) Protocol data.  Because of the high simulation Protocol Data Unit (PDU) rate associated with this exercise, DIS Filter Analyzers (DFA) feed individual internal DMOC LANs and external WANs, depending on the data requirements.   Each DFA was configured to protect a simulation from an excess of PDUs, protect a simulation from PDUs that it does not handle adequately, limit bandwidth on a WAN, or perform translations between systems with incompatible implementations of the DIS standard.  M&S data that was not in the DIS protocol was converted using gateways to convert data as requiredFigure 2.  DMOC Common LAN ConfigurationRequired data sent to external sites was determined by what was required to fulfill training requirements for the site-specific crew.  These training requirements were presented and discussed during the VF 05-3 Exercise Planning Conference (EPC).  Once training requirements were presented, the types of data sent and received from each site were derived and the DFA for that site was configured as required.    JRF Modeling and Simulation ProtocolsFour Modeling and Simulation (M&S) protocols used for distributed events were employed for JRF05.  They were Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS), IEEE 1278.1a, High Level Architecture (HLA), IEEE 1516, Distributed Missions Operations Network Protocol (DMON), and the Test Enabling Network Architecture (TENA).  The VF training event, conducted from the DMOC, used the DIS protocol.  Most DMOC simulators exchanged simulation data using the DIS protocol, and most VF external participants also used the DIS protocol.  One DMOC simulator and some distributed sites exchanged simulation data using the HLA protocol.  The DMOC was used as a central location for M&S data protocol conversion.   For external sites that are sending HLA protocol data to the DMOC, the data was converted to DIS using the JTEN provided DIS/HLA gateway, then sent to the Common LAN.  For the DMON sites, the data was converted from the DMON Portal protocol to DIS, then sent through the DFA to the DMOC Common LAN.   For the JRF range data using the TENA protocol, the TENA data was converted to HLA using the TENA/HLA gateway at Nellis, then sent to the DMOC using the JTEN, then converted to DIS using the JTEN provided DIS/HLA gateway, and then sent through a DFA to the DMOC Common LAN.   Other M&S data protocols used during JRF were TADIL J, TIBS, Secure Command Data Link (SCDL), also known as NATO EX, Information Broadcast System (IBS), Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) telemetry and imagery, Blue Force Tracker (BFT), and Hook 112 messages.   These are described next.TADIL JTADIL J was used extensively for JRF to provide the CAOC a data link picture of the entire event.  The DMOC played a central role in TADIL J conversions and data distribution.  Sites that were not connected to the JTEN connected their TADIL J output to the DMOC’s Common Connectivity Device (CCD) using other DMOC network connections, such as T-1s or other WANs. The CCD is able to handle up to 8 TADIL J connections.  In addition, the CCD could convert from one TADIL J transmission protocol to another, such as from Serial J to Socket J, or from Global Command and Control – J (GCCS – J) to SIMPLE.  All TADIL J connections were combined, and then sent to the CAOC at Nellis using the JTEN C4I network.  Some TADIL J messages required the simulation bit either set or re-set, which was accomplished by the CCD.NATO EX NATO EX is an unclassified version of the Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (JSTARS) and CGS Surveillance and Control Data Link (SCDL).  Virtual Flag uses NATO EX messages to connect JSTARS simulators to CGS and Joint Service Workstation (JSWS) systems. NATO EX supports Moving Target Indicator (MTI) and Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) messages one-way from JSTARS to ground systems. Two-way messages include free text messages, and messages that support Radar Service Requests.  Because of issues unique to the use of IP network systems, DMOC has developed TACCSF Software Router (TSR) software to buffer large messages from the JSTARS simulators to the ground systems.  Without the TSR, Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) images in particular are broken up, leading to incomplete images at Army Common Ground System (CGS) and Joint Services Work Station (JSWS) sites.Information Broadcast SystemInformation Broadcast System (IBS) consists of two protocols, IBS – Interactive, and IBS- Synchronous.  IBS is another tactical data link used by the CAOC for situational intelligence purposes.  The DMOC Cobra Ball simulation produced IBS - S messages, and sent these to the CAOC over the JTEN C4I network.Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Telemetry and ImageryUnmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) Telemetry and Imagery data were provide to the Nellis CAOC from the DMOC UAV simulators.  The UAV simulators were set up on their specific LAN, which then received DIS entity state data and converted the entities into images and sent these images to the CAOC on the C4I network.  Image data files are usually megabits in size.  Although the JTEN had allocated enough bandwidth for transmission, there still could be data loss due to bandwidth spikes or other network data packet losses.  To avoid data loss resulting in incomplete images, the DMOC TSR [Ref 2] was used to meter the data and ensure 100% data transmission.  All UAV images sent to the CAOC were complete, with no data loss.Blue Force Tracker and Hook 112 MessagesThe Distributed Information Warfare Constructive Environment (DICE) simulation produced Blue Force Tracker (BFT) messages for JRF.  DICE read the M&S DIS data and produced BFT messages and sent to the CAOC over the JTEN C4I network. Joint Red Flag Network ManagementWith over 100 LANs and 20 WANs, configuration of this vast network required a careful review of data required by all JRF sites.  The data required for each site was entered into the DFA Manager, an executable that manages all DFA GUIs from one display [Ref 2].  The configuration files for each filter were routinely saved, so that the latest configuration files were available when the DFA Manager required the specific JRF configuration files.  The network diagram tool used was MS Visio.  Internal and external network diagram Visio files were tracked using the configuration management tool ClearQuest, so that all changes were tracked and the latest versions of DMOC network diagram files were available.  Network changes during integration testing and the JRF event were implemented as follows:The Maintenance Cell Officer, the Systems Engineering Lead, and the JRF Exercise Engineer were informed of the network issue and suggested change to correct or address the issue.When the suggested change was approved, the network engineer recorded the change on the network diagram, and then changed the network.The change was then tested to verify the issue was resolved.Network Configuration Management played a key role in tracking all network changes, such that the network diagram was an accurate document of what was configured to support the JRF event.  2.	Joint Red Flag LVC ResultsThe Joint Red Flag (JRF) Exercise, held 21 March – 1 April 2005, proved that combining LVC assets could be accomplished in support of large distributed simulation events.  The JRF requirements, network description, and test results are presented in the following sections.2.1	Joint Red Flag LVC RequirementThe LVC requirement for the JRF live fly portion was for Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (JSTARS) to provide the ground tactical picture for air to ground assets.  However, due to scheduling issues, no JSTARS was available to support this live fly event.  However, an alternate solution was presented; to use the Test and Training Enabling Architecture (TENA) gateway to convert live ground tracks on the Nellis range into tracks that could be sent on the simulation WAN.  These tracks would be sent to the Virtual JSTARS (VSTARS) at Robins AFB, where crews could provide Fixed Target Indicators (FTI) and Moving Target Indicators (MTI) to live fly assets that required this data.  The data would be sent back the same way as the range data was sent.  Several gateways would be required, including the TENA Gateway, DIS/HLA Gateway, the DMON Portal, and the TSR.  Joint Red Flag Network DesignThe JRF network design included over 100 LANs spread across 20 different WANs, as shown in Figure 1.  WANs used during JRF included the JTEN, DMON, DTOC, MDANET, and 15 different T-1 connections.  For the JRF LVC merge requirement, network requirements were derived from the list of required sites and data required for the JRF Live Fly training event.  The data and how it would flow among sites are described next.  Joint Red Flag Live, Virtual, and Constructive Data FlowThe Nellis Range data was sent to the TENA middleware, part of the TENA common infrastructure, then converted to HLA using the HLA/TENA Gateway.  The HLA data was sent using the JTEN to DMOC, where it was then converted to DIS Entity State Protocol Data Units (PDUs).  The conversion from HLA to DIS was required because of filtering requirements between the ground Command and Control (C2) assets and the Air C2 assets for VF 05-3.  The DMOC DIS Filter fulfilled all filtering requirements; no HLA filter was available at the time.  The Joint Conflict and Tactical Simulation (JCATS) provided additional ground entities and ground clutter for the VSTARS simulator.  Then, the DIS data was sent to the DMON Portal at DMOC, where it was converted to DMON Portal protocol data, then sent to the VSTARS trainers at Robins Air Force Base.  The Nellis range ground assets were displayed on the VSTARS simulator, where JSTARS operators were able to provide Fixed Target Indicators (FTI), Moving Target Indicators (MTI) in JSTARS NATO EX format, and TADIL J message data, including J2.2 and 3.5 messages.  The data was encapsulated using the TSR, then sent back to DMOC over the DMON, bypassing the DMON Portal.  The data was then sent to the Nellis range over the JTEN, where another TSR removed the packet header data and sent the TADIL J and NATO EX data to the Nellis Common Air Operations Center (CAOC).  There, the data was displayed as part of the Common Operational Picture (COP).  This data had the same information as though a JSTARS was flying at the Nellis range.  A detailed WAN diagram of the LVC data path is shown in Figure 3. Data flow from the Nellis test range to Robins Air Force Base showed approximately 800 ground tracks.  These tracks were monitored as DIS Entity State PDUs at the DMOC, using a DIS data monitoring and recording tool, RedSim.  DMOC recorded data flow using RedSim, which showed all Entity State PDUs from Nellis, and the VSTARS Entity State PDU.  Bandwidth usage for this portion of the exercise was between 1Mbps and 3 Mbps, and varied depending on the time of the exercise, update rates of DIS PDUs, and voice communication between the JSTARS crew at Robins AFB and the CAOC at Nellis.  For voice communications between LV assets, the data flow was the same as entity state PDU flow, using DIS and HLA voice protocols.  The VSTARS simulator had specific simulated voice frequencies, which were sent via the DMON Portal to DMOC, where it was converted to DIS voice, then converted to HLA voice protocol and sent via the JTEN to the Nellis CAOC, which supplemented the COP.  Joint Red Flag Test ResultsData flow from the Nellis test range to Robins Air Force Base showed approximately 800 ground tracks. These tracks were monitored as DIS Entity State PDUs at the DMOC, using a DIS data monitoring and recording tool, RedSim.  DMOC recorded data flow using RedSim, which showed all Nellis.  Entity State PDUs from Nellis, and the VSTARS Entity State PDU.  Bandwidth usage for this portion of the exercise was between 1Mbps and 3 Mbps, and varied depending on the time of the exercise, update rates of DIS PDUs, and voice communication between the JSTARS crew at Robins AFB and the CAOC.  The Nellis CAOC was provided a tactical air and ground picture from Live, Virtual, and Constructive (LVC) assets, the first such from a Joint services event.  The tactical data provided by the VSTARS trainer at Robins AFB was displayed as though a JSTARS was participating in the live fly portion of JRF.  The air picture displayed at the Nellis CAOC showed a seamless integration of LVC data, provided valuable training for CAOC personnel, and showed that live and virtual assets can be combined in Figure 3.  JRF LVC Networka single event.  The seamless integration of LVC data was verified, and used in conjunction with the DMOC, can be used to enhance live fly training events when live assets are not available.  3.	ConclusionsThe LVC merge during JRF was extremely successful, and all training audiences met all event objectives.  All JRF technical concepts and issues were resolved such that live fly training can be enhanced with simulators, if implemented carefully.  Distributed training and simulation such as JRF events provide today's warfighters with a realistic training environment, which included LVC assets.   Also, technical personnel from each participating site worked together as a team and solved complex technical issues.  The VF training concept “train like we fight”, and “no participants will be a training aid in a VF event” were incorporated into JRF, and this training concept ensured that all JRF participants met their specific training objectives.  The VF and JRF event used many different distributed simulation protocols.  However, there are still many DIS-based distributed exercise infrastructures remaining in the simulation and training community.  In many cases these infrastructures will remain in place for years.  As the role of distributed LVC simulation grows, it is imperative to use gateways between other simulation protocols, to ensure interoperability between simulations and sites.  Tools such tools such as HLA and TENA gateways, the DMOC DFA and TSR allow us to move forward, and add to the training realism.  Network infrastructure design processes and control will also be imperative as the distributed simulation network grows in size and complexity.There are other technologies that provide similar functionality; however, the tools and processes described in this paper offer maximum flexibility while maintaining minimal impact to the existing network and exercises infrastructures.4.	AcknowledgementsWe thank the DMOC for sponsoring this paper and providing network engineering support.  Additionally, we extend our thanks to Mr. Tom Brown, LMC, DMOC’s Chief Engineer, Mr. William Elliott, DMOC’s Technical Advisor, and Lt. Col Phillips, DMOC’s Commander, and Lt. Col Ron Wiegand, 505th EXS Group Commander5.	References IEEE Standard for Distributed Interactive Simulation--Application Protocols; IEEE 1278.1a, 1998.Bandwidth Reduction Techniques Used in DIS Exercises: An Update SISO Paper 05F-SIW-105, Joe Sorroche and Jerry Szulinski, 13 July 2005. Lessons Learned From Virtual Flag Integration, I/ITSEC Paper 1648, Alan Berry, December 2004.Exercise Plan for Virtual Flag 05-3, DMOC, 9 February 2005.Exercise Report for Virtual Flag 05-3, DMOC, 6 May 2005.BiographyMr. SORROCHE has 17 years professional experience; 10 years experience in the Modeling and Simulation field. He currently works for Arctic Slope Regional Corporation Communications (ASRCC) at the DMOC as the Exercise Director for distributed exercises, and has been the Engineering lead for the DMOC for JEFX 06, JEFX 04, Millennium Challenge 02, JEFX 2000, JEFX 99, EFX 98, and many Blue Flag and Virtual Flag exercises. He is the Vice Chair for the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) Tactical Data Links Study Group, the Link 16 Product Development Group Chair, and the SISO Liaison for the NATO Tactical Data Link Interoperability Testing Syndicate.  Mr. Sorroche is a co-recipient of the Fall 2002 SIWZIE Award for paper 02F-SIW-119 titled “TADIL TALES.”  He has Bachelors and Masters of Science Degrees in Electrical Engineering from New Mexico State University.  He is a member of Tau Beta Pi and Eta Kappa Nu Honor Societies.   