Issues in Using the Environmental Data Coding Specification for Data InterchangeDr. Dale D. MillerAnnette Janett FilerLockheed Martin Simulation, Training & SupportAdvanced Simulation Center13810 SE Eastgate Way, Suite 440(425) 957-3259Bellevue, WA 98006 HYPERLINK "dale.d.miller@lmco.com" dale.d.miller@lmco.com,  HYPERLINK "ajanett@lads.is.lmco.com" ajanett@lads.is.lmco.comDr. Paul A. BirkelThe MITRE CorporationMcLean, VA HYPERLINK "mailto:pbirkel@mitre.org" pbirkel@mitre.orgKeywords:data dictionary, environmental data, standards organization, Environment Data Coding SpecificationABSTRACT: This paper discusses interchange issues presented in “The Environmental Data Coding Specification and its SISO Role” (05S-SIW-098). The authors of the current paper include members of the SISO EDCS Product Development Group (PDG), including its vice-chair, and the original developer and prior editor of the International Standard. This paper represents a “minority opinion” of the PDG. Some of these issues are common to any data dictionary – perfection is an elusive goal (and growing pains are natural) – these issues with the EDCS include imprecise definitions and continuing reliance on early drafts of the EDCS by some well-established Army application-development programs. However, our primary concern is that many environmental concept definitions, which often have direct lineage to other authoritative definitions, have been sequentially perturbed to the point at which the semantic concepts have significantly deviated from those of their ancestor(s). This returns us along a path toward the predicament for which the EDCS was originally designed to provide the solution.IntroductionAs recently reported at this workshop, the Environmental Data Coding Specification (EDCS) was successfully balloted as a Final Draft International Standard (FDIS) in the ISO/IEC international standards process. In June 2005 it was formally published as an International Standard and thus approved to begin register-based extension. The EDCS provides a dictionary of environmental concepts for all environmental domains, including terrain, atmosphere, ocean and space.In May, 2000, a SISO Product Development Group (PDG) first formally met to provide SISO inputs to the international standardization process, and, through a subsequent series of meetings, to assess the potential of the EDCS as an interoperability standard for the SISO community. This PDG has authored several SIW papers during the evolution of the standard. Most recently, the paper “The Environmental Data Coding Specification and its SISO Role” (05S-SIW-098)  REF _Ref109123095 \r \h [1], recommends that the standard be formally endorsed by SISO for the representation and exchange of environmental data in and among modeling and simulation (M&S) applications. All authors of this paper are members or officers of the PDG or formal advisors to the group. (Particular responsibilities and experiences are given in the author biographies.) This paper represents a minority opinion of the PDG that was originally proposed for inclusion in the above cited paper, but it was agreed to address these issues independently. Not only was the EDCS developed using the rigor of the ISO/IEC standardization processes, but its development required a strong commitment, and indeed, a labor of love and desire for scientific advance by the many involved. The authors have each contributed to the EDCS and can point to specific concepts, definitions, organizational structures and documentation for which we are directly responsible. It is neither our intention to denigrate the EDCS nor to dispute any of the assertions or recommendations in  REF _Ref109123095 \r \h [1]; rather, we believe that the message should be complemented with an open disclosure of issues and concerns which have been voiced by several Communities of Interest (COI), including data producers, operational and M&S data consumers, and software system developers. Some of these issues are common to any data dictionary – perfection is an elusive goal; these issues with the EDCS include imprecise definitions and continuing reliance on early drafts of the EDCS by some well-established Army application-development programs.However, our primary concern is that many environmental concept definitions, which often have direct lineage to other authoritative definitions, have been sequentially perturbed in the interests of rigor and internal consistency (within the EDCS), to the point at which the semantic concepts have significantly deviated from those of their ancestor(s). In some ways, this returns us to the predicament for which the EDCS was originally designed to provide the solution: a producer says “I can produce THIS, and you want THAT?” (or vice versa). A key enabler to resolving this issue is the formation of authoritative mappings among items/concepts in these different data dictionaries. Were the THIS and the THAT of the previous paragraph to be authoritatively equated, the issue reduces to simple syntactic manipulation of data sets (e.g., the type of manipulations that can be accomplished by XSL stylesheets on XML-based datasets). If semantic nuance differences are authoritatively documented, the issue is diminished, and the COIs have the motivation and opportunity to redefine and realign their dictionary concepts as required to meet mission (or business) objectives. If similar terms are deemed semantically distinct, the COIs have the opportunity to add concepts to their data dictionaries for better alignment.Better communication and understanding among the COIs are required, and we recommend that the DoD empower and fund an authority to define and scrutinize mappings among these various dictionaries. The Joint community is currently in the process of establishing the Defense Geospatial Community (DGC) comprised of a family of coordinated COIs to address issues in geospatial data exchange. Mappings should be added to their list of activities.EDCS IssuesIn this section, several issues with the EDCS from the standpoint of achieving cross-application/system environmental data interoperability are identified.Suboptimal definitionsAs illustrated in  REF _Ref109123095 \r \h [1], the definitions in the EDCS have some weaknesses. The example given discusses nuance differences between the EDCS attributes predominant_vegetation_height, height_agl and height_above_surface_level. Without belaboring the point further, we note that some care must be exercised when selecting concepts to ensure that the most appropriate choice has been made. The remedy is to improve these definitions as part of a future amendment process as concepts already included in the published EDCS International Standard may not be changed through registration.Imperfect and non-authoritative mappingsThe EDCS began as an upward-compatible extension to the DGIWG Feature and Attribute Coding Catalogue (FACC), and well-defined exact 1:1 mappings existed from the features, attributes and enumerations of FACC Edition 2.0 to those of the EDCS. The FACC was chosen as the starting point for the EDCS (originally the SEDRIS Data Coding Standard – SDCS) as it was the authoritative coding standard for topographic and hydrographic data in the DoD.In the last several years, however, both the FACC and the EDCS have evolved essentially independently. For both standards, definitions have been improved, attributes have been factored into multiple attributes, and new enumerations have been revised, added or removed. For example, the FACC progressed to Edition 2.1 in December 2000, then a series of 4 subsequent baselines through December 2003. Subsequently a major overhaul has taken place to create the DGIWG Feature Data Dictionary (FDD) and three DFDD baselines were released in the past 18 months. In addition, the DoD has added hundreds of additional concepts to the NSG FDD beyond those adopted for DoD use from the (international) DFDD. In parallel, but not coordinated, the EDCS has evolved through multiple working and then committee drafts to finally achieve the content of the published International Standard.As a result, the meaning of an EDCS concept may not be precisely the same as its lineage FACC 2.0 (and subsequent FACC Edition 2.1) concept, and examples can be given in which this is clearly the case. Moreover, a mapping from one dictionary to the other, originally 1:1 on both features/classifications and attributes (and their enumerants), is now, at best, a complex mapping that can be defined only on triples <feature/classification, attribute, enumerant>. Finally, the existing mapping no longer reflects the actual use of the NFDD in DoD data exchange today.Another significant data modeling program with military applications has made similar observations regarding the creation and maintenance of authoritative mappings. The Multilateral Interoperability Programme (MIP), established in 1998, developed the Command and Control Information Exchange Data Model (C2IEDM). On the issue of mapping complexity, Schmitt states  REF _Ref108412268 \r \h [2]:The required mapping rules can be very complex in practice. In particular, this holds in cases in which there is no clear 1:1 mapping of concepts. For instance, n attributes of the ODB [operational data base] might have to be mapped onto m attributes in the C2IEDM where the attributes may be distributed over several entities.This explosion of mapping complexity is further exacerbated by the fact that authoritative mappings simply do not exist. While SEDRIS has defined such mappings in their ”FACC 2.1 to EDCS 4.0 Mapping SDK Release 4.0.0" and "EDCS 4.0 to FACC 2.1 Mapping SDK Release 4.0.0" software development kit implementations, they have not been subjected to the scrutiny of the standardization process, and many errors remain. The accuracy of these mappings are unlikely to improve over time unless specific efforts are funded to validate and update them to current DoD practice (e.g., the NFDD). Such mappings are not part of the ISO standard and do not receive any attention from the activities of ISO/IEC JTC1 SC24 to manage the content of the International Register of Graphical Items – EDCS Section.We (the authors) take some blame in the current state of misalignment of the EDCS with other authoritative feature data dictionaries. In 2001, one of us had the audacity to suggest to the developers of the USIGS Conceptual Data Model (UCDM) (which included a dictionary for geospatial information) that they should abandon their data dictionary and embrace ours, the EDCS, if only because ours was undergoing ISO standardization and theirs might be relegated to a shelf at the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) (now NGA). (Little did we realize that the entire world of data producers was not about to embrace our EDCS work in its perfection.)But we fault those in our footsteps even further; not for their motivations or their scientific methodology, but for the application of rigor to its extreme. As “dictionarions” iteratively refined definitions of environmental classification, attribute and enumeration terms, the concepts simultaneously became more precise and semantically distinct from the terms upon which they were based. One of us, a mathematician, appreciates the beauty of precision. The two others, computer scientists, wonder whether practicality has bowed to elegance. If we in the M&S community insist upon the EDCS as our environmental data dictionary, we will have interoperability problems with authoritative data providers, environmental data consumers in other communities (e.g., C4ISR), and even with M&S programs that have embraced previous draft versions of the EDCS.We provide several examples of inexact mappings from FACC 2.1 to the EDCS International Standard. The concepts of losslessness and correctness of mappings are introduced and discussed in  REF _Ref109182244 \r \h [3].Example 1. The example shown in  REF _Ref109200032 \h Table 1, discussed in considerably more detail in  REF _Ref109182244 \r \h [3], is an example of a correct but lossy mapping. Many people would agree that the two human-understandable designators, “Wrecking Yard/Scrap Yard” and “recycling_site” conjure up quite different mental images. However, the two definitions are very similar, with only the word “recycling” added to the EDCS definition. Most people would agree that the definitions have a subtle difference, and the mappings between them would not be lossless. A different semantic would necessarily be assigned to the same data item when represented in the two different systems/applications. This is undesirable from an interoperability standpoint. The resulting differences in system/application behaviors may have unanticipated (and difficult to identify/localize) consequences.Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 1. Correct but Lossy MappingFACC 2.1Code/Label FACCDefinitionEDCS 4.0 LabelEDCS 4.0 DefinitionAB010: Wrecking Yard/Scrap Yard An area or site engaged in the wrecking, dismantling, storage, or resale of discarded products. (See also AB000)recycling_siteA site engaged in the wrecking, dismantling, storage, recycling, and/or resale of discarded or scrap products.Example 2. Shown in  REF _Ref109200050 \h Table 2 are a set of mappings from FACC 2.1 “features” to EDCS triples of <classification, attribute, enumeration>. Most people would agree that the mapped concepts are related but different.Example 3.  REF _Ref109199947 \h Table 3 provides examples of lossy and incorrect one-to-one classification (feature) mappings. Many of these would result in mission-significant differences in system/application behavior, throwing into question model or simulation results (e.g., in embedded trainers) when used with authoritative source environmental data.Example 4.  REF _Ref109205885 \h Table 4 contains examples of SEDRIS mappings of FACC 2.1 enumerations to EDCS enumerations that are lossy and correct, or lossy and incorrect. In addition, some examples are judged to be unambiguous errors in the mapping assignment process.Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 2. Lossy and Incorrect MappingsFACC Feature LabelFACC Feature DefinitionEDCS Classification Label EDCS Classification DefinitionEDCS Attribute LabelEDCS Enumeration LabelEDCS Enumeration DefinitionIE020: MiscellaneousContains topographical details and other information.OBJECT_SET A NON_EMPTY_SET of OBJECTs.OBJECT_SET_TYPEELEVATIONRelated to the relief or ELEVATION of the TERRAIN.CA040: Contour Polygon (Land)An arbitrary area outline created to establish elevation as polygons.OBJECT_SET A NON_EMPTY_SET of OBJECTs.OBJECT_SET_TYPEHYPSOGRAPHYRelated to the TERRAIN that directly depict TERRAIN_ELEVATION information, including CONTOURs and SPOT_ELEVATIONs; relief or hypsography.EB030: Land Use/Land Cover (Vegetation)Thematic classification of the predominant vegetation and land use characteristics of the land surface covers.OBJECT_SET A NON_EMPTY_SET of OBJECTs.OBJECT_SET_TYPELAND_COVERRelated to the TERRAIN, including agricultural and extraction activities, and related SURFACE characteristics; land use or cover.BG010: US-Current Flow UK-Current Flow/Tidal Stream DirectionThe flow direction of a current.OBJECT_SET A NON_EMPTY_SET of OBJECTs.OBJECT_SET_TYPEMARINE_ENVIRONMENTEnvironmental characteristics relating to WATERBODY_CURRENTs, TIDEs, and anomalies of significance to marine navigation; marine limit.Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 3. Lossy and incorrect one-to-one classification (feature) mappingsFACC 2.1 NameFACC 2.1 DefinitionEDCS 4.0 LabelEDCS 4.0 DefinitionMapping NotesCableAn insulated wire, or group of wires formed into one continuous strand, located underground or underwater. (See also AT006, AT030 and AT060)ELECTRICAL_CABLEA NON_EMPTY_SET of insulated WIREs formed into one continuous strand for the purpose of transmitting electrical power or signals; an electrical cable.Incorrect and lossy -- ELECTRICAL_CABLE is not necessarily underground or underwater.Depot (Storage)An area used for the storage of products or supplies. (See also AB000)STORAGE_DEPOTA FACILITY including one of more STORAGE_STRUCTUREs; a storage depot.Incorrect and lossy – e.g., Depot (Storage) could be comprised of piles of materials in a fenced area without STORAGE_STRUCTUREsProcessing Plant/Treatment PlantA site used for changing or refining a particular material.PROCESSING_FACILITYA FACILITY including one or more PROCESSING_BUILDINGs; a processing facility.Incorrect and lossy -- Processing Plant/Treatment Plant may not have buildings.SettlementA concentration of small dwellings.SETTLEMENTA concentration of DWELLINGs that is smaller in size than a TOWN; a settlement or village.Incorrect and lossy – in the definitions the adjectives “small” and “smaller” apply to different concepts.US-Crossing UK-Crossing/Level CrossingA point where two or more line features intersect or cross at the same level about which information is required. (See also BH070)CROSSINGA LOCATION where LAND_TRANSPORTATION_ROUTEs intersect or cross at the same vertical level; a crossing. EXAMPLES Railway crossing, road intersection, FORD.Incorrect and lossy – a line ford intersects a line river at a FACC Crossing but not an EDCS CROSSING. Note that the inverse mapping is correct and lossy.WellheadThe top of a well, as in oil, gas, or water well, that caps the well structure and which may be located on land or partially submerged offshore which nautical vessels can use for lashings.WELL_HEADEQUIPMENT (for example: casing heads, lowermost and intermediate tubing heads, Christmas tree equipment with valves and fittings, and/or casing and tubing hangers) used on the TERRAIN to maintain control of an oil WELL; a well-head.Incorrect and lossy – a FACC Wellhead may be the top of a gas or water well. Note that the inverse mapping is correct and lossy.Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 4. Lossy and/or incorrect enumeration mappingsFACCEnum IndexFACC Attribute NameFACC Enumeration LabelEDCS Attribute LabelEDCSEnumerant LabelEDCSEnumeration DefinitionNotesAFA_8Available FacilitiesDrinking WaterAVAILABLE_FACILITIES_TYPEFRESH_WATERFresh WATER. Correct and lossy – fresh water can be non-potable (e.g., irrigation water).BDT_1Beacon-Daymark RelationshipBeaconAID_TO_NAVIGATION_MARKER_TYPEVIS_BEACONVisual BEACON. EXAMPLE Flashing LIGHT.Incorrect and lossy – A FACC Beacon may be electronic (not visual). This is a common usage in NGA datasets.BMC_13Bottom Materials CompositionSeamountWATERBODY_FLOOR_MATERIAL_TYPEROCKY_OUTCROPRocky outcrop or SEAMOUNT.Correct and lossy – some underwater rocky outcrops are not seamounts.EXS_27Existence CategoryClosed/LockedEXISTENCE_STATUSNOT_ACCESSIBLENot open for access; not accessible, closed or locked.Correct and lossy – EDCS definition is more general.HFC_33Hydrological Form CategorySplit streamWATERCOURSE_CHANNEL_TYPEBRAIDEDShallow and subdivided into a number of continually shifting smaller channels that are separated by bar deposits; braided. EXAMPLE Split stream.Correct and lossy – notes in SEDRIS mappings suggest need to add a split stream enumeration where an island is dividing a channel.LFA_127Light Function AeronauticalAPAP alignment of elements systemsAERONAUTICAL_LIGHT_TYPECENTRE_LINE_2_CROSSBARCentre-line, 2 crossbars approach LIGHTs.Judged to be a SEDRIS mapping error.LFA_2Light Function AeronauticalApron FloodAERONAUTICAL_LIGHT_TYPECENTRE_LINE_AND_BARCentre-line and bar LIGHTs.Judged to be a SEDRIS mapping error.LFA_51Light Function AeronauticalAeronauticalAERONAUTICAL_LIGHT_TYPEAEROMARINEA marine-type LIGHT for which part of the beam is deflected to an angle of 10 to 15 arc degrees above the horizon to facilitate use by AIRCRAFT; an aeromarine light.Judged to be a SEDRIS mapping error.LOC_8Location CategoryOn Ground SurfaceRELATIVE_LOCATIONON_TERRAINOn TERRAIN.Correct and lossy – EDCS definition for TERRAIN allows for coverage by water, which would correspond to a different value for the FACC LOC.MCC_1Material Composition CategoryAircraftPRIMARY_MATERIAL_TYPEALUMINUMAluminum.Nonsense mapping. Since very few objects are built from the material “Aircraft”, this mapping appears to an attempt to correct a perceived problem with FACC.MCT_1Mooring Connection TypeMooring Cable/ChainMOORING_CONNECTION_TYPEFLEXIBLE_RESTRAINTFLEXIBLE_RESTRAINT.Correct and lossy – e.g., rope is a flexible restraint which is neither cable nor chain.SMC_50Surface Material CategoryHeatSURFACE_MATERIAL_TYPEPEATPeat.Judged to be a SEDRIS mapping error.SFC_4Sea Floor Feature CategoryWellWATERBODY_FLOOR_OBJECT_TYPEWELL_HEADRemains of a WELL_HEAD.Incorrect and lossy.SHO_4Shoreline CategoryStony or shingly shoreSHORELINE_PHYSIOGRAPHYSTONY_SHINGLY_MIXMixed STONY and SHINGLY.Incorrect and lossy.SPE_1Spot Elevation CategoryTop of treesSPOT_ELEVATION_TYPENON_TERRAIN_SURFACERepresents the ELEVATION on a SURFACE that is not TERRAIN (for example: the top of a NON_EMPTY_SET of TREEs).Correct and lossy.Continued use of previous versions of the EDCSSome significant simulation programs, much to their credit, were early adopters of the EDCS. WARSIM, the Army’s next generation, aggregate simulation for commander and staff training, adopted the SEDRIS EDCS version 2.9 (at that stage of development, explicitly based on extended FACC-like codes) in 1999. The OneSAF Objective System, the Army’s next generation entity simulation at the brigade or battalion level, adopted the ECDS CD.Neither program has plans to upgrade to the EDCS International Standard, a non-trivial process due to the fact that many changes in EDCS semantics over the years requires analysis and repair of application-level software (e.g., entity behaviors). A fact of life is that such simulation systems, still under development and expected to have widespread use and life spans of 20 years or more, may not be fully interoperable with systems compliant with the EDCS International Standard. Achieving and maintaining cross-version EDCS-to-EDCS interoperability may become a long-term chore.Use of non-interoperable dictionaries by federated Communities of Interest (COI)DoD Directive 8320.2, Data Sharing in a Net-Centric Department of Defense, requires all data within the Department to be made visible, accessible, and understandable as early as possible in the life cycle of the data. Additionally, the policy requires that communities of data producers, data consumers and system developers (e.g., Communities of Interest (COIs)) become the principal mechanism for reaching the necessary agreements on data semantics and structures to achieve net-centric data sharing.In a perfect world, these communities would agree on either a common environmental data dictionary or upon the use of multiple dictionaries with universally agreed-upon mappings among them. As we move toward net- and data-centric warfare, embedded training and the Army Future Force, current requirements for stand-alone M&S and C4ISR systems will be replaced with requirements for systems of systems, in which multiple, and potentially disparate, (sub)systems must interoperate. The degree to which their environmental representations align will directly affect the quality of interoperability. The importance of embedded training to the Army Future Combat Systems (FCS) concept is one such example.Unfortunately, the M&S and operational communities have been unable to agree on a set of environmental data dictionaries. In the geospatial domain, the current requirements for C2 and ISR systems are being specified as the Unified Profiles (UP) of Mission Specific Data (MSD). UP MSD is based upon the successors to FACC, the DFDD and the NFDD. Mis-alignment of FACC (and hence its successors) to the EDCS has already been described in a previous section.In the METOC domain, the Joint METOC Interoperability Board (JMIB) has adopted the Joint METOC Broker Language (JMBL) and its attendant data dictionary, which is loosely based on the Joint METOC Conceptual Data Model (JMCDM) data dictionary. However, recent attempts to map the JMBL data dictionary into the EDCS have exposed a significant number of problems and ambiguities with both dictionaries.A wholly different approach to achieving consistency and harmonization among data dictionaries from multiple COIs is given in  REF _Ref109121994 \r \h [8]. Rather than build an entirely new data dictionary, maintain it in parallel to other DoD communities, and then create/maintain mappings to other dictionaries post facto, the Army Battlespace Environment (ABE) is a registry of federated profiles of authoritative environmental data dictionaries from a wide variety of COIs. Adjudication of similar concepts in different dictionaries is being managed by direct interaction with the COIs to bring their data dictionaries into better harmony.Recognizing the broad scope of “geospatial” on the Global Information Grid (GIG), and the complexity of the undertaking to enable net-centric data exchange in accordance with DoD Directives, the Joint community is in the process of establishing the Defense Geospatial Community (DGC) comprised of a family of coordinated COIs to address issues in geospatial data exchange. These include: aeronautical, hydrographic & littoral, topographic, urban, imagery, METOC, facilities & environment, and geoanalysis data. The approach being prototyped in the ABE is proposed as the basis for harmonization across the DGC.RecommendationsReal systems of systems under development such as FCS are struggling with this cross-community dilemma. The M&S community, which generally consumes geospatial and METOC data from authoritative providers, is faced with consuming data based on data dictionaries from which the EDCS does not have authoritative mappings. And authoritative data providers, including NGA, the Air Force Combat Climatology Center (AFCCC) and the Fleet Numerical Meteorology and Oceanography Center (FNMOC) have been reluctant to deviate from their tried-and-true data dictionaries (with extensions) to adopt the EDCS as a replacement. Have we arrived at a stalemate among the concerned communities? We certainly hope not. Better communication and understanding among the communities is required, and we recommend that the DoD empower and fund an authority to define and scrutinize mappings among these various dictionaries. The Defense Geospatial Community (DGC), comprised of a family of coordinated COIs to address issues in geospatial data exchange, appears to be an appropriate venue to address this topic.AcknowledgmentsThe authors thank U.S. Army Engineer Research and Development Center’s Topographic Engineering Center, the Army Battle Command, Simulation and Experimentation Directorate, and the Geospatial Data/Information Focus Area Collaborative Team (GDI FACT) for sponsoring the work leading to the analysis described herein. We also thank Melissa Nakanishi for generating the content of Tables 1 - 4.ReferencesR. Richbourg, A. Janett, R. Moore, D. Jodeit, V. Dobey, P. Foley, “The Environmental Data Coding Specification and its SISO Role”, Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Paper No. 05S-SIW-098, April, 2005.M. Schmitt, “Integration of the MIP Command and Control Information Exchange Data Model into National Systems”, 10th International Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium, McLean, VA, June, 2005.D. Miller and P. Birkel, “Reflections on ‘The Challenge of Environmental Data Interoperability on the Global Information Grid’ by Dobey and Eirich (03S-SIW-133)”, Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Paper No. 05F-SIW-098, Sept., 2005.D. Miller, A. Janett and M. Nakanishi, “Environmental Data Modeling: REDM, DREDM, Ontology and Metrics”, Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Paper No. 03S-SIW-132, March, 2003.P. Birkel, D. Miller, T. Miller, J. Rourke and E. Root, “The Terrain Common Data Model (TCDM): a Joint Effort of JSIMS, STOW, and JWARS”, Proc. 8th Computer Generated Forces & Behavioral Representation, Paper No. 8TH-CGF-004, May, 1999.D. Miller, A. Janett, M. Nakanishi,, R. Schaffer, D. Wilbert, “An Environmental Data Model for the OneSAF Objective System”, Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Paper No. 02F-SIW-082, Sept., 2002.D. Miller, A. Janett, M. Nakanishi, L. Salemann, T. Miller, D. Hovanec, C. Gray, P. Birkel, J. de la Cruz and T. Kohler, “Interchange and Interoperability – Modeling Environmental Data with the Common Data Model Framework”, I/ITSEC, Orlando, Dec., 2004.M. Nakanishi, D. Miller, A. Filer, P. Birkel, D. Hovanec and K. Mullane, “The Army Battlespace Environment Registry of Federated Feature Data Dictionaries”, Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Paper No. 05F-SIW-097, Sept., 2005.V. Yakich, D. Miller, K. Cauble, M. Nakanishi, G. Lukes, G. Goodman, “JFCOM / NGA Seek Urban Geospatial Specifications”, Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Paper No. 05F-SIW-099, Sept., 2005.D. Miller, A. Janett, L. Salemann, S. Farsai, E. Miller, P. Birkel, “An Environmental Data Model for 3D Models”, Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Paper No. 01S-SIW-071, March 2001.Author BiographiesDR. DALE D. MILLER is the manager of Advanced Technology Development for the Advanced Simulation Centers of Lockheed Martin Simulation, Training & Support. He has been contributing to the EDCS at a grassroots level since 1999. As the lead environmental data modeler for the Army’s next generation aggregate and entity level simulations, WARSIM  REF _Ref109122985 \r \h [5] and OOS  REF _Ref109122998 \r \h [6], respectively, he was responsible for translating new environmental requirements as articulated by the programs’ subject matter experts into formal terms and definitions suitable for incorporation into the then-evolving EDCS, upon which these program EDMs are based. He has been the vice-chair of the SISO Product Development Group since its inception in 2000 and a member of its Drafting Group. Other environmental data model and data dictionary work includes the Common Data Model Framework (CDMF)  REF _Ref109121982 \r \h [7], the Army Battlespace Environment (ABE) register of federated feature data dictionaries  REF _Ref109121994 \r \h [8], and the development of the JFCOM urban geospatial specifications  REF _Ref109122004 \r \h [9].Annette Janett FILER is a senior software engineer with Lockheed Martin Lockheed Martin Simulation, Training & Support Advanced Simulation Centers. Annette was a co-author of the paper discussed herein  REF _Ref109123095 \r \h [1]. She leads development of the Common Data Model Framework (CDMF)  REF _Ref109121982 \r \h [7], which has used all revisions of the EDCS as a baseline dictionary for logical data modeling efforts. She was a key contributor in the development of the OOS environmental data model  REF _Ref109122998 \r \h [6], and she identified and supported the incorporation of new and revised concepts in support of OOS. Annette has contributed to EDCS development both as a SEDRIS Associate and a member of the SISO EDCS PDG Drafting Group since its inception. Contributions to EDCS have included concepts derived from the DIS Entity Documentation, derivation of an EDCS classification ontology  REF _Ref108412327 \r \h [4], identification of equivalence classes within EDCS  REF _Ref108412327 \r \h [4], incorporation of concepts related to 3D visual or feature models  REF _Ref109466501 \r \h [10], and additional concepts in support of sensor simulation. DR. PAUL A. BIRKEL is a senior principal scientist for The MITRE Corporation. He was a member of the original SEDRIS development team in 1994 and defined the original SEDRIS Data Coding Standard (SDCS). When it was proposed for ISO/IEC standardization in 1999 he became one of the two editors of the EDCS – from initial draft through completion of the Final Draft International Standard (FDIS). Since the mid 1990's he has also been involved with, and contributed to, such programs as DARPA STOW, CCTT, JSAF, JSIMS, WARSIM, OneSAF Testbed, and OneSAF Objective System. He currently provides technical support to the NGA in multiple standards areas including registers, feature data dictionaries and catalogues, logical data models, portrayal, and modeling and simulation (M&S), as well as support to external standardization activities in the Digital Geospatial Information Working Group (DGIWG), International Hydrographic Organization (IHO), and International Organization for Standardization (ISO). He also provides technical support to the Battle Command Simulation and Experimentation Directorate (BCSE – AGDIMP, GDI FACT) and Army programs (FCS, PD CTIS, ABE).  HYPERLINK "http://standards.iso.org/ittf/PubliclyAvailableStandards/ISO_IEC_18025_Ed1.html" http://standards.iso.org/ittf/PubliclyAvailableStandards/ISO_IEC_18025_Ed1.html Digital Geospatial Information Working Group One reviewer of our original submission to  REF _Ref109123095 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [1] observed that FACC definitions that embedded units could not be mapped 1:1 to EDCS definitions that did not. We agree, but this is almost a syntactic mismatch, not a semantic one. With a possible very few exceptions, the semantic mappings between FACC 2.0 and EDCS 2.7 – 2.9 were one-to-one. The National System for Geospatial-Intelligence (NSG) is the net- and data-centric system in which all DoD/IC applications/systems participate that have requirements to produce and/or consume geospatial data (excepting meteorologic and oceanographic data, which are handled separately).  Available at:  HYPERLINK "http://www.sedris.org/dwn4trpl.htm" http://www.sedris.org/dwn4trpl.htm The online register can be accessed at:  HYPERLINK "http://jitc.fhu.disa.mil/nitf/graph_reg/class_pages/edcs_dictionary.html" http://jitc.fhu.disa.mil/nitf/graph_reg/class_pages/edcs_dictionary.html We note that the brevity of both the FACC “name” and the EDCS “label” appear to do injustice to their related concepts.