The Application of an Information Model to C4ISR Systems ModelingGary W. StuttsGregory M. RoszykBooz Allen Hamilton8283 Greensboro Dr.McLean, VA 22102703-902-5000, 703-902-7162 HYPERLINK "mailto:stutts_gary@bah.com" stutts_gary@bah.com,  HYPERLINK "mailto:roszyk_greg@bah.com" roszyk_greg@bah.comKeywords:Information Model, decision, intelligence, ISR, cognition, inference, simulationABSTRACT: Many agencies within the Intelligence Community (IC), Department of Defense (DOD), and the military services have a continuing need to demonstrate the effectiveness of proposed Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR) systems and their impact on Battlespace Awareness. Current analytical approaches typically focus on satisfaction of data requests, and do not enable assessment of information-based impact on intelligence issues. Moreover, there is no end-to-end analytic capability supporting the study of multi-intelligence synergies or truly dynamic tasking in response to evolving informational requirements.This paper presents an Information Model (IM) construct as an approach to achieve information centricity within an analytical simulation environment.  Constructed via assembly of modular building blocks, the IM provides a mechanism to decompose Intelligence/Information problems into Requests for Information (RFI) that may be acted upon by collection assets. An example will illustrate the utility of the IM in developing and representing user information requirements in acquisition trade studies such as the functional analyses of the Joint Capability Integration and Development System (JCIDS).Background and MotivationMany agencies within the Intelligence Community (IC), Department of Defense (DOD), and the military services have a continuing need to demonstrate the effectiveness of proposed Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR) systems and their impact on Battlespace Awareness. Within the DOD and IC communities, Intelligence domains (INTs) are typically broken into the following primary categories:IMINT – Imagery IntelligenceSIGINT – Signals IntelligenceCOMINT– Communication IntelligenceELINT –     Electronics Intelligence MASINT – Measure and Signature IntelligenceHUMINT – Human IntelligenceOSINT – Open Source IntelligenceEach of these INTs has its respective and unique set of processes, procedures, organizations, systems and chains of command that typically results in end products particular to that domain. This overall cycle, nominally depicted in Figure 1.1, is referred to as the Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR) cycle [1]. These infrastructures are vertically integrated (i.e.-‘stove-piped’) with little cross-INT flavoring being realized. Similarly, system and process assessments are often conducted through complex, computer-based Modeling and Simulation (M&S) based studies that mirror this stove-piping, and reflect the separations existing between the agencies sponsoring them.Another characteristic of M&S efforts within the IC is that most rely on readily quantifiable metrics relating to development, acquisition, and employment strategies associated with the delivery of specific intelligence products to customers. Examples of these are volumetrics throughout the infrastructures and networks, and the satisfaction of collection requests (e.g. - Achieved/Required).  Therefore, study results necessarily reflect data, product, and timeliness views with little regard for the extent to which information needs are actually being fulfilled. To date, there has been a lack of M&S data structures or mechanisms to characterize and represent the more abstract concept of information itself, or the metrics to quantify performance in terms of informational impact. Precise metrics for all information problems are as infinite as the spectrum of information problems they measure. However, it is clear that to address any information problem, there must be a data structure that is capable of representing information, quantifying it, and reflecting the incremental enhancement to its state by fulfilling data requirements, regardless of INT domain source. Figure 1.1 – The ISR CycleConcepts of Information ModelingThis paper offers a construct known as an Information Model (IM) to fill these gaps and achieve an information centric approach in representing C4ISR problems within an analytic simulation environment. Booz Allen Hamilton has developed and is actively engaged in extending IM paradigms to a variety of intelligence and DOD information problems.   The Information Modeling approach and resulting IM toolkit proposed in this paper reflect, and are governed by certain principles.  The first of these concerns the lexicon. The emerging field of Knowledge Management is replete with definitions characterizing the nature of data, information, and knowledge. Debate of the definitional nuances for each of these is beyond the scope of this paper; however, there are sufficiently common themes among each that allows for the following definitions to be used:Data is defined as observations of some state that is presented by a sensory mechanism. It simply exists and has no significance beyond its mere existence [2].  It is important to appreciate that data is not absolute truth and is subject to a wide array of imperfections, both human and mechanical. To this extent, data should not be regarded as fact, per se. It is the best perception of absolute truth possible under the circumstances in which it was acquired.  Information is defined as data vested with meaning [3]. Such ‘meaning’ is contextual and depends on the purpose for which the data is used. This context usually arises from the fusion of data with the mission based objectives of the entity utilizing it.Knowledge is defined as beliefs and commitments that are often associated with or driving actions. While information and knowledge are similar in some respects – both are about meaning – the fundamental difference is that knowledge must be used to some end [4]. Traditionally, the relationship among data, information, and knowledge has been viewed as the simple hierarchy, with raw Data being processed into Information, and Information being processed into Knowledge. However, a more considered view would acknowledge the relation is not as much linear as it is cyclic in nature (see Figure 2.1). The three influence each other with both Data and Information requiring Knowledge to be interpretable; but at the same time, Data and Information are useful building blocks for constructing new Knowledge [4] [5].  As we will see later, this cyclic nature is mimicked by C4ISR operations making the IM a valuable addition to the simulation of those operations.Figure 2.1 – Cyclic View The second governing principle is that any information problem may be broken down into component parts.  Extending this idea, higher order information topics may be recursively decomposed until a quantum level is reached. These quantum level information topics uniformly exhibit the trait that they require actual data for satisfaction, answering their question, testing of their hypotheses, etc. This divide and conquer approach is not meant to dictate a strict parent/child relationship; it is possible that a lower-order topic is a component of multiple higher-order topics. Information ModelingOverview of ApproachConceptually, an IM is intended to represent and address an information problem. An IM instance is a particular treatment of an information problem, and is formed by creating/assembling structural primitives that decompose higher-order issues into their component parts. Figure 3.1 shows the generic view of this concept. Figure 3.1 – Information Problem DecompositionThe IM approach is not limited to a particular level of granularity and may address problems at the enterprise, mission, or engineering level depending on the context of the analysis effort. However, as with all simulation efforts, commensurate granularity is advisable within an IM instance as well as between the IM and other simulation tools used.The Building Block Agents (BBAs) represent the hypothetical subtopics comprising the decomposition of the information problem. BBAs maintain and evolve their state variables during simulation runtime, taking as input the Information from lower-order agents or observed Data and applying algorithms to form inferences. These inferences evolve the agent’s own state variables that are, in turn, passed on to higher-order agents as their input per the established connectivity (indicated as links in Figure 3.1).  The divide and conquer approach of IM construction may be applied in different ways to the same information problem depending on the nature of the analysis being performed, or the hypothetical view of the issue(s) desired. For example, an analysis effort may focus on exploring and identifying the best approach to an intelligence issue resulting in alternative IM configurations whose decompositions are based on purely topical views. A second analysis effort may use the same intelligence problem, but focus on system and process responsiveness dictating IM configurations that parallel the present analysis centers, postulated centers, or a mix of these with IM agents and links representing the products created and issued among them.  The IM’s role within a C4ISR simulation environment is four-fold:To represent an information/intelligence problem through progressively decomposed information requirements, ultimately to the extent of expressing Requests for Information (RFI) that may be acted upon by collection assets.To assimilate the data responses to RFIs and aggregate them back into high-order Information and/or Knowledge about the problem addressed.  To provide the analyst with a means and metrics to quantify, and assess the value added with respect to Information gained.[Optional] To represent and provide an adaptive decision making capability to the C4ISR cycle. It is important to note that these roles do not include strategies that actually map [Requests for] Information to actionable data collection requests. This function is handled by a separate mechanism known as the Information Strategy and is beyond this paper’s scope. Compartmentalizing this functionality away from the IM is consistent with the idea that the IM is a non-INT specific mechanism allowing for focus on information rather than data. This in no way precludes the fourth role indicated above. The IM, through the RFIs emanating from it, still acts as a planning and decision making mechanism; but does so without regard for, or specification of, the type of data or collection system used to satisfy the request. IM StructureAs stated, an IM represents a holistic treatment of an information problem. It is formed by creating and connecting instances of two primitive types to model the decomposition of that problem:Building Block AgentDatumFigure 3.2 shows a more detailed view of the concepts in Figure 3.1. The primary difference between the figures is the indication of the Building Block Agents’ subcomponents. IM Building Block Agents   The Building Block Agent (BBA) is the fundamental structure on which all IM construction is based. A BBA instance models an individual [sub] topic within the greater IM and is charged with maintaining the evolution of that subtopic during runtime. BBAs are comprised of two components known as the Subject and the Cognition Element as shown in Figure 3.3.  The outputs of a BBA are the inferred state variables defined for the subtopic as they evolve during runtime. Inputs to a BBA include the state variables from other BBAs or actual data received in response to Requests for Information (RFI).Figure 3.2 – Information Model Detailed ViewSubjects are sub-typed according to whether they address entity properties that are attribute-centric or behavior-centric: Attribute Subjects: These Subjects are used when there is a desire to determine and utilize the value of a particular attribute associated with a particular entity.  Attribute Subjects consist of:Entity identificationAttribute of interestState of the attributeBelief distribution across the possible statesPerishability algorithmCondition/Activity Subjects: These Subjects are used when there is a desire to determine and utilize whether an entity is exhibiting a condition or behavior profile that is not explicitly represented as attribute. An example of this  Subject would be a military unit’s state of combat readiness based on observed behavior over some period of Figure 3.3 – IM Building Block Agenttime. Condition/Activity Subjects are comprised of: Entity identificationHypothesized conditionState of hypothesized conditionTrue/false belief distribution representing present degree of belief that hypothesis is true (false).Perishability algorithmThe Cognition Element (CE) is the most versatile feature within the IM; while its form is well-defined, its content is open-ended. The CE controls how an individual Agent digests and reacts to inputs by providing three functionalities. These functionalities are achieved via dedicated algorithms that may be user-defined, and are user-specified at the time of Agent creation. They are: Input Receipt – The CE receives data or inputs from other Agents consistent with the connectivity specified in the IM. Additionally, it makes inferences on those inputs via an inference algorithm, determines a belief distribution among the state variable’s possible values, and effects changes to the state variables of the subject based on those inferences if necessary. There are no constraints on the algorithm used for inference as there is a wide array of information [sub] problem types. Such an algorithm could be as simple as a lookup table or as rigorous as the more typical inference methodologies of Bayesian net, fuzzy logic, state machine, etc.  Needs definition – This CE element is reactive in nature, forming and issuing Requests for Information (RFI) without regard to collection means. This element is optional as not all agents will necessarily issue RFIs (Ref. Figure 3.2). A present-day analogy of this function is an analyst issuing an intelligence need without reference to any collection system; the focus being on what Information (not Data) is desired. As indicated in section 3.1, the mapping of this information need to actual collection requests appropriate to individual systems would be handled by Information Strategies beyond the scope of the IM construct itself.  Bias Computation – This functionality is also reactive, and computes the relative bias (i.e. – preference) for pursuit of inputs from lower-order agents going forward in time. The relative desire for individual inputs will change as an agent absorbs information, evolves its state variables, and as those variables’ values perish. This is the primary feature that allows the IM to act as a dynamic planning and decision making mechanism (this will be further illustrated in section 4.2). The only constraint on the bias algorithm is that its results must be zero-sum among the agent’s inputs. Beyond this requirement, bias computations are left to the user to define and specify at time of agent creation. They may incorporate influences of varying degree from higher-order agents (i.e. – ‘coaching’) or any other value systems desired. As with needs definition, this element is optional and may be omitted entirely if the user is willing to bias all lower-order agents equally. Consideration of prioritization doctrine in collection scheduling may be advisable depending on circumstances since this bias will have influence when converted into Information Needs. DatumThe Datum structure models the response to an RFI. It contains raw or exploited data generated during runtime and its IM connectivity defines the routing for the datum to all BBAs utilizing it as input. It is possible that a datum is routed to BBAs not actually requesting it in addition to the one(s) that are requesting it.IM AssemblyAs indicated in previous sections, the process of building an IM involves the tandem activities of identifying subtopics, constructing their BBAs, and assembling those BBAs in a fashion analogous to recursion.  This process of decomposing higher order subtopics continues within the reasonable bounds of a problem’s scope until quantum level BBAs are identified and integrated into the IM. Much like the nature of Object Oriented Design, this process may involve both a top-down and bottom-up approach at different times.There are two aspects of note when considering IM construction. The first of these was mentioned in section 3.1, but deserves revisit. That is, that different philosophies may be used when constructing an IM, and that BBAs may be used to represent:A step in  problem decompositionActual analysis/exploitation centersPostulated analysis/exploitation centersIt is even reasonable to consider a mix of the above depending on the circumstances of the analysis effort.The second aspect highlights the modular nature of IMs.  As problems are decomposed, more sophisticated IMs may be constructed and augmented by leveraging previously developed IMs resident in a library as illustrated in Figure 3.4.Figure 3.4 – IM ModularityIM Macroscopic View Incorporating the details of component structures when considering the IM at a macroscopic level begins to illuminate the benefits of the IM construct (see Figure 3.5).  As BBAs perform their respective inferences and output their state variables forward, they are incorporated into the inferences of progressively higher-order BBAs as dictated within their inference algorithms. This propagation of Data and lower-order Information continues – upward in Figure 3.5 – until the effects of each node (be it a BBA or Datum) have been incorporated throughout the IM consistent with the connectivity defined.Figure 3.5 – Macroscopic ConceptsEach BBA performs its inference on its respective inputs thereby forming its perception of reality. As this process occurs across and propagates throughout the IM, there is not only the multitude of perceptions with respect to individual subtopics, but also the perception of the global reality pertaining to the entire Information problem under study (to the extent of what is modeled by the IM about that global reality).Once the full IM has been updated by the propagation of new data, a second process of bias computation begins.   In a fashion similar to the flow of Data and Information upward, the determination of bias in the pursuit of lower-order Information propagates downward. The specification of which Agents will spawn RFIs, and the nature of those RFIs, is defined at the time of construction; however, actual preferences among those requests is dynamic and evolves based on the unfolding events and the Information that is learned by the IM. Once bias is established for all RFI’s, they are passed to information strategies with these associated preferences, thereby making possible a mapping of information needs to collection requests without any compromise of the request attributable to data-centric or collection-centric issues. Whether purely topical, purely organizational, or a mix thereof, the use of the IM’s biasing functionality allows it to become an domain-independent planning mechanism within a simulation environment representing the collective effort of an ISR community to address information and intelligence problems purely on an information-centric basis rather than on a product-centric basis. Recall the open-ended nature of the CE and the optional nature associated with the bias functionality. The degree of influence, and even the actual existence of it, from higher-order BBAs is completely controllable via the bias algorithm resident in a lower-order BBA. In this manner a BBA may realize and mimic a full spectrum of compliance with higher–order BBAs ranging from absolute obedience to complete independence. Section 4.2 will illustrate how the coupling of these inference and biasing functionalities allow the IM to perform as a reactive feedback mechanism within the C4ISR simulation environment, yet remain divorced from collection and data specific issues.  Simulation Environment IM CONOPSCurrent Analytic EnvironmentsCurrently, community system and process assessments are conducted through complex, computer-based M&S tools based upon organizational and INT stove-piping.  These tools provide highly detailed representations of intelligence systems, such as collection platforms, and processes, such as exploitation. The products of these tools represent only the fundamental measurable metrics of quality, quantity, and timeliness of their respective INTs data. A shortcoming of this approach is the focus on information products to satisfy data requests, not the relationships between information needs as a means to providing insight.  Additionally as many of today’s capabilities were developed with a specific goal or program focus in mind, their inherent data structures do not meet the needs of an IM.  Implementation of an IM in conjunction with federated entities can potentially provide the basis for a more information centric analytic environment. IM Enhanced EnvironmentFigure 4.1 depicts a simulated ISR cycle, similar to that of Figure 1.1, with the incorporation of an IM instance and Information Strategies to service RFIs issued by the IM and provide the data on which the IM forms inferences. Figure 4.1 – Enhanced ISR Cycle SimulationSection 3.4 addressed the operation of the IM from a macroscopic view and demonstrated its use as an inference and decision making construct at that level. However, this view was discussed only in isolation. Integrating that IM functionality into Figure 4.1 illuminates the idea of the IM as a simulation mechanism facilitating a reactive C4ISR cycle, capable of coping with a truly dynamic, even stochastic, evolution of events within ground truth, or in parts of the C4ISR cycle itself. Moreover, when one focuses on the bias computations of the IM and their effect on collection prioritizations, the value of the IM as a dynamic planning mechanism to drive the cycle becomes clear. In essence, it now becomes possible to realize the cyclic relationship among Knowledge, Information, and Data indicated in Figure 2.1.The IM as an Analysis ToolThe previous section illustrated the part played by the IM in a simulation environment. It may be intuitively clear that there is a benefit to employing an IM within a simulation environment and as analysis tool.  However, some discussion as to how the IM provides value added to the analysis process is in order. Commensurate with a shift from data/product centric focus to an Information centric view is the need for new metrics to quantify Information so that its impact can be measured.  Section 3.2.1 detailed the components of the fundamental BBA used in constructing an IM. Examination of the Subject component reveals the two elements providing the key to using the IM as an analysis tool; they are:State variable containing the BBA’s perceived value about the subtopicThe belief distribution associated with that perceptionOf these two, the belief distribution is a readily identifiable quantity for use in analysis. State variables on the other hand are not primary metrics in themselves. Rather, they are useful in the development of secondary and tertiary metrics appropriate to the issue being examined. This idea is best illustrated through an example. Recall the issue of military unit combat readiness from section 3.2.1. One obvious candidate for a state variable within this behavioral BBA is ‘Combat Readiness’ with the possible values of ‘Ready’ and ‘Not Ready.’ The belief distribution associated with this subject expresses a zero sum relationship between the possible values (e.g. – Ready / Not Ready = 57 / 43). For purposes of this example, we will also assume that this belief is integral to the changing of the Combat Readiness perceived value based on predefined acceptance thresholds. This situation is illustrated in Figure 4.2.Figure 4.2 – Example MetricsMetrics may be identified and dependent variables derived that measure achievement of objectives. In this example, the following can be used in analysis efforts:Correctness of readiness perceptionAverage delta belief (difference in ground truth and perception)Average latency in readiness perceptionA utility score – via mapping function of the user’s choice (not indicated)It is important to note that the IM is not a monolithic construct. Metrics may be viewed and/or developed for the IM as a whole, or for any component Agents within it.The introduction of an IM can provide a valuable enhancement to analysis techniques and tools and can provide this enhancement across three major dimensions of issues being analyzed:[Information] Strategies and CONOPS: An IM provides the capability to gain insight into the informational impact of asset employment strategies and concepts of operation. Not only may assessments be made about various steps within the ISR cycle, but the true information impact of employing multiple INT domains in the pursuit of knowledge may be determined.System Hardware and Architecture: The IM provides a valuable addition to present analytical techniques in trade studies supporting  the  system acquisition process. Again, the information centric paradigm allows departure from a pure Acquired/Requested metric to assess true informational benefit between candidates.Knowledge Management & Development: This is a completely new dimension made possible and opened to exploration by the presence of the IM.  It now becomes possible to quantify and measure the utility of various approaches to information and intelligence problems at either their macroscopic or component levels.  In essence, this dimension poses the question, ‘Are we asking the right questions?’  It becomes possible to gauge the impact of the information requested and how it is exploited utilizing existing or postulated assets / strategies. Facets include:Alternative treatments of the information problem via different IM configurationsAlternative algorithms within the various agents throughout the IM (e.g. – inference, bias, perishability, etc.) As with any analysis, variation among these multiple degrees of freedom should not be viewed and addressed in a purely orthogonal fashion. An added benefit of using the IM as an analysis tool is that even if there are differences among candidate IMs, metrics associated with or derived from common higher order nodes still provides a normalized basis for analysis across whatever cases may be examined.ConclusionIt is clear that there is a need in the analysis communities of the DOD, IC, and military services for a capability to conduct analysis utilizing an information-centric paradigm as opposed to one that is data-centric. Such a capability requires a mechanism that is able to quantify and measure informational impact; make decisions in reaction to truly dynamic events that leverage multi-INT capabilities; and can be readily integrated into a analytic simulation environment. This paper has provided a description of an Information Model developed by Booz Allen Hamilton for use in such analysis. Initial efforts have focused on refinement of the IM concept and design. Later efforts will: 1) expand the information centric paradigm to a wider array of intelligence/information problems thereby opening the field of Knowledge Management as not just a subject of analysis, but also a tool and 2) extend the integration of this approach within the simulation community.  6. References[1] Gregory M. Roszyk, Gary L. Waag: “An Incremental Approach to Development of a C4ISR Analysis Federation”, Paper 99S-SIW-203, March 1999 Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW), Spring 1999.[2] Ackoff, R.L. (1997), “Transformational Consulting”, Management consulting Times, Vol. 28, No.6.[3] Choo, C. W., Detlor, B., and Turnbull, D. (2000), Web Work: Information Seeking and Knowledge Work on the World Wide Web, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht. [4] Nonaka, I. and Takeuchi, H. (1995), The knowledge-creating company: how Japanese companies create the dynamics of innovation, Oxford University Press, new York, NY. [5] Stenmark, D. (2002). “Information vs. Knowledge: The Role of Intranets in Knowledge Management”.  Proceedings of HICSS-35, IEEE Press, Hawaii.Author BiographiesGary W. Stutts is an Associate at Booz Allen Hamilton, Inc. in McLean, VA. He has almost twenty years’ experience in large-scale, constructive M&S software development and analytic support to diverse DOD and Intelligence Community activities. He leverages this experience to support model development and operations analysis efforts including weapons/systems design, decision-making methodologies, and system acquisition support.Gregory M. Roszyk is a Senior Associate at Booz Allen Hamilton, Inc. in McLean, VA.  He has more than sixteen years’ experience in simulation and analytic support to diverse DOD and Intelligence Community activities.  He has spent the last twelve years assisting NGA and the Intelligence Community providing systems engineering and systems acquisition support.