Fall SIW Demo NightThe Use of Game Technology in Military M&SMonday September 19th  19:00 – 21:00In the Main Captiva/Cypress BallroomHosted by Mike Freeman, Deputy Director OSD ADL Initiative	America’s Army	US Military Academy, Office of Economic & Manpower Analysis	Major Bret Wilson, Deputy Director	Tel: (845) 938-3599	Email:  HYPERLINK "mailto:bret.wilson@usma.edu" bret.wilson@usma.edu 	 HYPERLINK "http://www.americasarmy.com" www.americasarmy.com 	Engineering & Computer Simulations, Inc.	Greg Shumaker, Sr. Software Engineer	Tel: 407 823 9991 x304	Email:  HYPERLINK "mailto:gregs@ecsorl.com" gregs@ecsorl.com 	 HYPERLINK "http://www.ecsorl.com" www.ecsorl.com Engineering & Computer Simulations, Inc is a small, software development firm that provides Advanced Distributed Learning simulations and courseware to the Department of Defense. Our engineering teams are led by an experienced technical and management team and have extensive experience in the research and development of commercial gaming applications as educational tools. Our development methodology promotes reusability and allows for faster development times, lower development costs and increased performance on modestly powered personal computers and mobile devices. This technology can reach large numbers of people quickly with timely information, allow for the tailoring of training to local situations and provide simulated experiences that transfer efficiently into high levels of performance.The CSTT: Scenario-based Learning to help protect our nation anytime and anywhereThe CSTT is a government funded program that is currently being used to demonstrate the effective use of Distance Learning (DL) technologies for the military. It provides training and simulated practice to help our National Guard Bureau’s Civil Support Teams – Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD-CST) train in their mission to support local and state authorities at domestic CBRNE incident sites. The CSTT program uses distributed simulations and instructionally sound courseware to help keep their skills current for individuals and teams with regard to interagency operations and decision-making. This training improves the essential aspects of civil-military interoperability and mission planning.Forterra Systems Inc.David “Bart” Bartlett, VP MarketingTel:  540-907-2037Email:  HYPERLINK "mailto:dbartlett@forterrainc.com" dbartlett@forterrainc.com  HYPERLINK "http://www.forterrainc.com" www.forterrainc.com Forterra Systems builds distributed virtual world technology and turnkey applications for the defense, homeland security, medical, corporate simulation, and entertainment industries.  Using the OLIVE (On-Line Interactive Virtual Environment) Technology Platform, customers can rapidly generate realistic three-dimensional virtual environments capable of scaling from several concurrent users to many thousands connected over a LAN, WAN, or the Internet.  Independent of scale, applications built on the OLIVE Platform can integrate with existing systems to create powerful, integrated, multi-resolution simulation environments.  Within these environments, natural human interaction is accurately replicated creating powerful collaboration applications where individuals and organizations can communicate, train, plan, and rehearse in ways previously thought impossible.   Forterra will demonstrate two multiplayer training applications built on the OLIVE Platform.  Working with the US Army Research, Development and Engineering Command (RDECOM), Forterra has developed Asymmetric Warfare-Virtual Training Technology (AW-VTT) to assess virtual training for joint, interagency, and multinational operations in asymmetric and unconventional warfare, including antiterrorism, force-protection and security-and-stability operations (SASO).   Using the same technology platform, Forterra is also working with US Army Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center (TATRC) to create virtual environments that allow medical first responders to rehearse coordinated responses to mass-casualty incidents such as terrorist attacks and natural disasters.		Institute for Creative Technologies		James Korris, Creative Director		Tel: (310) 574 5712		 HYPERLINK "mailto:korris@ict.usc.edu" korris@ict.usc.edu 	 HYPERLINK "http://www.ict.usc.edu" www.ict.usc.edu   		HQDA, DCS-G2 DAMI-ISR 		MAJ Dan Ray, Modeling & Simulation Officer		703-695-3035 DSN: 225		 HYPERLINK "mailto:daniel.ray@hqda.army.mil" daniel.ray@hqda.army.mil The Institute for Creative Technologies was established as a University Affiliated Research Center (UARC) under the University of Southern California to bring the talents and expertise of the entertainment community (movies, theater, location based, computer based games) together with leading researchers in fields such as artificial intelligence and computer graphics to create deeply immersive environments that can be used for idea conceptualization, experimentation, education and learning. The goal is to create virtual environments so compelling, that participants react as if they are real.Self Directed Learning Internet Module: Every Soldier a Sensor SimulationCompleted in only 90 days, Every Soldier a Sensor Simulation (ES3) is the latest game application created for military training by the Institute for Creative Technologies in partnership with the US Army RDECOM Simulation & Training Technology Center (STTC).  With a focus on Combat Patrols, missions that both provide human intelligence and reinforce US military presence, ES3 is a web-delivered application that runs on a wide range of PC’s.  Dubbed “SLIMs”, these Self-directed Learning Internet Modules hold the promise of rapid turnaround and distribution combined with easy and intuitive user modification.  The challenge was to develop a focused, engaging experience keyed to training every soldier to play an active role in the information gathering process.  In SLIM ES3, users can play online for competitive scoring and content updates, or offline for practice.  Play is set in a southwest Asian urban environment inspired by Sadr City.  Working from a menu of choices, players are able to interact with civilians and record their observations.  With time as a limiting factor, player actions such as taking notes, translating graffiti, recording GPS location information, and even taking digital “photographs,” have an impact on player scores.  SLIM-ES3 is a micro training tool that could help make every soldier more aware of his surroundings and even possibly an invaluable intelligence asset. 			MÄK Technologies, Inc. 			Garry Morissette, Director Business Development			Tel: 617-876-8085 x111			Email:  HYPERLINK "mailto:gm@mak.com" gm@mak.com 			 HYPERLINK "http://www.mak.com" www.mak.com MÄK Technologies develops software to link, simulate and visualize the virtual world. We create tools and toolkits for distributed simulations, develop PC-based military tactical trainers, craft custom solutions, and research and develop the latest simulation technologies. We build commercial off the shelf simulation software that is flexible, portable and supported. Whether you choose our best-selling networking toolkit, VR-Link or our computer generated forces toolkit, VR-Forces, you have purchased a product backed by the industry’s leading distributed simulation experts. Our worldwide customers include ITT Industries, Boeing, Lockheed Martin, Raytheon, Tenix, Dassault and BAE. HLA and SCORM - Working Together for More Effective E-LearningCourseware teaches the knowledge and skills needed to be an effective warfighter. Training simulations provide opportunities to visualize and practice using those skills. Bringing them together in a fully integrated learning environment gives the warfighter the knowledge, skills and the practice to improve mission performance.Building on our expertise in simulation interoperability, MÄK Technologies has developed an approach to bring SCORM-compliant interactive multimedia instruction (IMI) and training simulations together. MÄK has integrated an HLA compliant simulation with a SCORM IMI. This new training system enhances instructional quality by providing distributed students with instructionally sound, interactive “experiential learning” in support of typical SCORM compliant courseware. Distributed learning becomes more standardized as well as more engaging for more effective individual or team training. In the prototype system, developed for the Joint ADL Co-Lab, MAGTF-XXI, a Marine Corps Tactical Decision-making Simulation (TDS) was integrated with the Marine Corps Planning Process IMI. MAGTF-XXI, an HLA simulation, is a Marine expeditionary warfare trainer developed by MÄK that helps prepare Marines to command a Marine Expeditionary Unit. BBN Technologies, IncBruce RobertsPrincipal Investigator617-873-3899 HYPERLINK "mailto:broberts@bbn.com" broberts@bbn.com HYPERLINK "http://www.bbn.com" http://www.bbn.comSteve Blankenship, CEO  (510) 521-1405 HYPERLINK "mailto:blankenship@totalimmersionsoftware.com" blankenship@totalimmersionsoftware.com  HYPERLINK "http://www.totalimmersionsoftware.com" http://www.totalimmersionsoftware.com BBN Technologies has been solving complex problems for government customers for over 50 years. Our government customers know they can rely on us because of our track record of launching new and successful technology solutions. We develop high-performance modeling and simulation systems for complex training, planning, analysis, and decision-making processes. We developed the first large, simulation training network, SimNet, in 1985, and over the next two decades an array of modeling and simulation systems for decision support and interactive training.BBN is the architect and integrator for DARWARS, a DARPA-funded project to accelerate the development and deployment of the next generation of experiential training systems—low-cost, web-centric, simulation-based systems that take advantage of the ubiquity of the PC and of new technologies, including multi-player games, virtual worlds, intelligent agents, and on-line communitiesTotal Immersion Software was formed to take advantage of a unique market convergence — namely the U.S. government's mandate to improve the training of its military and intelligence services through use of personal computer based simulation (with a strong focus on the capabilities found in computer gaming solutions) and the steadily increasing reliance of commercial game publishers on highly realistic military and espionage based action games as core products in their portfolios.Total Immersion will become the leading provider of immersive, interactive training software development services to the military and intelligence communities and related agencies as well as the leading developer in the commercial interactive entertainment industry for military/intelligence games. The founders of the company are gaming industry veterans who have worked on highly successful commercial products, including "hits" in the military/intelligence genre, and who possess expertise and important contacts in all areas of entertainment software development and the government/military sector.DARWARS Ambush! is a multi-player game environment (team vs. team; team vs. AI) that teaches our troops how to anticipate and react to ambushes & IEDs, transfer situation awareness during troop rotations, and recognize and adapt rapidly to constantly changing insurgent tactics. The system focuses on troop level experiences and convoy ambushes as well as dismounted forces, allows for field authoring so that new experiences can be added to the system easily, and provides support for capturing, sharing, and discussing incidents. The goal of DARWARS Ambush! is nothing short of saving soldiers' lives in Iraq and Afghanistan by capturing, analyzing, and disseminating lessons learned experiences.DARWARS Ambush! is a PC-based convoy team trainer developed by BBN Technologies in cooperation with Total Immersion Software. After six months of rapid development, DARWARS Ambush! is deployed in Iraq and at numerous training sites in the US.	Fall SIW Demo Evening		 PAGE 3The content depicted was sponsored by the U.S. Army Research, Development, and Engineering Command (RDECOM). The information does not necessarily reflect the position or the policy of the Government, and no official endorsement should be inferred. PAGE 2 PAGE 4