Military Scenario Definition LanguageStudy Group Final Report LTC John Surdu, Ph. DPEO STRI3045 Technology ParkwayOrlando, FL 32826407-384-5103john.surdu@us.army.milRobert L. Wittman Jr.MITRE3504 Lake Lynda DriveOrlando, FL 32817321-235-7601rwittman@mitre.orgJeff AbbottAcusoft3045 Technology ParkwayOrlando, FL 32826321-235-7716jabot@ideorlando.orgKeywords:Military Scenario Definition Language, Coalition Battle Management Language, C4I, Military Scenario, Simulation Scenario, Scenario Initialization, Tasking LanguageABSTRACT: The Military Scenario Definition Language (MSDL) Study Group was formed to find a solution allowing efficient reuse of military scenarios among simulations. The goal of the Study Group is to verify the need for standardization, evaluate existing related standardization efforts, and cultivate a broad base of support across the simulation community for development of MSDL product. The Study Group proposed the following tasks in the Terms of Reference to achieve its goal: reach out to the community to gather the requirements and inputs for MSDL; collaborate with existing standardization effort such as C-BML; perform analysis; and prepare a set of recommendations for MSDL standardization. This paper reports the status of the tasks and the findings of the Study Group.Introduction Simulation scenario definitions and associated scenario development tools have been non-standard and closely coupled to the simulations they support. This close coupling severely limits third party tool development and sharing of scenarios among simulations and between simulations and C4I devices. The final report of the recently completed Assessment of the Need for Product Data Representation Standards (ANDPDRS) Study Group identified “Campaign/Mission Scenario Data Presentations” as a simulation standards gap and nominated the MSDL effort as a possible solution. The Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) has approved the Terms of Reference for organizing the Military Scenario Definition Language Study Group in April 2005. The Study Group has been working to identify the needs for the standards and the products to be developed.  The Study Group’s products will include an MSDL Product Nomination for SAC consideration prior to or at the Fall 2005 SIW.BackgroundMSDL is being developed by the OneSAF Objective System (OOS) to provide simulations with a mechanism for loading Military Scenarios. [1] As a standard, MSDL is not being developed for simulation alone. The intent is for MSDL to define Military Scenarios that are independent of the application of that scenario. MSDL relies on military standards for data types, enumerations, precision, etc. In Block B of OOS development SIMCI held a workshop focusing on Scenario Generation. In this workshop two definitions of the Military Scenario were documented. One definition identifies the ontology of MSDL as a language. The second provides for the scope of MSDL within that ontology. The definition of the ontology of a military scenario states that a military scenario is bounded by the situation at one instant in time combined with the course of action (COA) planned to be taken in context to that situation. Military_Scenario = Military_Situation(t0) + Course_of_Action(t1)  SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1. Ontology of military scenarios.Within the defined ontology, MSDL is scoped by the requirement to remain application independent. SIMCI identified a Military Scenario as including: Core – Data that all military scenarios must included. Common – Data that any military scenario might include. Custom – Data that is custom or application specific. MSDL includes both the Core and Common portions of a Military Scenario.  Custom data is included when it can be abstracted to a common use case and data model.The remainder of Section 2 provides an overview of the main concepts of MSDL. MSDL Concepts This section highlights the main concepts involved in understanding MSDL. MSDL provides a link between planning and execution, either for a simulation or an operational scenario. The goal is for MSDL to allow the decoupling of planning and execution systems to enable a broad range of interoperability and reuse between the simulation and operational domains. However, MSDL can be used for more than the bridge between planning and execution. MSDL can be used within the planning phase (whether this planning phase represents planning for a simulation or an operation). The idea here is that, during planning, several courses of action are considered and evaluated. The results of the evaluation could cause replanning to be performed. Furthermore, when planning for large scenarios, a planner might break down the scenario into pieces, each of which can be planned independently. Once final plans are produced for each scenario piece, these plans can be fused together to form the overall scenario plan. A scenario specification standard such as MSDL allows this process to proceed smoothly by enabling interoperability between multiple planning tools and simulations for course of action analysis, and by allowing fusion of partial plans into an overall MSDL format plan. It is hypothesized that MSDL can also be used within the execution phase to enable interoperability of simulation and operations. MSDL scenarios could be split between these domains. Furthermore, within the execution of a scenario, planning or replanning of the military scenario might become necessary (for example, as part of training a command staff). MSDL can be used in that context to allow the specification of new plans within the execution context, and using simulation or C4ISR equipment for planning. In defining MSDL, we are considering several doctrine sources to determine what needs to be expressed. One consideration is specification of the military situation. The Military Situation is defined as the METT-TC in Joint Publication 1-02 as “mission, enemy, terrain and weather, time, troops available and civilian”. We have considered each of these factors in the MSDL specification. The Course of Action (COA) data is graphically represented by Overlays and Tactical Graphics (graphic representation). COA also includes the synchronization of actions to be executed. The execution matrix and Military Decision Making Process (MDMP) are being used to develop this data model. CollaborationThis section describes the plan for collaboration and alignment between the C-BML and MSDL study groups in the short term (FY05) and through the expected Product Development Group phases in Calendar Year (CY) 06 and beyond.  The remaining subsections highlight coordination activities and specific coordination points necessary for aligning the C-BML and MSDL standards-based activities and products.  C-BML & MSDL CoordinationDuring FY05 the primary collaboration activity is to identify the scope and coordination points between C-BML and MSDL and to define the alignment activity and schedule.  The POCs for MSDL and C-BML are Dr. Rob Wittman and Major Kevin Galvin respectively.  The following paragraphs document their work to date.Comparing MSDL & BML EffortsAs depicted in figure 2 and figure 3, C-BML intends to serve the international command and control, simulation (live, virtual, and constructive), and robotic domains with doctrinal, data representation, and protocol standards to communicate strategic, operational, and tactical orders to superiors, peers, and subordinates.  MSDL intends to serve the international command and control and simulation domains with data representation and file transmittal format standards to define military scenario information.  Doing so will allow MSDL compliant scenario planning tools including C4I devices to populate military scenarios that can be read by MSDL compliant live, virtual, and constructive simulations including DIS or HLA-based federations.  To meet these objectives both efforts have started in FY05 or earlier to define the military elements, activities, relationships and interactions of interest.  Both efforts have also initiated data modeling efforts with the C-BML leveraging and extending the Command and Control Integrated Exchange Data Model (C2IEDM) as its logical data model, and the MSDL effort developing an XML-based schema and data model.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2: BML & MSDL ScopeBoth C-BML and MSDL are leveraging the 5W concept (Who, What, When, Where, and Why) to support the identification, storage, and description of Military entities including organizational and platform level entities,Activities that can be performed by the entities, andRelationships and interactions between the entities, organizations, their assets, and the activities.Additionally both groups, the MSDL under the project leadership of the OneSAF Objective System (OOS) and Army-BML under a Simulation and C4I Interoperability Overarching Integrated Product Team (SIMCI-OIPT) sponsored effort (currently unfunded), are working together to develop a common tasking grammar specifying the syntax and semantics of assigning a task to a subordinate (entity or organization) by a superior (entity or organization).Finally, both groups are using and coordinating a phased approach in their Product Development Group (PDG) related planning efforts.  This coordination includes the rules for structure, content, and format as well as the context (NATO, Land, etc.) for the initial and follow on PDG development efforts. Throughout the remainder of CY05 the C-BML and MSDL Study Groups will continue to collaborate on the domain and process definitions; data modeling conventions, rules, and guideline definitions; and the tasking grammar development to ensure consistency, alignment, and the ability to easily share products between the groups.Comparing MSDL & BML CapabilitiesA brief comparison of the projected capabilities of the MSDL and BML resulted in Figure 3.  It shows the significant capabilities of each effort and the common capabilities shared by both BML and MSDL.  For brevity only the common capabilities are described.Support for simulation pre-initialization phase (operational planning phase) – MSDL is explicitly targeted to support the simulation pre-initialization phase where scenario details are synthesized and documented for input into the simulation for subsequent initialization and execution.  BML, its constructs and supporting tools, support the entire set of military operational phases including planning, employment, and review.  Thus BML products are aligned to provide input to the scenario development process.Common tasking language grammar shared between MSDL & BML allows for consistent data interchange for simulation initialization – MSDL and BML are working together to define a common grammar that supports a wide range of doctrines and can be implemented using a range of technologies including XML, relational databases, WSDL, SOAP, etc.Common vocabulary across the international C4I domain – The common tasking grammar as well as other important BML language components such as Geo-BML will provide the entire valid vocabulary across the international C4I domain.  This vocabulary will also provide the basis for MSDL constructs.Support for multiple doctrines – As the standards must support the international community both MSDL and BML will support multiple national doctrines as well as different battlefield domains (land, air, sea, and space) doctrines.The resulting application of both the MSDL & C-BML promise to provide a consistent mechanism to unambiguously define and populate a military scenario for use during simulation initialization.Figure 3: BML & MSDL Capability ComparisonCY06 MSDL & C-BML Product Development Group Collaboration and AlignmentPhase I of the MSDL & C-BML PDG efforts are anticipated to begin in CY06.  During this phase both groups move into their initial PDG processes.  The focus of the collaboration shifts from process and rule definition to developing a specific set of standards associated with the structure, content, and format for a defined context of entities, activities, relationship, and interactions.   It is expected that this initial PDG effort will collaborate and align with respect to the following:The 5 Ws concept with potential extensions to support Which and How attribution.The naming conventions and types of units, activities, interactions, and relationships.The initial rules and guidelines for structure, content, and format.The initial context for structure, content, and format (NATO, Land, etc.).Continued collaborative development of the formal grammar.FY07 MSDL & C-BML Product Development Group Collaboration, Alignment, and ExtensionPhase II of the MSDL & C-BML Product Development Group is anticipated to start in CY07.  During this phase both groups refine and extend their initial PDG processes and products.  The focus of the collaboration shifts to extending the context of entities, activities, relationship, and interactions and grammar development.   It is expected that this second PDG efforts will collaborate and align with respect to the following:Refinement and extension of the naming conventions for units, activities, interactions, and relationships.Refinement and extension of the standardized rules and guidelines for structure, content, and format.Refinement and extension of the standardized context for structure, content, and format. Initial standard-based definition of the formal grammar.Domain Analysis and Other Collaborative EffortsAs an additional effort to collect and categorize the communities’ interest in MSDL the MSDL Study Group has created a MSDL Interest Matrix.  The Matrix, shown in Table 1, contains six areas housing information from parties interested in MSDL.  The columns are organized along the following:Organization:  Identifies the organization that has a particular interest in MSDL.Program/Project/System:  Identifies the program, project or system that has a particular interest in MSDL.Domain: Identifies the battlefield domain of interest to the program, project, or system.Doctrine: Identifies whether the program, project, or system has a particular interest in the doctrine being represented.Operating System: Identifies the Battlefield Operating System (BOS) of interest to the program, project, or system.Environment: Identifies the environment of interest to the program, project or system.Each cell in the spreadsheet holds a value defining whether the program, project, or system produces (P), consumes (C), both (B) produces and consumes, has an undefined interest (X), or is not interested (blank) or (O) in the particular column.  The study group continues to define and evolve the format and the content of the Matrix to ensure the interests across the MSDL domain are captured. In addition to the matrix several other collaborative activities are occurring each of these is described in a short paragraph below.The Modeling Architecture for Technology, Research, and Experimentation (MATREX) is developing a mechanism and software for an improved distributed simulation capability.  The MATREX approach employs a common, standardized, data source for all simulation components.  This approach leverages the Military Scenario Definition Language (MSDL) and the Military Scenario Development Environment (MSDE), as used with the OneSAF Testbed Baseline (OTB) and the Objective OneSAF System (OOS).  In addition, MATREX also employs both commercial software and MATREX-developed software to allow for the consolidation of simulation configuration data, as well as for the instantiation and initialization of many additional simulations.  Ultimately, the goal is to store all initialization data for a distributed simulation execution in a single data file.  As data is accessed from a common source, simulations receive consistent representations of simulated entities, and repeating a simulation execution just requires retention of a single data file.Table 1:  MSDL Interest MatrixOperating SystemsEnvironmentOrganizationProgram/Project/SystemDomainDoctrineMAN (Ground)MAN (Air)MAN (Sea)MCMINTELFSADNBCC3CSCSSSea DefenseSurface WeatherGround TerrainOceanUrbanSpacePEO STRIOneSAFArmyXXXXXXXXXXRDECOMRDECOM-MATREXArmyXXXXXXXXXPEO C3T/ARL:UTACSISArmyOPPPPPPPPPPERDCGEO BMLArmy, SOFOXXXXXXXXXXXXATECIMASE (ISGT)ArmyOPPPPPPPPPPPPEO STRIWARSIMArmyXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXERDCERDCArmy, SOFOXXXXXXXXXXXXXCAECAEInt'l, Air Force, Sea, SOFXXXXXXXXXXXXXXMAK TechnologyMAKInt'l, Army, Air Force, SeaXXXXXXXXXXJCOFAJoint/Int'lXXXXXXXXXJFCOMRD3JointXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXNSCJointXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXOPTIMetricsOPTI MetricsArmyOXXXXXTRACAWARSJoint/Int'lXXXXXXXXXXXXXXTRACC3 DriverArmy, Air ForceXXXXXXXXXXXXXXATT GroupATT GroupJoint CoalitionXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXSimventionsSimventionsNavy, Marine, ArmyXXXXXXXXPEO STRICTIAArmyOXXXXXXXXXXXXXXP = Producer, C = Consumer, B = Both, X = Interest, but undefined, O or blank No InterestThe Marine Corp’s Combined Arms Staff Trainer Upgrade (CASTUP) is currently using MSDL as the mechanism to export military scenario data from their real-world C2 device, C2PC, and import into the OTB and OOS systems. The collaboration effort has been going on for at least a year; the Marine Corp and OOS developers are working closely to integrate the new requirements and modifications of MSDL schema into both projects.The OneSAF Objective System (OOS) has developed the MSDL XML schema that is being used as the starting point of the requirement-harvesting task by the MSDL Study Group. The MSDL XML schema is being evolved to support other collaboration efforts that intend to use OOS.MC2/CAPES will be funded to upgrade and support the MSDL standard. This support will be in place by the end of Fiscal Year (FY) 05.IMASE Scenario Generation Tool (ISGT) has the requirement to support the rapid generation of Operational Test threat scenarios for system testing of US Army Intelligence and Electronic Warfare (IEW) Systems. ISGT has entered into one of the last phases of development. Its current capabilities include multiple client/servers using Microsoft SQL, intelligence data importing using UOBDAT v8.1, scenario data import/export using ISGT XML schema, and scenario data exporting using the MSDL schema. ATEC Headquarters has given the task to examine the integration of ISGT, BML, ACSIS and C3 Driver. Currently ISGT has been able to export scenario data into other M&S systems, such as OneSAF Objective System (OOS) using MSDL v3.1.0 Block C build 21.MSDL Content, Criteria, & FormatThis section provides current rules and guidelines for populating the MSDL specification.  It is divided into two areas: content & criteria, and format.  The content & criteria section describes the scope of information to be contained within a MSDL formatted file and the current criteria for accepting changes to the MSDL specification.  The format section describes the spreadsheet fields for submitting changes to the MSDL specification.Content & CriteriaA valid MSDL file contains data that can be validated for structure and content against the current MSDL XML schema.The current criteria for accepting changes to the MSDL specification include the following:The data items must describe a military scenario (see MSLD SG terms for a definition of military scenario) for use in a live, virtual, or constructive simulation. The data items must represent part of the military situation in terms of Mission, Enemy, Terrain and weather, Troops and support, and Time and Civil (METT-TC) considerations.The data items must be simulation independent.The data items must be unique within the MSDL structure; andThe data items must be well defined by identifying a specific data type and allowable range of entries. such as within an enumerated list or numeric boundaries.FormatWhile the MSDL specification uses the XML Schema Definition (XSD) draft April 7, 2000, CR October 24, 2000, May 2nd 2001 final recommendation, submissions to add, subtract, or modify the contents of the specification should be made via an entry in the MSDL modification form.  Currently there are two proposals for the modification form a spreadsheet and a document based on the DIS Study Group Problem/Change Request (PCR).  Both the spreadsheet and the PCR form are undergoing the normal product review process.  The modified PCR form can be found within the MSDL reflector and is defined by an accompanying description document.  The spreadsheet document currently contains the following fields; newly proposed fields are preceded by “Proposed”:Ready for Request: The field is color coded: red for no, green for yes.   When a proposed data element is ready for request it can included a proposed MSDL build number as well.  Build numbers are used to incrementally plan and develop additional MSDL capabilities.Name: This is a descriptive name provided by the submitter.Complex or simple: Complex refers to a set of data that needs to be broken down into smaller elements.  A simple type refers to an element at smallest state.Description: Describes the attribute and why is it needed.Required by: Describes which simulation, federate, or organization requires the data element.Provided by: Describes which simulation, federate, or organization may provide the data element.Current Format/Data Type:  The data type or format currently used by the “Required by” simulation, federate, or organization to represent the data.Is this data already included in MSDL?: Yes or no field describing if the data is already included in MSDL.Definition: The definition of the data element.Scenario data type: Core, Common, or Custom, please see the definitions in section 5.1.2.3 for a description of these items.MSDL name: If the data already exists in MSDL, what is the name of the attribute?  If the data is not already in MSDL and should be included, what is the unique attribute name desired?Content: Simple or complexProposed – Parent Attribute Path:  Identifies parent attribute within the MSDL schema.Proposed – Attribute Name: (Already included above.  See MSDL name.)Proposed – Data type:  Describes the specific data type requested for inclusion in MSDL. May be included as part Description or Definition above.)Proposed – Units (when applicable):  Describes the units of measure for the data such as kilometers per hour, miles per hour, Meters per second, etc.)Proposed – Cardinality:  Determines if a single or multiple instances of the data will be provided.Proposed – Category: current situation, course of action, management, documentation.Proposed – Domain:  Describes the domain which is interested in provided and/or requiring the information.Proposed – Rational: Describes a rational for including the data element within the MSDL.Product Development PlanThe fourth task defined in the TOR is performing analysis to determine steps required to establish a product specification. This section describes the currently baselined process.Straw Man Review ProcessThe Study Group review process as shown in Figure 4 is both iterative and incremental.  It allows for the entire Study Group to review and collaborate on the contents of a particular product in an open forum.  Every effort will be made by the study group chair to use network-based mechanisms to distribute and receive comments on the products under review.  The process steps are described below:The process begins with the Study Group Chairperson proposing a new or pre-existing product. The product can be a process definition, a schedule, a document, the MSDL specification, or some other artifact appropriate for review.The review is then opened and announced along with the review opening and closing dates via the SISO MSDL Study Group reflector.  The product is also distributed via the reflector or posted on the SISO MSDL Study Group website. Study Group members then review and comment on the product in an agreed to format or via the SISO reflector discussion threads.  The Study Group Chair is investigating an open source request tracking tool called Web-RT to capture and disposition comments.  Once the review period has ended the Study Group Chair dispositions, clarifies, and integrates as necessary the changes into the product under review.  At the end of this stage the product with modifications is redistributed to the Study Group along with a new final review period including the start and end review period dates.Study Group members perform a final review and provide comments in appropriate format to the Study Group chair via the SISO reflector or other agreed to mechanisms.  The Study Group Chair dispositions, clarifies, and integrates final changes and produces the new product baseline (Baseline x+1).  The process is then repeated using the new baseline as the starting point as part of the normal, deliberate review cycle. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 4: Product Review ProcessInitial Product Review ScheduleIn order to test the process several key study group products have been through the Product Review Process.  The initial and final review periods for these reviews are shown in Figure 5. These products include: the review process; an initial set of definitions; an initial definition of the MSDL format, criteria, and content; a domain spreadsheet; and a MSDL modification request spreadsheet.   Each of these products is described below:Review Process:  Please see section 5.1 Straw man Review Process.Definitions: The set of definitions that are important to understanding and communicating concepts about MSDL. These definitions are available on the SISO MSDL Study Group web page.MSDL Format, Criteria, and Content:  This set includes the proposed format of the MSDL specification.  The proposed criteria for including data elements within the MSDL specification and the proposed content of data to be reposed in file conforming to the MSDL specification.  Please see section 4, the Straw Man MSDL Format, Criteria, and Content for more detail.Domain Spreadsheet:  The Domain Spreadsheet contains information relating to the MSDL domain analysis showing the information domains (air, land, sea, etc.) that are relevant within MSDL and the organizations that may produce, consume, or are interested in specific domains.  Please see section 3.4 for additional information. MSDL Modification Spreadsheet:  This spreadsheet is used to comment on the MSDL specification in terms of additional elements, changes to existing elements, or deletion of existing elements.  Please see section 4.2 for additional detail.Figure 5: Initial Review ScheduleInitial MSDL Baseline and Report ScheduleIn addition to the products mentioned in section 5.2 Initial Review Schedule a draft MSDL initial baseline and report schedule has also been executed by the Study Group Chair.  The initial MSDL baselining and report schedule coincides with the Euro-SIW and Fall-SIW events.  The key milestones and processes are described below and shown in Figure 6:Milestone 6/8/05 MSDL Study Group Meeting 1:  The first MSDL Study Group meeting held in Orlando, FL June, 8 through June 10, 2005.Process Submit MSDL Good Ideas 6/8/05-6/12/05:  The timeline provided for Study Group members to submit their initial good ideas for inclusion into the initial version of the MSDL specification.Milestone 6/26/05 Euro-SIW Study Group Meeting 2:  The second MSDL Study Group meeting held in conjunction with Euro-SIW in Toulouse France.Process Integrate Submissions into MSDL 6/29/05-7/15/05:  The timeline allocated for the Study Group Chair to disposition and integrate the good ideas submitted by the study group into the MSDL draft spec.Milestone 7/13/05 Study Group Draft Report Due:  The draft report is due on 7/13/05 per the MSDL Study Group TOR.Milestone 7/19/05 Publish Draft MSDL Spec:  The date for publication of the draft MSDL spec including the good ideas submissions.Process MSDL Review 7/19/05-8/9/05:  The Study Group review period for commenting on the draft MSDL spec.Process Integrate Comments into MSDL 8/10/05-8/13/05:  The period allocated to Study Group Chair to disposition and integrate comments on the draft MSDL spec.Process Revise Initial Report 7/14/05-8/18/05:  The period allocated for evolve and mature the MSDL initial report.Milestone 8/18/05 Study Group Draft Report Due:  The due date for the MSDL Study Group final draft report.Process Final Report 8/18/05-9/20/05:  The period allocated to work on the MSDL Study Group final report.Milestone Publish Final Draft MSDL Spec 8/31/05:  The date to publish the final draft MSDL spec.Process Final MSDL Spec Review 9/1/05-9/8/05: The period allocated for the Study Group to review the MSDL final draft spec.Process Publish MSDL Initial Baseline 9/9/05-9/20/05: The period allocated to published the initial baseline MSDL spec.Milestone Fall SIW begins 9/18/05:  Fall SIW starts 9/18/05.Milestone MSDL Intial Baseline 9/20/05: The date for formal publication of the initial MSDL Baseline.Figure 6: MSDL Initial Baseline and MSDL Report ScheduleStraw Man MSDL Second Baseline ScheduleIn addition to the current MSDL baseline process the Study Group Chair proposes a second comment and review iteration to create version 2 of the MSDL specification baseline following the Fall 2005 SIW.  The proposed schedule for this iteration is shown in Figure 7.  Figure 7: MSDL Second Baseline ScheduleMSDL Standard Development PhasingThe product development schedule for MSDL is consistent with phase I of the MSDL & C-BML PDG efforts that are anticipated to begin in Calendar Year (CY) 2006. For MSDL the first phase concentrates on producing an initial standard version of the MSDL content schema and the implementation rules and guidelines associated with MSDL usage.  For MSDL purposes the content schema includes a data dictionary defining each data element as well as with a detailed XML schema showing each elements data type, boundary conditions, and enumerations where applicable.The Second phase of MSDL standards development process extends the products developed within the first phase and formalizes the standard grammar-related products co-developed with the C-BML community.  This is seen as a multi-year process extending through CY 2008.The third phase focuses in two areas.  First it extends the standards established in the preceding phases.  Secondly it continues the collaborative effort with the C-BML community to standardize ontology-based methods, concepts, and technologies for a robust computable battle management language.  This too is seen as a multi-year process extending through CY 2010.References[1]	Franceschini, Robert, W.; Franceschini, Derrick, J.; Burch, Robert, B.; Sherrett, Russ; Abbott, Jeff:  “Specifying Scenarios Using the Military Scenario Definition Language”, paper 04F-SIW-068, 2004 Fall SIW.[2]	MSDL Study Group Product: MSDLDomainAnalysis8-1-05(1).xls[3]	MSDL Study Group Product: Review Process 8-1-05.ppt[4]	MSDL Study Group Schedule Aug-3 Meeting Presentation to MSDL Study Group.[5]  “MSDL Study Group Interim Report”, presented at the MSDL Study Group Meeting Euro-SIW, 29 June 2005..Author BiographiesLTC JOHN Surdu is an infantry officer currently serving as the Project Manager for OneSAF.  He has been working in the M&S community on and off since 1995.  He earned a B.S. in Computer Science from West Point, an MBA from Columbus State University, an M.S. in Computer Science from Florida State University, and a Ph.D. in Computer Science from Texas A&M University.ROBERT WITTMAN, JR. currently works for the MITRE Corporation supporting the OneSAF program. He has been part of the U.S. DoD M&S community since 1990. He holds a B.S. in Computer Science from Washington State University, a M.S. in Software Engineering from the University of West Florida, and a Ph.D. in Industrial Engineering from the University of Central Florida.JEFF ABBOTT is a Senior Software Engineer at AcuSoft. He has been involved in the OneSAF Objective System program in the capacity of developing the Military Scenario Development Environment, a military scenario planning capability. Mr. Abbott was a lead designer of the initial OneSAF MSDL specification. CoreCommonCustom