Research, Development and Engineering (RD&E) ForumChairCynthia BallardVice ChairRalph WeberSecretaryJohn FayObjectives for this Workshop:Discuss the content and format with the RD&E users during the forum.Focus the RD&E Forum for the Users.Have at least one invited presentation from Game COTS community in anticipation of Fall 2005 Conference.Comments and Recommendations:Four SIWzies nominated papers were presented in the RD&E Forum.Our Invited Presentation was not able to present due to pressing schedule.  The schedule had been changed that day outside the door and on the overhead.  The RD&E Chair announced that the presentation was cancelled throughout the morning, but still had people attempting to see the cancelled presentation.No evidence of cross fertilization with SCS.  It is less expensive to attend the SCS conference than SIW.Several study groups were requested by presenters including:  Metadata Standards, Fault Tolerance for RTI’s, Federates and Federations, and SIP M&S.  Suggest that Metadata Standards (05S-SIW-84 and 05S-SIW-88) be addressed by the BOM PDG.  Suggest that the Fault Tolerance for RTI’s, Federates and Federations (05S-SIW-129) authors solicit additional interested users utilizing the reflector.  The RD&E Forum would sponsor such a study group if a significant percentage of users request it.  Suggest that SIP M&S (05S-SIW-135) be addressed by CFI PRP with necessary collaboration.  The RD&E Forum would be interested in such study group outcomes.A new C2 DIS PDU was presented (05S-SIW-055).  The DIS PDG Chair requested the presenter submit a change request to the DIS PDG.Recommend that all large meeting rooms have podiums and amplification.  RD&E needed presenter amplification and 27% of the presenters requested a podium.Fall 2005 SIW, RDE is interested in a panel discussion on the theme of the conference.  There is interest in the RD&E user requirements as it compares and contrasts to the COTS Game Industry discussion.RD&E ForumAverage attendance (excluding joint sessions)44Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)64Peak attendance (including joint sessions)N/ATotal papers presented11“No-show” presentations1Other presentations and panel discussions1 – Invited PresentationRecommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):05S-SIW-129 (Towards Fault Tolerant RTIs, Federates and Federations) Presented by Dr Treavor Pearce of Carleton University, Ottawa.