Name of Forum or Group:  Training (TRAIN)ChairScott JohnstonVice ChairGarry MorissetteSecretaryMichael WoodmanLeslie WintersRobert ChapmanMike NivenJerry SzulinskiDavid McKeebyObjectives for this Workshop:Provide an interface between User requirements and standards development.Provide a forum for Users to describe M&S interoperability shortfalls.Provide a linkage between the User and the Technical Communities.4.	Provide a forum for the Technical Community to present potential solutions to Users.Comments and Recommendations:There is emerging evidence that interoperability will be increasingly defined by its usefulness to the user.  Up to this point, discussions about interoperability have focused on the technical aspects and little attention has been paid to how the presence or absence of specific data affects the user.  Meaningful interoperability will become an increasingly significant topic as human performance measurement systems, such as those found in sophisticated debriefing and AAR systems, become part of training federations.  These systems require data that may or may be present on the federation network depending on how the federation was constructed especially when filter or gateways are used to optimize the network's technical performance.  The Training Forum will continue to solicit papers/presentations from the User Community to ensure that user requirements and goals are discussed and addressed by both the Technical and User Communities.Specific applications of M&S for training were described in several of the more well-received papers/presentations during past SIWs.  This workshop included a session devoted to USAF Distributed Mission Operations (DMO), as well as an excellent presentation of paper 05S-SIW-046 describing the development and deployment of a tactical training simulation ("ATLAS") for use by the Royal Thai Army.  A good balance of technology development & experimentation papers with user technology application papers should be the goal of each SIW.  The Training Forum will continue to solicit papers/presentations that provide information about User Community lessons learned, particularly those associated with interoperability.Several papers/presentations over the last three SIW events addressed a growing interest in adapting commercial PC gaming concepts, heuristics, and technologies into traditional DoD military simulations.  Given the SIW audience interest in this topic and the theme for the upcoming SIW, the Training Forum intends to host and facilitate a PC Gaming Technologies panel session at the Fall 05 SIW event.  This would be a continuation of the PC Gaming Technologies panel session conducted by the Training Forum during the last Fall SIW event.The Training forum members took note of a peculiar absence of papers describing using the GIG specifically for training.  That is not to say that there were no GIG papers at the SIW, but just that they were not targeted toward this forum.  The forum members could only speculate as to the reasons for this occurrence.  We suspect that perhaps the GIG concept is so new that there is very little training currently being conducted on the GIG.  The Training Forum intends to solicit GIG training papers/presentations for future SIW events.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)34Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)60Peak attendance (including joint sessions)57Total papers presented16“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions0Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):1.	05S-SIW-100  Challenges in Developing a Performance Measurement System for the Global Virtual Environment, Antoinette M. Portrey, Loren B. Keck, and Brian T. Schreiber2.	05S-SIW-130  Use Cases, Requirements, and a Prototype Standard for an Intelligent Tutoring System (ITS)/Simulation Interoperability Standard (I/SIS), Richard H. Stottler, Dr Robert Richards, and Brian Spaulding2005 SPRING SIW OUTBRIEF FORM