Name of Forum or Group: Distributed Simulation Process and Tools (DSPT)ChairJake BorahVice ChairJane BachmanSecretaryPierre GauvinObjectives for this Workshop: DiscussProcesses for developing distributed simulationsTools for developing distributed simulationsExercise planning and managementComments and Recommendations:1. 05S-SIW-084, “Understanding the BOM Metadata and Making it Work for You”Key points:Metadata is important to support reuse and interoperability within the M&S community.This work reused existing standards for metadata where ever, and whenever possible while defining metadata for a BOM. Recommendation:None 2.  05S-SIW-088, “RPR-BOM Initiative: Providing a Set of Applicable BOMs to the M&S Community”Key points:The RPR FOM was chosen for this BOM use case because it was widely known in the M&S community.This work was done to provide a “kick start” for the adoption of BOM technology. Recommendation:The authors will continue to look for additional use cases to encourage usage of BOMs by general M&S community3.  05S-SIW-091, “Moving Towards a Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) for Distributed Component Simulation Environments”Key points:The SOA concept is not new, but in essence has been known for some time.The SOA concept stresses loose coupling between software components for reuse, adaptability, and aggregation. Recommendation:The authors will continue to research the applicability of these concepts in the context of BOM usage. 4.  05S-SIW-005, “The XMSF Profile Overlay to the FEDEP”Key points:XMSF profiles and HLA concepts will complement each other in web enabled M&S environment The XMSF FEDEP overlay is an example of leveraging the XMSF/HLA relationship.Recommendation:The authors will continue to research the relationship of an XMSF overlay to FEDEP activities. 5.  05S-SIW-075, “Simulation Over Geographic Information System (SOGIS) Web Service”Key points:The SOGIS web service has been developed to address the complexities of multi-agency planning problems which may arise within a single agency or between one or more agencies.Multi-agency simulation is a method meant to improve collaboration among agencies.This work demonstrates that GIS is useful as a web display tool.Recommendations:SOGIS offers a convenient method of distributing the simulation experience to a broad and distributed user baseGIS appears to be a rich and powerful interface for many simulations. 6.  05S-SIW-064, “Mixing Service Oriented and High Level Architectures in Support of GIG”Key points:There are several challenges to be addressed such as client-server calls versus two-way exchange of data, encoding of data, and maintaining the RTI state for a federate session when mixing SOA and HLA in support of the GIG..A prototypical implementation has been made with small tank federate in several different scenarios using a Web Service Definition Language (WDSL) for HLA services. The conclusion of the implementation is that a web services API is more attractive than expected for it supports a heterogeneous set of environments for development and deployment.The web services API is a valuable addition to HLA, and likely to gain acceptance.However, while performance is adequate for most applications, several issues still will need to be addressed.While it is possible to get a mixed HLA federation running, it is labor intensive to make the necessary connections and mappings.Additionally, it is not easy to add HLA properties like time management to existing SOA services.Finally, there areas of ambiguity surrounding the role of a SOA in an HLA FOM, and whether a loose coupling is actually achieved.Recommendations:A suggested unified architecture reusing HLA semantics with one data model to obtain benefits of both HLA and SOA has powerful implications for the GIG.While HLA and SOA both about interoperability but there are fundamental differences that will need to be addressed.  To fully unleash the power of the GIG benefits from both HLA and SOA are needed.  It is easy to add web services API to HLA, but it is hard to add HLA functionality to existing web services. 7.  05S-SIW-015, “Methods for Creating Intermediate Morphologies to Aid 2D to 3D Visualization”Key points:This paper addressed two techniques to morph terrain features from 2d maps into 3d visualizations.  This was done because it is easier to visualize in 3d while training military personnel.Recommendation:Three dimensional visualization is a preferred technique for training personnel. 8.  05S-SIW-079, “Simulating Rigid Body Physics in a Distributed Environment”Key points:This paper addressed techniques used to add physics effects to simulations in order to make virtual objects appear real in a tactile sense. Recommendation:More research is necessary to make the physics based effects of collisions consistent among federates in an HLA federation. 9.  05S-SIW-106, “Simulation And Software Development for Capabilities Based Warfare: An Analysis of Harmonized Systems Engineering Processes”Key points:This paper addressed a US Navy initiation to transform their acquisition process from being hardware based to being capabilities based.The activities embedded within the MDA, FEDEP and DoDAF were compared and contrasted in order to harmonize each of these system engineering processes.  Recommendation:More work is necessary in the early requirements definition and concept development phases of each of the system engineering processes to leverage commonalities at the front end of simulation development. 10.  05S-SIW-037, “Space-based Sensor Integration with the Advanced Warfighting Simulation (AWARS) Using HLA”Key points:This paper described the development activities necessary to integrate space-based sensors into an HLA federation.The development took about two weeks to perform and used the 1.3 HLA specifications.  Recommendation:	The use of the FEDEP was key to greatly reducing the time and labor required to perform the integration. Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)35Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)41Peak attendance (including joint sessions)60Total papers presented10“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussionsN/ARecommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):1.	05S-SIW-1062.	05S-SIW-0643.	05S-SIW-0842005 SPRING SIW OUTBRIEF FORM