MATREX Blue Thread – Networked Effects C2 (NEC2)Monte PorterMichelle HermanJohn HughesComputer Sciences Corporation4090 South Memorial ParkwayM/S 4-2-06Huntsville AL 35802 HYPERLINK "mailto:mporter@csc.com" mporter@csc.com,  HYPERLINK "mailto:mherman@csc.com" mherman@csc.com Jhughes23@csc.com800-477-1140Tim McKelvyUS Army Avaition and Missile RDECRedstone Arsenal AL 35898Tim.McKelvy @us.army.mil256-842-9501Key Words: C4I, Modeling and Simulation Software, Networked Effects, C2, Modeling and Simulation Software, Net-Centric Warfare, Networked Fires. Abstract:  “Networked Fires is a triad of relevant sensors, effects capabilities, battle command tools and communication capabilities available across the Unit of Action (UA) which enables dynamic application of lethal and non-lethal and suppressive effects to achieve the commander’s tactical and operational objectives” (from TRADOC IP3 “Networked Fires”).  The modeling of this concept requires a simulation that models not only the effects themselves but the elements of the command and control tools and network interfaces necessary to realize the advertised potential of the concept and to identify the technology hurdles to be overcome. RDECOM’s MATREX STO (Modeling Architecture for Technology, Research, and Experimentation)is developing a Networked Effects C2 capability which brings together elements of current fires systems (AFATDS), two Networked Fires prototypes (CDAS and ProtoCommand), the current C2 prototype for FCS (Mobile Command and Control (MC2)) and C3 Grid to allow HLA experimentation to examine the issues of Networked effects. This paper will describe the issues and concepts that are being explored in the development of networked effects simulation capability for MATREX.1. Backgrounda. MATREX Purpose.  The Modeling Architecture for Technology, Research, and Experimentation (MATREX) Science and Technology Objective (STO) will provide the Army with simulation-based capabilities to support acquisition decisions for Objective Force and Future Combat System (FCS). The goal of MATREX is to develop a persistent, secure, distributed and reusable environment where simulation models and system components can be “plugged” into an established architecture as needed and then “played” for analysis, evaluations and technology trade-offs in support of the Objective Force, Army transformation, other Services, and joint acquisition programs. b.  NEC2.  The Networked Effects Command and Control (NEC2) system is the Blue Arrow component of the MATREX STO for 2005.  Simply stated, the goal of the NEC2 effort is to provide a networked effects capability using elements of current fires systems (Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data System (AFATDS)), two Networked Fires prototypes (Combat Decision Aid System (CDAS) and ProtoCommand), the current Command and Control (C2) prototype for FCS (Mobile Command and Control (MC2)) and C3 Grid to allow High Level Architecture (HLA) experimentation to examine the issues of Networked effects in a bandwidth constrained environment. c.  Approach.  Key to our approach is the application of basic lessons learned in 3 + years of attempting to model “Networked Effects”:  1) we can’t shoot everything, 2) not every target is important, 3) everyone doesn’t need every piece of information to be “situationally aware”, 4) C2 messaging must be separated from the simulation cycle, 5) not all information is useful ,and 6) the network will know – but we must develop the how.  The network must be managed in order to support the commander’s scheme of maneuver using a set of policies and guidance’s, some of which are described in this paper.  Overlaid on these lessons are the user requirements.The best source for system requirements is the US Army’s Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) Integrated Process 3 (IP3) which gives a top level description of networked effects [1].  For MATREX, we compared the details of graphical user interface (GUI) and process functionality from the Users Functional Description (UFD) [2] and the current capability of MC2.  We then added the Networked Effects messages and necessary GUI interfaces.  By starting with MC2 and adding the functionality specific to Networked effects, the resulting NEC2 system should fit seamlessly into TRADOC’s ongoing C4I experimentation. These messages are designed to be transmitted through the network which will be represented by C3 Grid.  C3 Grid provides a Command, Control, Communication, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I) abstraction layer between the simulation (and the simulation cycle), the C4I devices that must communicate over radios, and the radio models themselves. The goal is if it works through the Grid, it should work in the field.  Other federates in MATREX include advanced sensor and high fidelity missile simulations and a host of other services that are not part of this paper. 2.  NEC2 Concepta.  NEC2 Components.   The Networked Effects Command and Control system will have two parts, an Effects Engine (EE) [3] and a Warfighter Interface(WI) [4] as shown in Figure 1. The WI will provide planning and policy inputs to EE and to C3 Grid and will be the graphical user interface for the Effects role player.  The EE will provide a decision support service to multiple warfighter interfaces each having a role laid out in IP3.  As with all MATREX federates, the NEC2 WI and Effects will be initialized via remote creates that will pass consistent scenario data, task organization and other C3 data needed at STARTEX. b. Effects coordination.  C3 grid represents each C2 node as an entity and includes a number of network topologies for various functional flows.  It also separates the C3 data flows from the simulation cycle.  The C3 Grid updates the Blue SA to the WI and EE via Situation Reports and SALUTE Reports from perceived threat reports based on the OTB simulation interactions.  These reports are sent according to policy.  Once targetable information is received, The EE performs a target value analysis and attack analysis.  If the two analyses produce an actionable target, the effects engine nominates targets to the WI along with a selection of munitions.  These nominations will be acted upon by the WI and then sent to the appropriate effecter.  As the attack is executed the effecter will update the NEC2 until the mission is complete. c. Network Requirements for Success.  Central to success is the effective management of the message flow and network linkages throughout the network.  These must be managed by policy and be closely knit to the effects plan.  As the commanders’ plan changes, the policies in effect for the network and sensor nets must be changeable to allow the commander to fight the fight and not the plan.  Some of this guidance remains internal to NEC2 while other pieces extend to the network in terms of topology and to the sensors themselves.  The plan for NEC2 is to allow the WI to enter and update both policies and guidances as the battle progresses.  Guidances relate to the effects engine providing a service to a given WI.  Policies are more global and are sent to the Grid (in version 1.0) and to external federates (One Semi-Automated Forces (SAF) Testbed Baseline (OTB) and OneSAF Objective System (OOS) for implementation in later development).  A diagram showing the major functions of the NEC2 is at Figure 2.Figure 2 NEC2 Functions3.  Prioritization, guidances, and policies.  In order to allow the warfighter to change his plan dynamically, he needs to be able to “turn the knobs” to “tune” the processes of the network to fit his needs.  This tuning is generally done by allowing the commander to set and change priorities, provide detailed guidance and modify reporting policies so the network will perform as required and the critical tasks will be supported.    While this is necessary it is also very dangerous to the network.  Poor policy, poor guidance and a lack of prioritization can detract from mission success by causing an overloaded network, or failing to get the right information to the right place.  NEC2 is an attempt to support experimentation with these critical “tuning knobs” exposed to the warfighter in order to establish minimum network requirements and flesh out workable tactics techniques and procedures. The balance of this paper will discuss some of the “tuning knobs “ specific to NEC2.a. Mission Value Analysis.  Commanders need to influence specific components of guidance.   The attack guidance matrix combines elements of the High Value Target (HVT) list, Target Selection Standards (TSS), and Attack Guidance.  It needs to be editable in real time and distributed to the network.  Values in this matrix are used in the mission valuation process. The dynamic adjustments of the matrix allow the commander or his Fire and Effects Cell to fight the fight and not the plan.  Required functionality is in the ProtoCommand prototype and is planned for the WI and the EE.  An example of the attack guidance matrix (AGM) is shown in Figure 3. Figure 3 AGMb. Target Attack Planning.   Once a target value has been assigned, if the value meets or exceeds the cutoff value a weapon target pairing is accomplished using the policies and priorities published in the AGM and guidances.  A range and availability check is also done along with a check for any coordination requirements.  Available pairings are nominated to the war fighter who may intervene to deny the fire, clear the fire or allow the system to operate autonomously.  c. Distribution policy.  The determination of areas of responsibility or area of operations (AO) must be made and transmitted to the network as a sensing distribution policy based on the spatial location of targets.  This allows the network to establish a direct connection between the sensor and the headquarters responsible for that AO (bypassing the slower SA channels that are based on organization). This policy is used by the commander to assign responsibility for a given area of battlespace. The AO’s are numbered from left to right and from closest to furthest away.  This numbering scheme allows for ready understanding as to the relative position of each box on the battlefield.  Figure 4 shows an example distribution grid.   Once this AO policy is determined, it is issued to the net participants.  Sensors that find targets within a given box will provide spot report type information through normal operational channels but will also send a directed message to the headquarters responsible for that area.  This link is dynamic and can change with the phases of the battle or if a different headquarters is designated as responsible for the area.  Once the target is fused by the Information Superiority Cell, the NEC2 receives the data and determines if the target nominated, meets the rules of engagement. Figure 4  Distribution Policyd. Sensor update rate policy.  In order to meter the flow of threat data into the process, the commander will set a sensor update rate policy.  Moving / firing targets might be updated more often than sitting targets.  If an effect is called for that requires a more frequent update to be given during the engagement, the sensor responsible is notified.  At the end of the engagement the sensor is notified to return to the effective policy.e. Aggregation/deaggregation policy. Current levels of sensor activity will preclude an “everyone gets all” policy of information distribution.  Bandwidth availability will drive the requirement for an information distribution policy.   Using the distribution policy, C2 nodes responsible for relaying threat data will follow an aggregation/de-aggregation rule set that will send disaggregate data to their own local unit and  those higher units who have the responsibility for actioning the report.  Aggregate data would be sent to adjacent units.  For example, if 1st Combined Arms Battalion (1CAB) has responsibility to control effects in AO-34 then the network will provide detailed information to units in that AO and the appropriate Intelligence and Effects Cells.  Effects Cells in the adjacent CAB will be have situational awareness in a more aggregated (possible platoon icons) sense.  This reduces by 2/3rds to 3/4ths the number of people that must receive detailed information.  Exception policies would allow other elements to request disaggregate level data on a target by target basis.  In an information centric battle, this policy will also reduce the workload of operators at each node and increase situational awareness resulting in greater combat effectiveness for the force.f. Allocation of effects by phase.  One of the key problem areas surrounding future force effects process is the small number of rounds available versus the large number of available targets.  To maximize the effect of available ammunition, the commander allocates a number of rounds of each type to each phase of the battle.  This allows for an efficient management of ammunition available to the war fighter by phase to ensure sufficient ammunition will be available for later efforts.  If the ammunition allocated for phase 1 is not consumed in the first phase, it is added to the allocation for the succeeding phase.  The commander or his fire and effects cell will announce the next phase to the network thereby releasing the rounds allocated.  If the allocation has been exhausted for a given phase, the commander may elect to change the allocation and update the policy to the network.g. Allocation of effects by support relationship.   The commander allocates effects resources to subordinates by assigning a support relationship to effects units.  This allocates ammunition to the subordinate’s headquarters.  If the support relationship and allocation is not established, a subordinate may still request effects from the commander but that request will compete with other requests based on factors such as priority of fires.4.  SummaryWhile the user is still experimenting with the concept of Networked Fires, a perceived enabler is “the network will know”  It is vital that we begin now to determine the “hows”, the policies, guidances and priorities that bring the concept to reality.  The NEC2 federate will be a first step in the development of a manageable message flow and network linkages.  Simulations that feed the process and consume the results of decision making must begin now to implement the policies through the network.  A robust set of policies, closely knit to the commanders plan Will allow the commander to manage his resources (including the network) as the fight progresses.   5.  Road Ahead The NEC2 federate for MATREX 1.0 implementation is scheduled for delivery in August of 2005.  Future work includes IP20, the ISR process, joint Close air support (JCAS) and Aviation Airspace Command and Control (A2C2).6.  References[1] TRADOC Integrated Process IP3, Networked Fires.  Sept 2003[2}TRADOC Users Functional Description May 2004[3]  MATREX NEC2 Software Design Document, Effects Engine, 30 Nov 2004. [4] MATREX NEC2 Software Design Document, Warfighter Interface, 30 Nov 2004Authors BiographiesMonte Porter has over 12 years experience in integration simulations to support C4I experimentation and is the primary developer of the Intelligent Exercise Monitor at CSC’s Modeling and Simulation Center of Excellence.Michelle Herman is a certified M&S professional and lead simulation engineer at CSC’s Modeling and Simulation Center of Excellence.John Hughes is the coordinating lead for NEC2 architecture at CSC’s Modeling and Simulation Center of Excellence.Tim McKelvy has been applying distributed simulation tools and technologies in the US Army Aviation & Missile acquisition workforce for over 10 years.  He is an electronics engineer at the US Army Aviation & Missile Research Development and Engineering Center Systems Simulation & Development Directorate, is a longtime member of IEEE and SISO, and is grateful to his wonderful wife and three great children.PAGE  