Deployable Intelligence Simulation For Collaborative Operations (DISCO): Bridging the Training Gap between Simulations & Real-World Intelligence SystemsVickie TrunnellGary WaagTitan Corporation11955 Freedom Drive, Suite 2000Reston Town CenterReston, VA  20190(703)434-5668; (703) 434-4095vtrunnell@titan.com; gwaag@titan.comKeywords: Intelligence, C4I, Training, JSIMS, JNTC, JNITF, TC AoAABSTRACT: In the realm of training, exercises and experimentation, a recurring concern for many years is the lag between the advancement of real world, operational C4I capabilities, and the ability of simulation tools that support such events to reflect these current C4I capabilities.  The intelligence officer in such events rarely has access to the same quantity, quality or timeliness of information that would be available in the real world. The acquisition cycle associated with simulation software is one key reason for this lag.  Another is that such simulation development activities typically focus on combat interactions, while the models that reflect intelligence operations often do not receive the same degree of attention.  This lag forces training, exercise and experimentation audiences to have to gain access to intelligence information through systems and processes that are perhaps non-standard, non-operational and non-realistic.  The potential ramifications of this are, for example, developing a common operational picture that does not accurately reflect what would be developed in an operational setting, as well as allowing for the possibility of “negative” training.The Deployable Intelligence Simulation For Collaborative Operations (DISCO), developed by the Defense Intelligence Agency for the Joint Forces Command (JFCOM), allows us to make a giant leap forward in bridging this gap.  DISCO has been designed to provide training, exercise, and experimentation audiences access to intelligence information through their real-world C4I systems.  Anticipated static intelligence is defined and stored prior to the event, while dynamic intelligence is extracted from the various simulation and live entities that are “playing” during the event.   The system allows intelligence analysts to work in their native C4I environment, in effect, enabling them to “train as they fight,” rather than having to deal with systems and procedures that have no correlation with their real world operations. This paper provides an overview of the DISCO architecture, a summary of its key challenges and how they were overcome, and concludes with a summary of its current status and plans for the future.Introduction“Train as you fight,” has become almost a mantra across the U.S. DoD community over the last 10 years, cited recently by the current Secretary of Defense, Mr. Donald Rumsfeld.  This phrase has been used to help support and justify many programs, as well as to highlight the still needed improvements to address deficiencies in achieving this vision.  This paper contends that there is still much to be done to realize this vision, in particular, from the perspective of adequately reflecting, within military training and exercise environments the valuable contributions of the US intelligence community that are available to support real-world operations.  Among the key deficiencies are the following:Rarely does the Exercise Control Group (ECG) or Intelligence Support Cell (ISC) supporting an exercise have access to the same quantity, quality, or timeliness of information that would be available in the real-world;Indeed, access within an exercise environment to current intelligence systems typically lags the real-world, operational community by years;In a typical exercise environment, there is still heavy reliance on text-based messages and the “sneaker-net” method of coordinating intelligence functions.A related issue is that the US Intelligence Community has struggled over the past decade to continue to justify investments in simulation-based training tools to support inherently Service responsibilities to conduct Warfighter training.  Most each of the US Intelligence Community organizations that have invested some resources to support programs such as the previous Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) and the current Joint National Training Capability (JNTC) are looking to derive a secondary benefit from such investments.  Organizations such as NSA and DIA can more readily justify investments in Warfighter training simulation activities if they can also make the claim that such investments will also contribute to Intelligence Analyst training.  Such Intelligence Analyst training could occur as a residual benefit of an Intelligence Analyst supporting an Echelon-above Corps Warfighter training event, or it could occur when such tools are modified to stimulate the Intelligence Analyst in a stand-alone mode.These various above issues have begun to be addressed by the Deployable Intelligence Simulation for Collaborative Operations (DISCO), originally developed by the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) and then turned over to the Joint Forces Command (JFCOM) for further development, operations and maintenance.  This paper will provide an overview of the DISCO architecture, describe how it addresses these various above issues, and concludes with a summary of the current status of the program.Overview of the DISCO SystemDISCO was developed to make a giant leap forward by providing exercise and training participants, including the ECG, ISC and the actual Primary Training Audience, access to intelligence information about the events of their particular exercise through their real-world C4I systems.  There are two basic types of intelligence data that are necessary to reflect the intelligence capabilities that would be available in real-world operations:Quasi-static data that describes items such as foreign equipment parametric data, force structures, enemy order of battle, geospatial data (i.e., DFAD, DTED data);Dynamic data that reports on the current enemy situation/posture during the exercise that is either simulation-generated or human scripter-generated (i.e., HUMINT, SIGINT & IMINT reports).  Such reports should reflect the capabilities of our combined national, theater and tactical intelligence systems that would be available to the Warfighter in real-world situations.Figure 1.1 below attempt to graphically portray what the use of DISCO adds to a standard simulation-driven training and exercise event.  The two boxes in GREEN at the top right are new functionality that DISCO would provide to any exercise that without DISCO would be limited to non-existent.DISCO handles static data primarily by hosting these reference databases on the Intelligence Shared Data Server (ISDS).  Generally speaking, these databases do not change much during the course of the exercise.  They are initially populated with a snapshot of a real world copy of the database and then updated with exercise specific entries.  These databases provide the analyst with easy access to reference material.  Additionally, some of the applications provided on DISCO need this data to be fully functional.DISCO manages dynamic data through a combination of algorithms internal to the DISCO Federate code and external XML Style Sheets and scripts.  As the DISCO Federate collects interactions and object updates from the models participating in the game based on the DISCO Subscription List, the internal algorithms determine what form the data needs to take when it is passed out of the federate and tags the data elements for use by the XML parser and the scripts.  For example, when a ground unit movement object update is processed, DISCO may need to generate a JUNIT report, a Tactical Report (TACREP), and/or an update to the Military Intelligence Database (MIDB).  This entire data transformation process is what is generally referred to as the DISCO “Glue Code”.  Through the use of XML “Glue Code”, DISCO can easily translate binary game information into whatever form is needed by the intelligence tools on the end users workstation. It is important to note that DISCO is not a simulation.  It has no algorithms that represent the functionality of any battlespace objects (i.e. tanks, sensors, etc.).  It does not “own” any battlespace objects, and therefore does not “publish” updates to attributes of any objects in the game space.  Rather, DISCO interfaces with various simulations during an exercise, extracting needed information about the game status, formatting it, and then posting this data to the appropriate Intelligence Mission Applications (IMAs) for the ECG, ISC and or Training Audience to then access.  Therefore, in any given exercise, it is important to carefully plan in advance what data  DISCO will provide to whom so as to make the exercise reflect real-world intelligence capabilities as closely as possible.   INCLUDEPICTURE "C:\\Documents and Settings\\Administrator\\Desktop\\DISCO-001-R1.jpg" \* MERGEFORMATINET Figure 1.1 Exercise Architecture with DISCOThe DISCO architecture is built using the Joint Deployable Intelligence Support System (JDISS)1 as the core platform to host the IMAs.  JDISS was selected because of its wide acceptance and use within the Joint Intelligence Community and because it was developed as a Defense Information Infrastructure Common Operating Environment (DII COE) compliant system, which gives JDISS the architectural flexibility needed   to implement the concepts prescribed for DISCO.  In effect, DISCO is a surrogate for JDISS in a modeling and simulation environment.  The important point to understand here is that JDISS is currently used in most Joint exercises but only to the extent that it has connectivity to the training audience and provides the intelligence support staff with a computer platform to use in scripting.  The surrogate JDISS that DISCO provides not only incorporates this function but also provides the critical capability to be connected to the exercise thereby increasing by several orders of magnitude the usefulness of the JDISS. As previously mentioned and depicted in the below figure 2.1, JDISS hosts a wide variety of IMAs that can be upgraded or changed with very little impact to the DISCO architecture or the underlying data transformation code. These IMAs are largely intelligence community standard tools used on a daily basis worldwide not only in the Joint Intelligence Centers but also at the National Agencies and at Tactical Units.  By using tools such as the Command and Control Personal Computer (C2PC) and the Joint Mapping Toolkit (JMTK), the DISCO users are able to visualize the exercise ground truth on the same tool they use in the real world to visual the Common Operational Picture (COP).  In the same manner, they can use Mission Manager to perform collection management tasks for exercises; Coliseum to perform exercise Request for Information (RFI) management and Intel Office to manipulate and visualize game MIDB/GMI data.  Even complex integrated software suites like Battle Visualization Initiative (BVI) are easily incorporated into the set of software tools to produce a very realistic environment for the analyst to participate in the exercise.  In addition to the IMAs mentioned above, DISCO also incorporates the following applications:Common Message Processor (CMP) – The primary tool for Automated Message Handling and Automated Message Processing tool that is used for scripting.Joint Targeting Toolkit (JTT)  - This set of tools provides Automated Targeting Folders, Target Planning Worksheets, Battle Damage Assessment, and Automated/Plotted Targets.Figure 2.1   Intelligence Mission Applications in the DISCO Exercise ArchitectureJoint Collaboration Environment/Info Work Space (JCE/IWS) client – Provides the analyst with means to collaborate with all of the exercise participants.Each of these tools represents an investment of millions of dollars and years of development time.   All of them are tools that satisfy requirements to function in the operational environment of the real world.  DISCO capitalizes on this investment by allowing the exercise intelligence support staff to operate in the same manner as they do in their day-to-day operational role and by allowing the intelligence analyst in the training audience to interface with the role players in a realistic manner. DISCO’s interface to tools is via data only.  DISCO modifies the data feeding the tools, not the tools themselves.  If a new version of a tool is released, DISCO simply loads the new tool.  There would be occasions that DISCO would need to be modified, e.g. MIDB layout change or a USMTF change.  But these changes would not be unique to DISCO.  Any Federate/tool using these types of common data structures would also need to be adapted.  DISCO would be no exception. Benefits Afforded by DISCOThe Warfighter will be the primary beneficiary of the use of DISCO in DoD simulation-driven training and exercise events.  The Warfighter will have access to the same quantity, quality, timeliness and accuracy of intelligence reporting as he would expect in a real-world situation.  There will no longer be a need to sneaker-net information to the Warfighter through mechanisms and processes that are exercise specific and not available or expected in real-world operations.DISCO will also allow the Intelligence Analyst supporting an exercise to function as he normally would in the real-world.  The Analyst will now be an active participant in the exercise, not just a stand-by, support operation.  The Analyst will have access to and can pull from game-viable intelligence data.  This will allow the Analyst to create realistic queries, thus training him on what he would do in real-world situations.Current DoD exercises still do not typically provide Intelligence Analysts access to both static and dynamic data through real-world C4I systems.  Analysts rarely have access to the same information as they would in the real-world.  DISCO addresses this need to have the Analyst interact with the National Intelligence Community/Agencies as they do in the real-world, not use the back-door approach that is currently the norm for exercises.  Another benefit of the use of DISCO is that it will reduce the footprint of the Intelligence portion of the exercise.  Currently, in most exercises, the Intelligence Analyst has no ability to view all exercise assets or see the game from their own intelligence terminal.  The Analyst typically retrieves some information from within the exercise and some from outside the exercise.  It is not uncommon for the Analyst in the exercise to “sneaker-net” in order to do message scripting – run to one terminal, get information on assetsrun to another terminal, get information on objectsrun to another terminal, get ground truth informationgo back to their own terminalreview the master event scenario listscript the messagesend the message for review/approval message approvedmessage released at the proper time.There are even times where two additional steps are needed right after the message is scripted because some Analysts sit outside the exercise:scripted message is printedsomeone in the game re-scripts the message.It takes a lot of time to complete this process and most exercises have a lot of scripters participating.  DISCO provides the Analyst with everything inside the exercise, he never has to leave his terminal.  Message templates are available from within DISCO and the scripter can see what the other scripters are doing, again directly from his terminal.  Without DISCO, there is no direct connection.  All these factors help to cut the message scripting process time considerably and therefore increase overall efficiency.  This also reduces the manpower needed to man the white cell during an exercise.  This reduction is seen typically in personnel doing functions that are not real world.Another clear example of the benefit of the use of DISCO is in regards to exercise Requests for Information (RFIs).  In most exercises today the Intelligence Analyst receives RFIs via exercise message traffic and must script a response message and send it back through the exercise.  This is not how it is done in the real-world.  In the real-world (and in DISCO), the RFIs are posted to a website and the response is posted back to the website.  Again, DISCO allows Analysts use tools as they do in the real world.  We have to train like we fight.A potential benefit of the use of DISCO to overall exercise operations relates to the fact that, in a lot of exercises today, either an e-mail or printed document are handed out at the start of the exercise to note what databases will be used.  Any changes are noted by a new e-mail or a new printed document.  Access to these databases must be worked out ahead of the exercise.  This is not the most efficient manner to run an exercise as it is often hard to obtain and know that you have the current data.  DISCO could address this issue by providing a single URL where exercise participants could go to gain all exercise information.  URLs for appropriate databases and login accounts would be found in one location.  Even using the standard URL for databases can be tricky when at an exercise, as many Analysts have this information bookmarked and therefore not readily available for recall.  DISCO would consolidate exercise information in one location.  This eliminates the need for any special communication lines.4.  Using DISCO to Improve Intelligence Analyst TrainingIn current exercises, supporting Intelligence Analysts do not train, they merely wait on can-scripted messages to be fed to them over the network, then pass them along to the exercise.  They have no active role like they do in the real world, to analyze the data and provide intelligence reporting.  The Analyst needs to train by tasking, collecting, analyzing, and reporting on the data while the exercise is active.  This is how the real-world operates.  The first step in making the role of the Intelligence Analyst more active would be to provide the Analyst with raw, not analyzed data.  While DISCO is not the tool to provide the raw data, it can be the support infrastructure for the Analyst to process it.  DISCO can be used as the hub/facilitator by providing the access to intelligence information to be used in the analysis.  DISCO could also provide the tools that the Analyst uses in the real-world.  This gives the Analyst an active role in the exercise, not a passive one.The Analyst comes into the exercise with access to real-world intelligence databases, but that typically does not match the scenario playing out in the exercise.  DISCO could pull the needed intelligence “pieces” for the exercise, then could in turn be used to train the Analyst.  Using DISCO to provide the Analyst with the same environment as he uses in the real world would help in having the Analyst derive some real training benefits during the exercise.5.  DISCO Simulation EnvironmentsDISCO was initially developed to operate in the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) enterprise, which was based on the High Level Architecture (HLA).  Effort was concurrently invested to integrate and test DISCO within the Joint Training Confederation (JTC), where the inter-model connectivity was based upon the Aggregate Level Simulation Protocol (ALSP).  DISCO passed all of its test requirements at the winter 2003 JTC Confederation Test event, although DISCO was never formally accepted as a full fledged member of the JTC due to the absence of any funding to take DISCO to a JTC exercise that year.Also during 2003, DISCO was modified to operate in and then installed in the JFCOM J9 Distributed Continuous Exercise Environment (DCEE).This history demonstrates that DISCO can easily be adapted to function in various simulation environments.  To participate in a specific simulation environment, DISCO would need to adapt to the respective Federation Object Model (FOM) for that event.  A FOM defines what objects can be portrayed (e.g. aircraft, ships, etc.), what interactions can be used to convey information on those objects (e.g. location, mission status, etc.) and how they change with time.DISCO would also need to coordinate with other intelligence models about data sharing, as well as roles and responsibilities as they relate to tasking and reporting.6.  Current Shortfalls Addressed by DISCOIn most current exercises, a common shortfall is that of data disconnects.  A good example of this is last year’s Joint Expeditionary Force Experiment 2004 (JEFX04).  JEFX04 was focused on Battle Management Command and Control (BMC2) in order to further advance network-centric operations.  One of the noted shortfalls of the exercise was that exercise scenario data needed to be incorporated into the MIDB database.  Many hours were spent to compensate for this shortfall, trying to recreate scenario MIDB data.  DISCO could have fixed this issue by capturing the scenario data at the startup and populating the MIDB for exercise use.  DISCO could have been the coordinating factor to help eliminate this data disconnect.7.  Origin of the DISCO ProgramDISCO was initially developed to address intelligence training needs of the JSIMS program.  JSIMS was to provide valid computer-simulated environments for use by commanders around the world, their components, other joint organizations, and the services to jointly educate, train, develop doctrine and tactics, formulate and assess operational plans, assess war fighting situations, define operational requirements, and provide operational input to the acquisition process.  JSIMS was intended to do the following:Provide a training environment at the operational level of war that would also accommodate requirements at the strategic and tactical levels including space, transportation, information operations/warfare, and intelligence.Establish a common simulation support structure that would enable sharing of simulation resources, processes, and results among users.Enable joint simulation users to interact freely with elements of their command structure, supporting or supported organizations, and other simulation centers or users.Reduce overhead and operating costs for simulation-assisted training.Increase effectiveness and overall utility of modeling and simulations (M&S) in support of training and education by solving problems that previously existed within the family of primarily service-developed M&S systems. DISCO’s role in JSIMS was to provide web-based dissemination of intelligence products to Training/Experimentation audiences that reflect real-world changes to operations (i.e. the “game”) currently underway.  DISCO satisfied over 95% of its stated Joint Intelligence requirements in the IOC version of JSIMS.  DISCO was intended to enable rapid adjustment to the game to reflect the speed of real-world mission planning and tasking.  Event messages were to be manipulated in the same manner analysts currently use to accomplish their tasks at DIA.Unfortunately, in December of 2002, a Secretary of Defense Program Decision Memorandum (PDM) was issued that cancelled the JSIMS program, as well as zeroed out the budgets for all of the various service and agency programs that were part of the JSIMS enterprise.  DIA’s budget for DISCO was one of the programs effected by this PDM.8.  DISCO and Simulation InteroperabilityDISCO can play a key role in simulation interoperability from the perspective of linking a simulation federation with real-world intelligence systems.  A lot of focus in the SIW over the years has been linking simulations with C2 systems; DISCO was built to help stimulate intelligence systems, for which there have not been many other like efforts.  The use of XML style sheets to build the interfaces between the simulation federations and the various intelligence applications minimizes the need for any rigorous interoperability standards.  When changes are made to either the simulation federation on one side of DISCO, or the real-world intelligence applications on the other side of DISCO, all that is needed is to redesign and/or develop anew the appropriate XML style sheets to enable the proper data to be extracted from the simulation federation and be appropriately posted to the correct intelligence applications.  In effect, the DISCO system becomes a key mechanism by which to facilitate interoperability. 9. DISCO FutureDespite the DIA budget for DISCO being zeroed out in Sept 2003 by the December 2002 PDM, the value that this program will afford to both the Warfighter as well as the Intelligence Community which originally sponsored its development seems to be recognized at various levels across the DoD.  For example, the PDM that canceled the JSIMS program also directed the DOD to conduct a Training Capability Analysis of Alternatives (AoA)2 to decide what the future investments in DoD training should be to replace the JSIMS program.  The focus of the AoA study was to (1) compare current training capabilities with training requirements in order to identify gaps, (2) identify alternatives for removing these gaps, and (3) assess the cost and effectiveness of these alternatives.  The final recommendations of the AOA addressed and blended efforts across five distinct areas:Establishment of Management organizations and processes to oversee Joint Training;Improvement, development and minimization of the number of Training Simulations;Conduct of a rapid turnaround “trade study” for Reengineering Joint Training;Tasked USSOCOM to lead an Innovative Acquisition Prototype for Joint Close Air Support training;Development of a Joint National Intelligence Training Federation (JNITF).Additionally, the AOA Study concluded with four major points in their briefing to the Senior Steering Group to which they reported.  One of these four points was that:“Intelligence must be made part of the warfighting training audience.  Whereas intelligence has served in the past more as a training aid to the warfighters, the Intelligence Community must now be made an integral part of the training audience.”This is precisely what DISCO will help enable.The JNITF effort has begun to move forward, and is currently sponsored by the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)) office.  The initial focus of the JNITF is to follow-up on the AoA recommendations to investigate how to salvage the three national intelligence community simulations that are legacies from the JSIMS program – the National Reconnaissance Office’s National Wargaming System – Next Generation (NWARS-NG)the National Security Agency’s Adaptive Communications Reporting Systems (ACRES)and DIA’s DISCO program.The focus of FY05 JNITF efforts is to develop a roadmap for the JNITF, focusing on the resources necessary to build, operate and maintain this federation beginning in October 2006 (FY07).  The goal is to have such funding data ready to support the development of the FY07 budget submission that take place in the late winter/early spring of 2005.  While this roadmap is being developed, efforts are underway to define a “target” exercise prior to FY07 at which a JNITF “proof of concept” could be conducted.  The intent is to deploy all three JNITF simulations to a single exercise/experiment, and to survey the participants to gather feedback on the utility of the JNITF simulations, as well as to solicit feedback for future development activities.Concurrently, the U.S. Marine Corps has expressed interest in potentially using DISCO to support USMC simulation-driven exercises, as they have a concerted effort underway to improve the quality of intelligence training and support and reduce the number of scripters and role players.In conclusion, the DISCO program has the ability to make dramatic improvements to Warfighter training and exercise events in terms of improving the quantity, quality, timeliness and accuracy of supporting intelligence information.  It can also be used to help improve the ability to provide residual or possibly stand-alone training for the Intelligence Analyst.  Lastly, it also affords some potential benefits to the overall execution of the exercise.  In total, DISCO will help achieve the vision of being able to “Train as you fight.”10.  References[1]  JDISS description can be found at 	www.fas.org/irp/program/process/jdiss.htm[2]	Training Capabilities Analysis of Alternatives, (Unclassified FOUO), Department of Defense Joint Staff, 30 July 2004, from SIPRnet websitehttp://fcb.js.smil.mil/jt_fcb/ref/final_v1.pdfAuthor BiographiesVICKIE TRUNNELL is a software developer/engineer with 20 years of programming and database experience.  She was active in the initial setup, several deployments, and all versions of DISCO.GARY WAAG is the Director of Titan’s Simulation Applications Department, overseeing contracts currently supporting NSA, JFCOM, ASD-NII, CENTCOM, NORTHCOM, USFK/J3 and the Joint Staff/J8.  He is a former member of the SIW C4I Forum, as well as the founder and initial Chairperson of the SIW IO-ISR Forum.  He has about 30 years of experience supporting various DoD organizations in the areas of constructive and virtual simulations.  He holds Master’s degrees in Applied Mathematics, Electrical Engineering and Business Administration.