Name of Forum or Group: Medical Modeling & Simulation (MM&S) ForumChairDr. Kenneth CurleyVice ChairGary Gilbert, Azhar Rafiq, MDSecretaryHarvey Magee, William Beavin Objectives for this Workshop:1.   Focus on interoperability standards in medicine that build upon the already existing and extensive medical interface standards in such areas as a) operational systems for robot-assisted surgery, b) command and control systems for medical situational awareness, and c) medical models of varying resolutions for research and development in various medical domains.2.   Focus on training systems for instruction and rehearsal; imaging systems for treatment planning and assessment; and logistic planning systems for security and disaster response.3.   Identify most likely avenues for pursuing growth of MM&S community within SISO.4.   Present and discuss topics of interest in the simulation domain which are of interest to the large MM&S community which exists beyond the current reach of the SISO community.5.   Present updates and information on recent and near future activities associated with modeling and simulation in the medical domainComments and Recommendations:Note: Much of the core medical expertise in the MM&S Forum has been provided by representatives from the Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center (TATRC), Dr. Ken Curley (Chief Scientist) and Mr. Harvey Magee (Portfolio Manager).  Both have been prominent among the Forum’s leadership. TATRC’s interest in SISO has been to explore how best to address the needs of the medical community for development of simulation standards, as one aspect of increasing the use of simulation and modeling products within the broad medical community. Note: Dr. Curley was unable to attend the Forum; the Forum was led by Mr. Magee.1.   Preceding this Forum, Dr. Curley & Mr. Magee chaired a  panel on interoperability for Medical Modeling & Simulation (MM&S), “INTEROPERABILITY STANDARDS FOR MEDICAL MODELING AND SIMULATION: The Need, Challenges and Opportunities” at the 13th Annual Medicine Meets Virtual Reality (MMVR) conference, January 2005. Attendance exceeded 100. See  HYPERLINK "http://www.nextmed.com/mmvr_program.html" http://www.nextmed.com/mmvr_program.html for a summary of materials presented. As part of that panel, Rick Severinghaus (SISO Executive Committee), on behalf of SISO, presented a briefing, “Making a Case for Simulation Standards.”  Pete Swan (SISO Conference Committee) also attended; together TATRC and SISO spread the word about SISO Medical Simulation efforts. At MMVR also, a session, “Emerging Trends in Medical Simulation: Identifying the Needs of the Medical Community and Methods to Address Them” was held; see  HYPERLINK "http://www.simcen.org/mmvr2005/" http://www.simcen.org/mmvr2005/  for materials presented.2.   One joint session with SNE/SENS held Wednesday, to present 05S-SIW-045 “Modeling and Simulation for the Experimentation of Chemical and Biological Sensors.”3.   Attendance at the MM&S Forum has been fewer than hoped for since the startup of the Forum. Efforts to increase attendance have so far been unsuccessful, primarily due to the relative newness and substantially different nature of the development process(es) in use outside SISO for medical-specific M&S development. 4.  There is, and has been, a significant community of interest focused on the application of M&S in the medical domain for a number of years. The bulk of that effort has been aligned to specific practices/areas within the broad MM&S community. That community is beginning to work on open source standards on an ad hoc basis, and that work originated in venues other than SISO. The challenge for SISO, and the MM&S Forum in particular, is to show reason and value for that work to migrate to SISO SIW venues. That will occur once folks working medical M&S issues recognize and find value in SIW attendance as being in their interest. That interest will be recognized when ongoing ad hoc efforts become impeded by lack of interoperability among elements that are part of medical M&S development effort. 5. There is a natural gathering of the MM&S community at the Medicine Meets Virtual Reality (MMVR) conference, held annually. This venue is a major international gathering of leaders, practitioners, physicians, surgeonsengineers, government agencies, and industry having in common an interest in the practice of medicine. There are already at least 3 other major medical M&S meetings per year in the U.S. Each of those venues draws hundreds of medical community folks, much as SIWs draw hundreds of M&S practitioners from the military M&S community. Within the medical community meetings, M&S is a subset of the full agendas conducted, and the materials presented focus on specific medical applications, each at present having little need to interact.  Thus, the need for interoperability among M&S products is perceived to be small.  On the other hand, there is great need for attendees to stay abreast of current developments in the field of medicine. Not surprisingly, given these conditions, medical community practitioners are driven by self interest to allocate scarce workshop/conference time to venues focused on medicine, and not on those focused on M&S.  This has resulted in the low attendance results in SIW medical Forums.6.   Recommendation: within the context of the observations in the preceding paragraphs, the Forum suggests consideration for the conduct of a MM&S Forum as a subset of a medical community meeting, separate from an SIW venue. The Forum leadership believes this to be in the longer terms interests of SISO. From discussion within the Forum, and from discussion and interaction with the MM&S Study Group leadership, it is apparent that the medical community, broadly defined, has not yet gained an appreciation of the potential value and benefit of having in place simulation interoperability standards. This recommendation has been presented to SISO Excom for consideration by the Excom liaison to the MM&S Forum.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)10Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)12Peak attendance (joint session with SNE/SENS)16 Total papers presented4“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussionsnoneRecommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):05S-SIW-150 Virtual Vitals™: A low cost hardware interface to SVS™ 3D Virtual Reality Simulator for First Responder Training05S-SIW-120 Enhanced Distance Learning for DVTE: Real Time Feedback in an Integrated SCORM Environment2005 SPRING SIW OUTBRIEF FORM