Name of Forum or Group: LOG (also, Situation Awareness Display special session)ChairDave PayneVice ChairDan Cerys (had to skip this one)SecretaryVacant (Pat Jones fills in on this role)Objectives for this Workshop:1.	Assess and discuss the future of LOG Forum2.	No No. 2 priority Item3.	Provide venue for a related group of orphan papers in the area of Situation Awareness Display (SAD) and SAD simulation. Comments and Recommendations:1.	LOG is fading away due to lack of participation and lack of insight into major LOG simulation or analytical efforts, and related government or major program support.2.	The main outcome of our strategy discussion was the recommendation that LOG leadership needs to contact key US DOD logistics leaders/managers to convey potential of LOG Forum venue and current glide path toward downsizing or phasing out LOG forum (due to lack of interest, participation, impact on LOG programs and enterprise). Ideally, do the same with non-US, non-defense, and private sector leaders, but we have no ready way to do this (i.e., no likely international or non-defense sector members to do the outreach).3.	Over the next year, over the reflector and at upcoming SIWs, expand discussion of LOG future with members and SIW leads to lay out a plan of action for revitalization or stand down.4.	In the near term, (Fall 2005, Spring 2006), plan to structure LOG block as 2-4 paper LOG session, a 2-4 paper OOTW session, and a 2-4 paper Situational Awareness Display session.Based on an excellent SAD session with much more interest and enthusiasm than the actual LOG session.Also reflects that a number of long term LOG members “day jobs” now more closely align with SA simulation and visualization. May be a path to retiring or downsizing LOG while retaining the LOG active member base for SIW and SISO.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)10Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)20Peak attendance (including joint sessions)5Total papers presented8“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions1Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):1.	05S-SIW-0022.	05S-SIW-0493.	05S-SIW-0752005 SPRING SIW OUTBRIEF FORM