The Future of LOG Forum in a Network Centric WorldDavid L. PayneThe MITRE Corporation 7515 Colshire DriveMcLean, Virginia, 22102-7508703-883-6366 HYPERLINK "mailto:dpayne@mitre.org" dpayne@mitre.orgKeywords:Logistics, simulation, LOG Forum, SWOT, mission and vision, action plans.ABSTRACT: This Spring 2005 SIW, with the theme of "M&S for Network Centric Operations in the Global Information Grid" provides an appropriate opportunity for our Forum to assess how we fit, if we fit, into the needs of the distributed simulation community in a network centric world. By definition, simulation of all types, including logistics and enterprise simulation, in a network centric environment is distributed, and is readily available to both consumers and providers as a research and design tool for their network centric enterprise relationships. We are already seeing revolutionary efforts to transform both military operations and the logistics that supports them, and the rapid emergence of a global networked and distribution based economy. Log Forum is encouraged to take advantage of the moment and consider how we want participate in these ongoing revolutions in enterprise design and coordination. This paper uses some organizational dynamics tools, including the SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats) analysis approach, mission and vision development, and action identification to achieve identified mission and vision goals. Finally, the forum members in attendance will be encouraged to contribute their insights and ideas to the discussion, hopefully resulting in an agreed way forward to our participation as simulation professionals in the rapidly developing network centric world.1. Introduction: Why Assess Our Future Now?I think we as a forum need to take the opportunity of this Spring 2005 Simulation Interoperability Workshop to assess where we are and where we want to go over the next few years. Over the past few workshops I have become concerned with increasing signs of trouble. Attendance has been dropping. Papers, especially solid logistics simulation papers, have become fewer and further between. Most disturbing to me has been the drop off in discussion and interaction, both at the workshop and throughout the year, via the LOG Forum reflector and email threads. At the same time, the need for logistical simulations to advance transformation in and beyond the defense community seems great. Major defense transformation efforts are underway. And a global networked and distribution based commercial economy continues to grow. But where are the logistics simulationists? Or why aren't they here with us?2. SWOT+A AnalysisSWOT is a technique to perform an assessment of the Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats confronting an organization or group. I extend this concept for the LOG Forum assessment by also assessing the Alternatives available to the organization and to us, its members. Let's now look at each element as it pertains to the LOG Forum today.2.1 StrengthsWe can consider as our strengths as a forum what, we have, what we have access to, and what we bring to share with the forum, either at workshops or over the reflector. A few strengthsI've identified include:SISO, its structure, committees, services and talent available to help us excel as a forum and as individual practitionersSIW, the venue, the publication system, and the predictability of a set schedule to leverage for planning participation, projects, and work programsLOG Forum itself-Us!, with a hosted reflector, a set meeting schedule, and a group of like minded practitionersThe professional contacts we members bring to the forum, contacts within: US and foreign governments (especially in the defense departments and ministries) Industry of all sizes (especially defense and R&D, but hopefully including commercial supply chain and distribution) Academia Finally, we have built up and provide access to an extensive body of knowledge— papers, Proceedings, discussions, and individual knowledge made available to the forum. 2.2 WeaknessesWe can consider as our weaknesses as a forum what we can't control, what we don't have to offer, and the constraints that we face. A few weaknesses I've identified include: Declining participation Lack of logistics M&S activityLack of logistics M&S sponsorsWeak connections with rest of SISO and SIW core communitiesNo common forum vision or goals for logistics M&S No clear vision or identified need for standards unique to logistical modeling or (especially) distributed logistical modeling. 2.3 OpportunitiesI think we have significant new opportunities currently available to us:New areas to explore or influence, including:Commercial SCM modelingManufacturing simulationsMarket modelingSustained or "Green" developmentThe US DOD's Focused Logistics Functional Area, with its Focused Logistics Joint Functional Concept (JFC), and Joint Logistics Joint Integrating Concept (JIC)US TRANSCOM's new role as US DOD "Distribution Process Owner"Coalition and Relief LogisticsGlobalized Virtual EnterprisesAll of these areas can benefit greatly by improved logistics operations, and logistics M&S is a key and proven approach to improving logistics effectiveness. We can and should be big players in all of these initiatives.2.4 ThreatsI'm not sure we face any true threats, but I do see situations and developments that could render the LOG forum obsolete or irrelevant, and thus bring about its end. These include:Apathy, in my opinion our biggest problem, but also fully within the forum members’ controlNew Forums/Other Forums, which either compete with, fragment, dilute or draw off the Log forum attendance, member base, and the attention of us membersIrrelevance, either to the greater logistics M&S community or to the SISO simulations standards distributed simulation communities.2.5 AlternativesMore so than threats, I think we need to consider the alternatives that we, as both LOG Forum and individual SISO members have for what we traditionally (and hopefully currently) look to the LOG Forum venue to provide:Move to other venues, other than SIW:Other associations, such as. INFORMS, SCM, SOLE, etc.Other conferences Other SIW Forums, where we can individually focus on core M&S issues and apply what we learn and to help meet logistics M&S needsNew venues: Perhaps spin off new Forums for OOTW, crowd modeling, enterprise (business) simulation, etc. 3. Mission and Vision OptionsWe have a wide range of alternatives for LOG Forum mission and vision to carry us through next few years. Let's look at several that span a wide range of activism, interest, and participation: "Catalyst for achieving integrated enterprise M&S" "Preeminent resource for logistics M&S practitioners" “Advocate for standards for (distributed?) logistics M&S""Clearing house for distributed logistics simulation coordination""Focal point for sharing knowledge about distributed logistics M&S".4. Action OptionsHere's an initial list of action options we can get behind as a forum, if we choose. Hopefully we'll add more during the SIW discussion.Return to RootsRealign:LOG: return to rootsOOTW venture forth on its ownAlter focus, either:Give up on Enterprise M&S, and refocus of military logistics M&S issuesMake a big push to expand LOG to Enterprise M&SDissolve LOG Forum?5. ConclusionI have applied the SWOT analysis technique to assess the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats, as well as alternatives, of the SIW LOG Forum.  From these I propose several alternative mission and vision statements for LOG Forum. Finally, I offer several action options to set a course for the future for LOG Forum.  Now the discussion must continue, at the Spring 2005 SIW and over the reflector, and we, the members of LOG Forum and representatives of the logistics M&S community, must agree to some specific way forward, and join together to make it happen.6. References[1] About Inc.: "Understanding and Using SWOT Analysis", c. 2004.  HYPERLINK "http://businessmajors.about.com/" http://businessmajors.about.com/ , search “swot”[2] Manktelow, James: "SWOT Analysis: Understanding Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats", Mind Tools Ltd., Swindon UK, August 2003. HYPERLINK "http://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newTMC_05.htm" http://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newTMC_05.htm Author BiographyDAVID PAYNE is the SIW Logistics Forum Chair. He has been involved in operational, system, and policy analysis for the Department of Defense and other Government Agencies for over 20 years in a variety of roles and assignments in the US Army and subsequently in the private sector. He has been an active participant in SISO affairs since the DIS days.DISCLAIMER:The author's affiliation with The MITRE Corporation is provided for identification purposes only, and is not intended to convey or imply MITRE's concurrence with, or support for, the positions, opinions or viewpoints expressed by the author.Approved for Public Release; Distribution Unlimited.   MITRE Case Number 05-0090