Enabling the Art of Battle Command for Current and Future ForcesColonel George F. Stone IIIBattle Command, Simulation and Experimentation Directorate, US Army G-3/5/7 Washington, DC  22211703-601-0005george.stone@us.army.milKeywords: Battle Command, training, education experience, warfighting effectivenessABSTRACT:  The environments of the future are shaped by events of today.  Ever since the events of September 11, 2001, today’s world has confronted a vicious and dangerously cunning threat.  Prior to 2001 the US military knew that terrorists existed in different parts of the world, but never anticipated that a group of 19 would dare strike so deeply and effectively on soil within the continental United States.  Now military leaders must train and prepare their units for the Global War on Terror.  To do this, commanders must exercise effectual Battle Command.  Technology can boost the commander’s ability to lead units, but it could also inhibit success.  Only with proper training, education and experience on the battle systems and related decision support tools will leaders and soldiers increase their effectiveness.  Enabled by technological advances, Battle Command tasks still depend on the factors of training, education and experience.  These factors are key ingredients in the warfighter’s ability to achieve 100% mission success. Using Battle Command, this paper provides a model to consider how training, education and experience of leaders and soldiers will yield the largest return-on-investment for the warfight.  1.  IntroductionVarious military systems work in conjunction with commanders and their staffs to enable decision-making processes in planning, preparing and conducting missions.  Applied to these systems, the art of Battle Command is depicted as an operational process in Figure 1.1.  The current system for Battle Command is the Army Battle Command System (ABCS) and the future mode is the Future Combat System (FCS).  ABCS utilizes fixed/semi-fixed installations and mobile networks and is interoperable with theater, joint, and combined command and control systems.  This is the system that commanders employ to disseminate information and leadership decisions.  As early as 2008, the Future Combat Systems (FCS) will enter the Battle Command arena as a system of systems with advanced network-enabled air and ground maneuver, maneuver support and sustainment capabilities.  FCS will include both manned and unmanned platforms.  Battle Command will be enhanced by FCS technology and advancements in a system of systems architecture.  Despite the added value of FCS the true multipliers for success factors for battle command are training, education and experience.  Nontraditional tactics coupled with an extensive information network will compensate for the loss of size and armor mass by utilizing information superiority and synchronized operations to see, engage, and destroy the enemy before the enemy detects the future forces.  These factors relate to doctrine, organization and material which are only part of the equation for warfighting effectiveness.  Enabled by technological advances, Battle Command tools must intensify the factors of training, educational or experience.  These technological enablers for battle command experiences are becoming primary areas of study in basic and applied research at academic institutions, i.e., the Institute for Creative Technologies, University of Southern California.  The results of this research are surfacing as experiential factors of immersion in the simulation, computer gaming and virtual reality areas.  Now and in the future leaders will train and prepare their units for the Global War on Terror.  To succeed, commanders must exercise effectual Battle Command—“the art and science of applying leadership and decision making to achieve mission success.” [1] This paper will provide a model to consider how training, education and experience of leaders and soldiers will yield the largest return-on-investment for the warfight.  2 Enabling Battle Command2.1 A regression equationIn order to “enable” Battle Command, there are many formulas for success.  Recently, the US Army Chief of Staff proposed a “regression” equation for solving Warfighting Effectiveness.  This equation has been postulated as another way to think “outside the box” to measure warfighting effectiveness and prioritize resources and funds.  Warfighting Effectiveness = f {(D + O + M) + (S x L) T+E1+E2 }Where-D= Doctrine		O= Organization	M= Materiel		S= SoldiersL= Leaders		T= TrainingE1= Education		E2= ExperienceInitial look at the CSA’s regression equation reveals that the most influential variables are the exponential variables -- Training (T), Education (E1) and Experience (E2).  Soldiers and Leaders are critical elements of Battle Command.  For this paper, S x L is combined and replaced by Battle Command since “Battle Command entails the continual collaboration between commanders, subordinates and staff.” [2] Battle Command effects are maximized through Training, Education and Experience.  In order to improve Warfighting Effectiveness, the BC exponential variables can be increased through conventional methods and also with tools such as simulations, collaboration and decision support systems that affect the experiential factor.  As a proof of concept, the author demonstrates the utility and a method to model and prove the CSA’s regression equation as it relates to Battle Command.  The regression equation also applies to all tasks related military training, education and experience.  This paper focuses only on the battle command tasks.  In an attempt to enable the art of Battle Command for the current forces, the most current doctrine was selected.  However, as future BC tasks change, the approach and methodology will follow a similar process.  A sample of 10 current battle command tasks is in Figure 2.1.  The actual number of tasks listed in various Mission Training Plans is probably in the hundreds.  Figure 2.1 Battle Command TasksBC1 Acquire and Distribute Relevant InformationBC2 Apply Judgment and Analysis to Understand the SituationBC3 Assess and ReviseBC4 Describe Intent and Guidance BC5 ExecuteBC6 Motivate, Direct and Enable Subordinates BC7 Receive or Generate a MissionBC8 Specify Commander Information NeedsBC9 Supervise ActionsBC10 Visualize End States The original regression equation is shown in Table 2.1 with Battle Command (BC) as the main variable of interest.  Note also that Training, Education and Experience are variables.  For this example, all variables were held constant except for the exponential variables of training, education and experience.  Table 2.1 Warfighting Equation with Battle CommandWarfighting Effectiveness (WE)  = f{Doctrine + Organization + Material + (Battle Command) ^ [Training, Education, Experience]}For the solutions of each of the regression equations, an exponential regression was taken using logarithms for sample values.  Table 2.2 presents the constructed equations as an example.  The author felt that the three variables should be treated separately for simplicity.  Their individual effects are significant.  One would also propose that the most important and prominent variable is experience.  The experience variable had the highest correlation and future research should support such a presumption. Table 2.2 Regression Equations for BC VariablesWarfighting EffectivenessWETWEE1WEE2BC Regression Equation1.358 (1.037^T)1.417 (1.039^(E1)1.423(1.027^E2)Correlation Coefficientr= 0.8914r = 0.8867r = 0.9487As a means to show application, the following three tables present data from the BC regression equations.  The next step for this process would be to take actual data collected from warfighting experiments, tests, classes and operations.    The values for the input variables of training, education and experience ranged from 0 to 10.  Other values could be selected and normalized to this range.  The output values for warfighting effectiveness assumed constants for the other variables and treated each of the BC variables for training, education and experience as the real drivers for warfighting effectiveness.  Table 2.3 Regression Results for TrainingTaskTraining (T)WETBC1437.2BC2542.5BC3756.4BC4542.5BC5332.7BC6542.5BC7648.8BC8865.5BC9756.4BC10865.5Table 2.4 Regression Results for EducationTaskEducation (E1)WEE1BC1437.2BC2437.2BC3332.7BC4332.7BC5648.8BC6542.5BC7648.8BC8756.4BC9648.8BC10542.5Table 2.5 Regression Results for ExperienceTaskExperience (E2)WEE2BC1648.8BC2542.5BC3437.2BC4648.8BC5756.4BC6756.4BC7865.5BC8648.8BC9865.5BC10976.4The warfighter’s effectiveness depends on the training, education and experiences associated with collaboration and understanding the situation. Collaboration, one major enhancement for Battle Command, enhances training and experience factors. Mission accomplishment demands collaboration in the form of teamwork, cooperation, and task sharing among commanders, subordinates and peers.  Training and simulation exercises improve collaboration.  Currently, the ABCS programs are the U.S. Army’s solution to meet the needs of commanders in exercising Battle Command.  3.  Future Forces and Battle Command Systems An interim battle command systemNontraditional tactics coupled with an extensive information network will compensate for the loss of size and armor mass.  By utilizing information superiority and synchronized operations to see, engage, and destroy the enemy first could become the mantra of future forces.  With simulations embedded into battle command systems, this could become a reality.  One system that the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency is completing is the Command Post of the Future (CPOF).  Other efforts are also in the works, but this glimpse of future potential shows the promise for future forces.  The Command Post of the Future is a surrogate system for the FCS Battle Command System.  As an enabler of the ABCS solution, this “leap-ahead” technology will likely become a program of record in 2006. Battle staff officers and leaders will need to learn, train and use this new technology.  CPOF provides advanced planning and mapping tools to support the Commander’s decision making through online sharing and immediate correlation of combat information from all sources.  Requiring little education and training, CPOF enables commanders and their staffs to conduct advanced distributed, collaborative Battle Command in a “true mobile, distributed command…using an information-centric tool that provides real-time knowledge sharing.” Increasing and highlighting human interaction and experience, CPOF allows intuitive visualizations by all staff and leaders to apply battle command and simultaneously share situational awareness.  This type of experience will enable battle command and warfighting effectiveness to accelerate faster than current systems allow.Future battle command systemsPrevailing in many shapes and forms, future battle command systems will permeate combat brigades or Units of Action (UoA) with approximately 690 FCS systems.  Higher echelons or the Unit of Employment will have 3500-4000 battle command systems on its network.  Battle command will be focal point for all entities on the network.  Effective training, education and experience will create a network-enabled warfighting environment for leaders to 1) gain information superiority, 2) locate and identify the enemy and 3) kill from a standoff range before the enemy can engage.  The challenge will be for commanders and leaders to train and be experienced in the art of Battle Command for UoAs and UoEs.  These systems will communicate using the Global Information Grid Enterprise System in a Joint Command and Control (C2) environment.  Linking to over 150 different types of Department of Defense C2 systems, the UoE and UoA systems will interface with a multiple array of diverse systems at varying levels of security.  Joint interoperability will network battle command systems to enable synchronous operations and shared situational awareness.  All of these considerations will warrant improvements in the training, education and experience of leaders throughout the Department of Defense.  4.  ConclusionThe factors of Training, Education and Experience enhance Battle Command and Warfighting Effectiveness by their power to change and improve.  Battle Command is a future dynamic that is changing how commanders fight.  Instead of bullets, bits and bytes are the ammunition in the war against terror.  Bullets are material. Their impact, as seen in recent conflicts, sometimes has less effect than information to win over the masses.  More attention is needed in this area to ensure effective execution for joint and combined operations. The Battle Command regression model demonstrates a proposal to start and invigorate efforts in proving or disproving premises crucial to our national defense and military strategies.  A full-fledge experiment and study would seek to validate the importance of training, education and experience.  Coupled with this notion are the funding and strategic implications for the military.  The resultant effect would be more resources dedicated to leadership and soldier training, education and experience.  With the advent of highly technical, complex and capable battle command systems, the importance of such an investigation is definitely worth considering.   Immersive and captivating experiences outside the actual combat environment are on the future horizon.  The Army should begin planning now to capitalize on simulations, new decision-support systems and other research to increase experience sooner than later.  Experiences should also be garnered to share and build and develop these factors.  Instead of a 20-million dollar annual expenditure of research funds at centers like the Institute for Creative Training, perhaps the required bill is closer 200 million dollars.  The effects on training, education and experience may potentially (and exponentially) raise warfighting effectiveness to unprecedented levels.  Given the daily tolls incurred in Southwest Asia and other areas of the world, the Army should implement a study to investigate this feasibility.   Enabling the art of Battle Command for information-centric operations coupled with the CSA’s regression equation will provide a safer and more effective fighting force.  Enhancing the experience, education and training opportunities for a leader will have a positive impact on Warfighting Effectiveness, both in the Army and Joint battlespace. 5. References [1] US Army Battle Command Battle Lab web site.[2] U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command: TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-0.1, The United States Army Objective Force Battle Command (C4ISR) Concept, Fort Monroe, Virginia, 5 Mar 2003.[3] Patterson, Ryan: CPOF Technical Reference Manual (Draft), 2004.Author BiographyGEORGE STONE is an Army colonel currently assigned to the Pentagon at the Army G-3/5/7.  He is the Acting Director of the Battle Command, Simulation and Experimentation directorate.  George is a West Point graduate with a master of science in Industrial Engineering, a master of arts in Strategic studies and doctorate in Industrial Engineering. CPOF Technical Reference Manual (Draft), R. Patterson, 2004.Figure 1.1 Operational Process