Name of Forum or Group: CFIChairSteve BoswellVice ChairVacantSecretaryVacantObjectives for this Workshop:1.	Increase awareness in the forum of emerging technologies, such as SIP and Web Services.  Focus on the multiplayer game community in the Fall SIW is consistent with this goal.2.	Increase interest and participation in the Forum’s presentations.  A self-assessment is modest success this workshop.Comments and Recommendations:1.	CFI had steady attendance throughout the workshop, minimum of 30, usually 35-45.2.	Web Services is an increasingly important topic, and potentially a means of extending distributed M&S to a much broader audience.  Performance implications clearly need more public recognition, and architectures and techniques of use are still evolving, but it is a technology with promise.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)40Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)50Peak attendance (including joint sessions)60Total papers presented15“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions3**A Wednesday afternoon session on HLA and Web Services had three 20-minute presentations, which will be made available to the conference web site and CDs.Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):1.	05S-SIW-1182.	05S-SIW-048Note: these are the same papers we recommended prior to the workshop.  Paper 118 is an account of the development of infrastructure (networking, comms, security, etc) and organization required to produce a standing, multi-use distributed T&E simulation facility.  Its value is that of a professionally conducted used case.Paper 048 describes concepts for introducing fault tolerance into the HLA.  The presentation is rather high level, but the paper is recommended because the authors have proposed fault tolerance supports that are being discussed in the HLA-Evolved PDG, and that will likely appear in future revisions of the specification.2005 SPRING SIW OUTBRIEF FORM