05S-SIW-121Building a DMO NetworkJoe SorrocheASRC Communications, Ltd.USAF Distributed Mission Operations Center (USAF DMOC)4500 Aberdeen Dr., SE, Building 942Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico 87117505-853-0372, DSN 263-0372 HYPERLINK "mailto:joe.sorroche@kirtland.af.mil" joe.sorroche@kirtland.af.milJason AtkinsonLockheed Martin CorporationUSAF Distributed Mission Operations Center (USAF DMOC)4500 Aberdeen Dr., SE, Building 942Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico 87117505-853-0150, DSN 263-0150jason.atkinson@kirtland.af.milABSTRACT:  The Air Force Distributed Mission Operations Center of Excellence (DMOC), located at Kirtland AFB, New Mexico, participates in many Air Force distributed exercises, as well as conducting four Virtual Flag (VF) distributed training exercises each year.  The exercises focus on Command and Control warfighter training in the sensor-to-shooter kill chain, experimental exercises, proof of concept, and many other training objectives.  The DMOC’s wargaming infrastructure includes over two hundred computers, over 100 LANs, and over 30 WANs.  They are combined to support an immersive combat synthetic battlespace that models nineteen different weapons and C2ISR systems.  The DMOC is now a persistent Joint Training and Experimentation Network (JTEN) site, as also connected to the Distributed Missions Operations Network (DMON), the Defense Research Engineering Network (DREN), the Joint Distributed Engineering Plant (JDEP), the Distributed Training Operations Center (DTOC), and over 25 T-1s.With the DMOC able to access many networks, the next logical step will be to join these networks together, creating one DMO network hub, with the DMOC as the common site.  Joining these networks and using DMOC network expertise will enable the DMOC to become the Air Force’s Distributed Training and Experimentation Network (DTEN) center.  By joining these networks and using current in house expertise, the DMOC can support many joint services training events and exercises.  The concept will take advantage of existing networks that provide connectivity to many sites, eliminating the need for additional connectivity and funding.  Each service, when coordinating training events, will be able to request connectivity to required sites using the DTEN, thus avoiding spending additional funds and testing for connectivity that already exists.This paper describes the technical approach, challenges, and solutions to joining, managing, and building a DMO Network.1.	IntroductionThe Air Force Distributed Mission Operations Center of Excellence (DMOC), located at Kirtland AFB, New Mexico, participates in many Air Force distributed exercises, as well as conducting four Virtual Flag (VF) distributed training exercises each year.  The exercises focus on Command and Control warfighter training in the sensor-to-shooter kill chain, experimental exercises, proof of concept, and many other training objectives.  The DMOC’s wargaming infrastructure includes representations of over two hundred computers, over 100 Local Area Networks (LANs), and over 25 Wide Area Networks (WANs).  They are combined to support an immersive combat synthetic battlespace that models nineteen different weapons and C2ISR systems.  The DMOC is now a persistent Joint Training and Experimentation Network (JTEN) site, as well as connected to the Distributed Missions Operations Network (DMON), the Defense Research Engineering Network (DREN), the Joint Distributed Engineering Plant (JDEP), the Distributed Training Operations Center (DTOC), and over 25 T-1s.With the DMOC access to so many networks, the next step will be to join these networks together, creating one DMO network, with the DMOC as the common link to all networks and sites.  In addition, since DMOC personnel possess technical expertise to conduct several distributed training events every year, it will be advantageous to setup, maintain, and schedule these joined networks and become the Air Force’s Distributed Training and Experimentation (DTEN) Center.  By joining the networks and using current, in house expertise, the DMOC will provide network support for many joint, concurrent training events.  The concept will take advantage of existing networks, eliminating the need for others, and more importantly, additional funding.  Each site, when coordinating training events, can request connectivity using the DTEN that will fulfill site connectivity requirements.  However, joining these networks and interoperability between each network and their protocols will be a challenge.  These challenges and ways to meet them are discussed in later sections.The following section describes the networks the DMOC has connected to during VF exercises, and other training events.Network DescriptionsThe DMOC currently has persistent connections to several WANs, and also has over 25 point-to-point T-1 connections, shown in Figure 1.  The following sections describe each of the DMOC persistent networks.  Joint Training and Experimentation Network (JTEN)The Joint Training and Experimentation Network (JTEN) is funded by the Joint Forces Command (JFCOM).  The local network connection is a DS-3 (45 Mbit/sec of available bandwidth), and can be split into several virtual LANs for sending different types of data.  For JFCOM sponsored events, the JTEN is usually divided into 4 separate Virtual LANs:  The Simulation LAN, the Coalition LAN, the Tactical LAN, and the Video Tele-Conferencing (VTC) LAN.  These LANs transmit and receive different types of data protocols throughout JFCOM sponsored events.  The JTEN is continuously adding “persistent” sites each year.  Last year, the DMOC became one of several persistent sites, and provided simulator assets for two JFCOM events.  The JTEN will greatly enhance the DTEN, and combining the JTEN and DMOC existing networks will create a large, distributed network.  2.2	Distributed Missions Operations Network (DMON)The DMON is funded by Air Combat Command (ACC) and controlled by Northrop/Grumman in Orlando, Florida. The local network connection is a DS-3 (45 Mbit/sec of available bandwidth). The DMON is part of the Distributed Missions Operations tasking to link all Air Force mission trainers for distributed training.  The DMOC has a Figure 1.  DMOC NETWORK CONNECTIONS persistent network connection, and DMON sites have participated in Virtual Flag training events.  Currently, the persistent sites other than DMOC are Tinker AFB (AWACS Mission Trainers), Robbins AFB (Joint Stars Trainers), Elmendorf AFB (AWACS Mission Trainers), and Langley AFB and Eglin AFB (F15C Mission Trainers).  The DMON uses a Portal to convert DIS messages into DMON standard messages.  A portal is located at each site, and converts DIS and HLA messages into the portal standard protocol for data transmission.Defense Research Engineering Network (DREN)The Defense Research and Engineering Network (DREN) is DoD's recognized research and engineering network.  The DREN is a high - capacity, low-latency nation-wide network that provides connectivity between and among geographically dispersed High Performance Computing (HPC) user sites, HPC Centers, and other networks. The DREN provides digital imaging, video, and audio data transfer services between defined service delivery points (SDPs). SDPs are specified in terms of WAN bandwidth access, supported network protocols such as Multi Protocol Label Switching, Internet Protocol (IP), Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM), and local connection interfaces. DREN currently support both IP Version 4 (Ipv4) and IP Version 6 (Ipv6)  at bandwidths from DS-3 (45 Mbps) at user sites up to Optical Carrier (OC) – 48c (2.488 Gps).  Expansion or enhancements to the DREN are accomplished by the addition of defined SDPs or modifications to sites connected by DREN. These services may be at virtually any location in the continental United States, including Alaska and Hawaii, and OCONUS sites.The DMOC local connection is an OC-3 Fast Ethernet (100 Mbps), and is rate limited to 15 Mbits/sec of available bandwidth.  The DMOC has used the DREN to connect to Wright Patterson AFB and Pax River.Defense Training Operations Center (DTOC)The Defense Training Operations Center (DTOC) is an Air Reserve component network that connects tactical training sites within the National Guard.  The DMOC has a T-1 to the DTOC in Des Moines, Iowa.  Other National Guard sites are connected to DTOC via ISP (Internet service provider) T-1s.  The T-1s provide 1.536 Mbits/sec of bandwidth to these sites.  The sites include A-10 training simulators that have participated in several Virtual Flag events.  Additional sites and trainers are available using the DTOC.  Joint Distributed Engineering Plant (JDEP)The Joint Distributed Engineering Plant (JDEP) is a DOD and Service funded initiative created to support interoperability.  JDEP facilitates access, coordination, scheduling, and technical support to replicate joint operational environments through the reuse of existing hardware and software in the loop (HW/SWIL) capabilities across the DOD and industry. This allows for the creation of a distributed joint test environment for use in the development, integration, testing, and assessments of IT and NSS.The DMOC is connected to the JDEP through DISN-LES ATM cloud via OC-3, and has 10 Mbits/sec of available bandwidth (rate limited).   DMOC has used the JDEP to participate in the Joint Cruise Missile Defense (JCMD) event, connecting to the Joint National Integration Center (JNIC) in Colorado Springs, Colorado; the Virtual Warfighting Center (VWC), in St. Louis, Missouri; the Avionics Integration Laboratory (AIL) in Seattle, Washington; and the JITC at Ft. Huachuca, Arizona.  The JDEP uses virtual LANs configured to carry simulation data, Video Teleconferencing (VTC), and Voice over IP (VoIP) data.T-1s. DMOC has 24 T-1s that connect to various Army, Navy, and Air Force facilities across the CONUS.  T-1s have a bandwidth of 1.536 Mbit/sec.  These T-1s are used to support quarterly VF exercises each year.  Although VF exercises run with approximately 1000 air entities and over 7000 ground entities, the T-1 bandwidth is usually never exceeded, because the data are filtered based on external site requirements.  Details on how this is accomplished are described in Reference 2.  Other data is transmitted on these T-1s, such as Data Links, NATO EX, and VTC.  VTCs are conducted after Virtual Flag events, using the available networks and bandwidth.  When using VTC, a Quality of Service (QOS) configuration programmed in Cisco routers ensures that video conferencing data is not interrupted or delayed during conferencing. Missile Defense Agency Network (MDANet)The MDANet is funded and maintained by the Missile Defense Agency.  MDANet is a 100Mbps Fast Ethernet OC-3 connection that is rate limited to 10 Mbps.  Other sites that have MDANET access are the JNIC, and Ft. Bliss.  This network and these sites have been used to support Virtual Flag and other exercises, such as Roving Sands.  ISDNThe Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) is a Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN) DOD lease, which provides Digital Dial-Up High Speed connectivity.  A user pays for actual usage of this network, and has 64 to 1.536 Mbits/sec of available bandwidth.  The DMOC has used ISDN to connect sites with ISDN capabilities for SIM and Video conferencing.  Additional Tail SitesAdditional sites will also be accessible by connecting to a site that has other site connections, referred to as tail sites.  For example, the DMOC has a connection to the JNIC, which has a connection to the El Segundo B-2 facility.  During Virtual Flags, the DMOC takes advantage of these connections to link the B-2 virtual simulator into Virtual Flag exercises.  All sites shown in Figure 1 will also most likely have tail sites.  These tail sites will also be entered into the DTEN database, and will take advantage of existing connectivity to other facilities. Memorandum of Agreements (MOAs) with each DTEN site would be required to list all connecting tail sites.  In addition, these tail site connections will be monitored carefully to detect unwanted participants, and so as not to setup a loop back condition on the DTEN when conducting an exercise or training event. 3.	Bridging DMOC NetworksThe DTEN would be the encompassing architecture and network, adding capability by joining all networks described in section 2.  This concept is shown in Figure 2.  Bridging these networks will require the ability to interoperate between these connected networks and their associated data standards and transmission protocols.    With so many inter-connected networks, security, transmission protocols, interoperability standards, bandwidth monitoring and filtering, and gateways between each standard will be the most important requirement in joining these networks together.Security ConcernsSecurity concerns cover many areas, including level, security agreements, and data compromises.  These are discussed in the following sections.  Security LevelAll distributed events that DMOC has participated in have been conducted at the same security level.  Some events include sites and facilities that are at different security levels, and network connections have been configured to support security requirements.  The DTEN database that contains all networks and sites will include the security level of each site, available networks, and tail site connections.  Security requirements will also be required when requesting DTEN access.  Different levels of security, or Multi-Level Security (MLS) are discussed further in section 3.1.4.Memorandum of AgreementA Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) process currently exists that enables the DMOC and other Army, Navy, and Air Force sites to connect and address security, hardware, and software agreements, but each service has its own process.  The MOA process will be streamlined so that all services will have one process.  This one process will ensure all services have a common process and agreement when connecting to any site, whether it was an Army, Navy, Marine, or Air Force site.  The MOA would require all DTEN sites to show all network connections, LANs, and tail sites.Network SecuritySince many WAN clouds and point-to-point connections are joined, network security from unwanted users is a serious concern.  For the DTEN, network guards or firewalls will be required to prevent unwanted users from accessing the network.  Intrusion Protection Systems (IPS) will also be installed to detect unwanted access into the DTEN.  Issues that need to be addressed are where the IPS will be installed, the capability to detect an “attack” on the network during events, and how the IPS can monitor all DTEN connections.  DTEN personnel will become familiar with the latest IPS capabilities to ensure that proper safeguards are setup and prevent data security compromises.  In addition, DTEN personnel will request “Red Team” help when setting up and maintaining all DTEN connections.  The DTEN Red Team will perform this important function by continuously testing the network for vulnerabilities. Figure 2.  DTEN ConceptMulti-Level Security (MLS)Since the DTEN will be providing connectivity to several sites across multiple DoD services, the network should have MLS.  Much interest and work has been recently conducted in this area, including at the DMOC.  The DMOC has a MLS facility, which has been designing and testing different MLS rule sets. These, plus rule sets generated and test at other facilities and networks, will be used to determine the best way to enhance the DTEN with multilevel security capabilities.  Transmission ProtocolsThe transmission protocols between each persistent network are different, taking advantage of the many, different protocols to exchange data.  Each network has a different transmission protocol and, use different transmission techniques.  Some of these are not readily interoperable, so translators are required for each to ensure interoperability.  For example, DMOC uses IEEE 1278.1a, the Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) protocol for their Virtual Flag exercises.  Other exercises, such as Blue Flags, JEFX, and JCMD also use this protocol.  JFCOM sponsored events use the High Level Architecture (HLA) protocol, and use their in house developed Federation Object Model (FOM) and Run Time Infrastructure (RTI).  DMOC has participated in JFCOM events by using the JFCOM provided DIS/HLA gateway.  Such gateways between DIS, HLA, and DMON protocols will be required for site interoperability.  Tests have shown that these translators add minimal propagation delays to the network. The DMOC designed and built the TACSF Software Router, (TSR) which converts broadcast transmission protocol data to multicast and can reverse the conversion as well, when required.  The TSR has been used successfully in several Virtual Flag exercises, as well as other distributed events.  One example of the TSR use was during VF 04-3.  The JSTARS trainer at Robbins AFB was accessible using the DMON.  The DMON Portal converted DIS data to DMON Protocol data, but did not have the capability to send or receive the JSTARS NATO EX data.  The TSR was used to encapsulate the NATO EX data into multicast data packets, which the DMON used as a transmission protocol, and bypassing the DMON Portal.  The NATO EX data was successfully sent and received from the JSTARS Trainer to Common Ground Station (CGS) trainers at Ft. Sill.  Another DMOC designed tool is the DIS Filter Analyzer (DFA), which filters DIS data from different LANs.  Filter parameters include IP address, Site-Application-Entity ID, Range, and DIS Enumeration.  This tool is described in detail in Reference 2.  These, plus other network tools will enhance the DTEN capabilities for data distribution, transmission, and filtering.  Another issue that will be addressed is the proper setting of the “Time to Live” parameter in data packets.  If the time to live setting is two high and is broadcast, the data packet will be able to move across several different virtual LANs, which could increase unwanted data on other LANs, and add to bandwidth usage.  These parameters will be carefully monitored and set to avoid these issues.Virtual LANsDifferent Virtual LANs will be required on each network to ensure data segregation.  These virtual LANs will segregate simulation, tactical data links, video teleconferencing, and a distributed PC network.  Each virtual LAN will be filtered based on site/event requirements to support each type of simulation event.  Network Monitoring and Configuration ManagementNetwork monitoring will be required during initial setup, integration testing, and the event.  This will ensure that the proper connectivity for each site is provided and that adequate bandwidth is available to support all data transmissions.  Configuration management plans will be put in place that will ensure no cross talk will occur during tests and exercises.  Network configurations will be documented to ensure that the DTEN meets test and exercise requirements, and changes will also be documented so that all participants know the latest network configuration. IP assignments will also be recorded and monitored.   These assignments will follow standard IP rules, such that there will be no duplication of IP addresses throughout the DTEN.  This will ensure that when virtual LANs are reconfigured, there will be no chance of duplicate IP assignments conflicting within the DTEN. Network DatabaseA DTEN database will be assembled that includes all networks, transmission protocols, and connectivity to sites.  This database will be maintained, with configuration management techniques applied so that the most recent data is available to all services.  When planning an exercise, training event, or experiment, each service will access this database and determine if the required sites can be accessed, using any available network and protocol.  In addition, a common scheduling database should also be available so that each service can schedule the networks, required sites, required bandwidth, required virtual LANs, and event dates.  The DMOC will then determine if any of the available networks will meet event requirements.   The DMOC has several network monitoring tools that will ensure the DTEN is operational.  One such tool is called Ptool.  Ptool, developed at DMOC, is an application that sends an Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) to external sites and monitors the network for specific UDP traffic.  This tool is used during VFs and is configured before each DMOC run event. Another network monitoring tool used at the DMOC is the Network Performance Monitor, created by Solar Winds.  This tool is also used to capture and analyze router traffic on the DMOC WANs and LANs.  It is also used to determine network status.   These tools, plus others, if required, will monitor the DTEN and support testing and troubleshooting efforts.SchedulingSchedule of a network will start with the event planner submitting an official DTEN request to the DMOC scheduling group.  The DTEN schedule and event request forms will be web accessible.  The request will include required sites, required bandwidth, data protocols, and types of data required to support this event.  If another event is scheduled at the same time or overlaps for part of another event, then the DTEN group will determine if these events can be supported simultaneously.  One goal of the DTEN is to have the capability of scheduling and conducting several simultaneous distributed events, using the available networks and bandwidth.  Simultaneous support will depend on available bandwidth and personnel support, and there may be other issues that may impact each event.  The DTEN technical group will review each event’s requirements and determine if these requirements can be met.  Then, the event will be added to a master schedule that is accessible to all participants.  Any concerns by event participants will be addressed as needed.Event Support	Event support will consist of integration testing and exercise support.  During testing and exercises, network issues and failures can occur.  The DTEN group will support all events and tests, and provide network troubleshooting support and analysis for each event.  These networks will be monitored continuously for packet loss, congestion, and crypto maintenance and re-keying.  In addition, the DMOC will provide site support during these events.  Reference 3 shows that providing site liaisons during integration testing and events providesConclusionsThe DTEN could enable all services to take advantage of existing network connectivity across the U.S., as well as overseas when planning distributed simulation events.  Previous experience has shown that a significant amount of funding, time, and resources are dedicated to setting and testing new networks when preparing for a distributed simulation event.  By using existing connectivity, additional network resources will not be required, so significant savings in equipment and integration testing will result.  The DTEN is not meant to replace existing networks, but provide a capability to bridge the networks together, thus enhancing network connectivity.  Also some DoD policies and security issues must be addressed before this concept proceeds.  This paper does not reflect any policy position or suggested changes, only a technical concept.  The DTEN will be a resource available to all services for distributed simulation events, such as training, experimentation, and joint services exercises.  AcknowledgmentsWe thank the DMOC for sponsoring this paper; all network engineering support.  Additionally, we extend our thanks to Mr. Tom Brown, LMC, DMOC’s Chief Engineer, Mr. William Elliott, DMOC’s Technical Advisor, and Lt. Col Phillips, DMOC’s Commander. 6.	BiographyMr. SORROCHE has 17 years professional experience; ten of which are in Modeling and Simulation. He currently works at the DMOC as the Exercise Engineering Integrated Product Team Lead for distributed exercises, and has been the Engineering lead for the DMOC for JEFX 04, Millennium Challenge 02, JEFX 2000, JEFX 99, EFX 98, and many Blue Flag and VIRTUAL FLAG exercises. He is the Vice Chair for the SISO Tactical Data Link Study Group, and the Chair for the Link 16 Product Development Group.  Mr. Sorroche is a recipient of the Fall 2002 SIWZIE Award for paper 02F-SIW-119 titled “TADIL TALES.”  He has a Bachelors and Masters of Science in Electrical Engineering from New Mexico State University.  He is a member of Tau Beta Pi and Eta Kappa Nu Honor Societies. Mr. ATKINSON has 10 years professional experience and is actively engaged in the Modeling and Simulation field.   He currently works at the DMOC as a Network Engineer and was the Engineering lead for the Advanced Concepts Event and Joint Red Flag.  Mr. Atkinson holds a Bachelors of Science from Southern Illinois University in Industrial Technology, and is a Cisco Certified Network Professional (CCNP).7.	ReferencesIEEE Standard for Distributed Interactive Simulation--Application Protocols; IEEE 1278.1a, 1998.“Bandwidth Reduction Techniques Used in DIS Exercises,” Joe Sorroche and Jerry Szulinski, SISO Paper 03E-SIW-023, June 2003.“Lessons Learned From Virtual Flag Integration,” I/ITSEC Paper 1648, Alan Berry, December 2004.McChord AFBBarksdaleMDANetDMOC505th CCWJDEP NetBradley, CTBattle CreekRobins AFBCharleston AFBFt Hood St. Louis (CIDS/VWC)Nellis(CAOC-N) CWICJTENOffutt AFB (RJMT) LukeFt Sill  29th PalmsFt. HuachucaSeattle(Boeing)Ft. DodgeFt BlissTinker AFB NTCJFCOM (JTASC)JTEN (JNTC)ARCNET (CASNET)DRENJDEP NetISDNDMONMDANetT-1As of:  14 Jan 05Tyndall AFBTTGPDamneckLangley AFBJNTFJNIC(SWC)Ft Benning19th SOSEglin AFBHill AFBARCNETDTOCWPAFBDREN58SOWGreenvillePentagon (CVC)DMON NOC Orlando, FLDMONCAF DMOHanscom AFB (CEIF)FallonAFRL MesaIWC