Environmental Transformation for Live, Virtual, Constructive (LVC) Training Clark D. Stevens, Chan Huynh, Bruce Robbins, Edgar Barbosa, Todd Kohler, Will SamperUS Army Program Executive Office Simulation Training and Instrumentation Command (PEO-STRI)Julio de la Cruz, Maria Bauer, Bonnie Eifert US Army Research Development and Engineering Command Simulation Training and Technology Center (STTC)12350 Research ParkwayOrlando, Florida 32826407-380-4000Keywords:  CPC, FCS, LVC-IA, embedded training, net-readyABSTRACT: Recent conflicts have highlighted the need for higher levels of joint interoperability and the challenges are well documented. The Department of Defense (DOD) is attempting to overcome decades of parochialism underscored by service specific solutions to a broad range of military functions.  This duplication of effort multiplies DOD’s Total Ownership Cost (TOC) while impeding or even precluding interoperability. Joint Interoperability is giving way to “Net Readiness” as the number one Key Performance Parameter (KPP) for the Army’s Future Combat System (FCS).  The environmental representation is a fundamental and very visible component of simulation systems. “Custom” environmental representations have been the norm between services, within the various domains of each service such as Battle Command, Mission Planning and Modeling and Simulation (M&S) and even within the M&S community. As the Simulation Training and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM) transitioned to a Program Executive Office (PEO) in 2003, the PEO STRI charter mandated a "family of systems integration approach" among the programs managed by the newly formed PEO. The position of PM Future Force Simulation (FF(S)) was established to fulfill this role and to administer the new Future Combat System (FCS) Training IPT where Embedded Training (ET) is also an FCS KPP.  The LVC Integrating Architecture (LVC-IA) is the vehicle by which the horizontal integration requirement is being pursued across PEO STRI.  By agreement, PM’s across PEO STRI are pursuing a Common Products and Component (CPC) approach to facilitate the LVC-IA:Live - PM Training Devices (TRADE) manages the live training systems and has agreed to collaborate with virtual and constructive to achieve a common environmental representation  for the Common Training and Instrumentation Architecture (CTIA) and the One Tactical Engagement Simulation  System (OneTESS) programs. CTIA and OneTESS will re-use the constructive simulation’s  Environmental Run-time Component (ERC) and virtual’s "Standard/Rapid Terrain Database Generation capability" (STDGC) as described below Virtual - PM Combined Arms Tactical Trainer (CATT) traditionally manages virtual simulations and will focus on the development of the STDGC to support the common component database requirements for LVC under the Synthetic Environment (SE) Core initiative.Constructive - PM Constructive Simulations (CS) has agreed to focus on the ERC common component to support LVC-IA runtime requirements.  PM CS is also responsible for the common C4I adaptor and this work is expected to prepare the way for aligning training with Battle Command (BC) applications in FCS.  Test/Instrumentation - PM Instrumentation, Targets and Threats Simulators (ITTS) is a leader in the Test & Training Transformation (T3) initiative working to align the Test Enabling Network Architecture (TENA), Virtual Proving Grounds (VPG) and other test initiatives to support Army and Joint Transformation.Research - The Simulation, Training and Technology Center (STTC) is executing research initiatives to facilitate the common component and STDGC initiatives and to align the runtime systems with emerging DOD standards. PEO STRI is coordinating closely with the Army’s Battle Command Simulation and Experimentation (BCSE) Directorate in the formulation of the Army Geospatial Data Integration Master Plan (AGDIMP) and Joint Geospatial Services (J-GES) Initial Capabilities Document (ICD), JFCOM J7's Joint Rapid Distributed Database Development System (JRD3S) ICD, the National Geospatial and Intelligence Agency (NGA) Commercial Joint Mapping Toolkit (C/JMTK) and other programs as required to ensure that the Army's next generation of M&S  systems is fully interoperable and can migrate toward the Global Information Grid Enterprise Services (GIG-ES) as it emerges. Introduction.  Recent conflicts have highlighted the need for higher levels of joint interoperability and the challenges are well documented. The Department of Defense (DOD) is attempting to overcome decades of parochialism underscored by service specific solutions to a broad range of military tasks.  This duplication of effort multiplies DOD’s Total Ownership Cost (TOC) while impeding or even precluding interoperability. Joint interoperability is giving way to “Net Readiness” as the number one Key Performance Parameter (KPP) for the Army’s Future Combat System (FCS). The environmental representation is a fundamental and very visible component of simulation systems. “Custom” environmental representations have been the norm between services, within the various domains of each service such as Battle Command, Mission Planning and Modeling and Simulation (M&S) and even within domains such as the M&S community.   In order to bridge the interoperability gap between what exists in current and what the Future Force requires, radical changes are required in the way systems are constructed. The DOD Command and Control Research Program (CCRP) is focused on supporting the transition to Network Centric Warfare (NCW) and identifying the impediments to Force Transformation. CCRP provides “Out of the Box” thinking and explores ways to help DoD take full advantage of the opportunities afforded by the Information Age.In “Power to the Edge”, Alberts cautions that “There is still a widespread belief that the future is a linear extension of the past… (and) this has resulted in an emphasis on modernization and incremental innovation rather than real transformation...” [1]  He goes on to assert that there is “… a need to move away from a centralized, top-down, engineering oriented process to a production process that works from the bottom up; one that creates fertility, seeds ideas, nurtures them, selects the most promising, weeds out the losers, and fertilizes the winners.  Only an empirically-based experimentation process that employs an appropriate set of measures can accomplish this.” [2]The Program Executive Office (PEO) for Simulation Training and Instrumentation (STRI), the FCS Training Integrated Product Team (IPT) and the Army’s Research, Development and Engineering Command (RDECOM) Simulation, Training and Technology Center (STTC) have embraced this notion by beginning to establish a network of Systems Integration Labs (SIL) to be linked to the FCS System of Systems Integration Lab (SoSIL). The objective is to explore promising new data sources and applications that may remediate deficiencies in existing capabilities and interoperability to support the implementation of embedded training. PEO STRI is coordinating closely with the Battle Command Simulation and Experimentation (BCSE) Directorate in the formulation of the Army Geospatial Data Integration Master Plan (AGDIMP) and the closely related Joint Geospatial Services (J-GES) Initial Capabilities Document (ICD), Joint Forces Command (JFCOM) Joint Training Directorate (J7) Rapid Distributed Database Development System (JRD3S) ICD, the National Geospatial Intelligence Agency (NGA) Commercial Joint Mapping Toolkit (C/JMTK) and National System for Geospatial Intelligence (NSGI) and other programs as required to ensure that the Army's next generation of M&S  systems is fully interoperable and can migrate toward the Global Information Grid Enterprise Services (GIG-ES) as it emerges.FCS Embedded Training Environmental Transformation. In “Network Centric Warfare” (NCW), Alberts writes:“At the tactical level, the U.S. Navy’s Fleet Battle Experiment Series has demonstrated that combat power can be significantly increased through the ability of tactical units to self-synchronize operations based on a shared combat operational picture and shared knowledge of commander’s intent.” [3]Alberts goes on to identify the environmental representation as foundational to realizing the Common Operational Picture (COP).  Figure one illustrates that shared environmental awareness may be achieved through imagery, geospatial data and weather, to name a few.  The environmental data may be rendered as a “smart map” as the means for giving context to the COP. The FCS System of Systems Common Operating Environment (SoSCOE) will provide a layer of domain services including “common services” for terrain and environment.  There is an ongoing debate within FCS regarding whether “common service” implies “common data”, “common algorithms”, or even “common applications”.  Alberts is careful to qualify the extent to which commonality is desirable:“A common operational picture does not imply that everyone in the battle-space sees exactly the same thing, in the same way, at the same time. Rather it means that at least a subset of the people have the same information available about key components of battle-space awareness in a timely manner. The effect is that they share a common perception of the situation. This common perception enables better communication and mutually supporting actions.” [4]Figure 1.  NCW Elements of Battlespace Awareness [5]While common applications might guarantee a fair fight, this extreme approach to interoperability might be precluded by a host of variables.  Balancing these concerns is a major design consideration for the FCS SoSCOE and herein lies a major challenge for FCS embedded training, i.e., the blurring of lines of distinction between battle command, mission planning, mission rehearsal. The relationship between domains is moving from discrete “stove-pipes” with custom solutions toward a continuum where environmental solutions must span the continuum from training to operations. Probably most importantly, Alberts states that “Power to the Edge is about changing the way individuals, systems, and systems relate to one another” and it “implies greatly enhanced peer-to-peer interactions…when fully achieved in each of the domains of warfare, provides the initial conditions that allow NCW to reach its fully mature form-a self synchronizing capability.” [6] By extension, shared “environmental awareness” is foundational to attainment of self-synchronization. In order to provide embedded training for Battle Command (BC) Systems in a net-ready environment, the FCS embedded training solution must be able to accept data from internal and external sensors to reflect the operational environment more readily as the intended use of environmental data moves to the right along the continuum from training to operation.  As a result, FCS embedded training must move beyond traditional linear processes for producing terrain and other environmental databases and the resultant “canned scenarios” that typify today’s training solutions.  PEO STRI and the STTC are partnering internally and externally to develop the infrastructure that will facilitate this transformation. LVC Integrating Architecture (LVC-IA).  As the Stimulation Training and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM) transitioned to a PEO at the beginning of FY 2003, the PEO STRI charter mandated a "family of systems integration approach" among the programs managed by the newly formed PEO. The position of Project Manager (PM) Future Force Simulation (FF(S)) was established to fulfill this role and to serve as government PM for the Future Combat System (FCS) Training Integrated Product Team (IPT) where Embedded Training (ET) is identified as another FCS KPP.  To facilitate the PEO mandate for a “family of systems” integration approach, all domains leads within FF(S) (such as environmental representation) are “dual-hat” to support both FCS embedded training requirements and horizontal integration across all STRI programs. The LVC Integrating Architecture (LVC-IA) is the vehicle by which the horizontal integration requirement is being pursued across PEO STRI.  By agreement, all PMs are pursuing a Common Products and Component (CPC) approach to facilitate the LVC-IA with responsibilities for environmental representation described below.  Live.  PM Training Devices (TRADE) manages development of the Common Training and Instrumentation Architecture (CTIA) and One Tactical Engagement Simulation System (OneTESS) programs.  TRADE has agreed to support specification of the environmental requirements for these systems within the CPC process and then to integrate the CPC to ensure a common environmental representation for next generation live training within the LVC-IA.    The CTIA intent is to define the environmental representation for live training exercises through re-use of constructive’s Environmental Runtime Component (ERC) with its associated Application Programmers Interface (API). The CTIA compliant plug and play components developed for instantiating the Live Training Transformation (LT2) product line, e.g. Combat Training Center Objective Instrumentation System (CTC-OIS)  will interface with the ERC services enabling the exercise planning, data distribution, obstacle creation/placement, 2D/3D map display, terrain effects, and weather effects within the live engagement simulations.  CTIA will align its environmental representation with OOS terrain standards being extended to support LVC requirements. The CTIA program is also supporting Synthetic Environment (SE) CORE in its Standard/Rapid Terrain Database Generation Capability (STDGC) development effort to ensure the common Environmental Data Model (EDM) development effort includes live training requirements.Virtual.  PM Combined Arms Tactical Trainer (CATT) manages virtual simulations.  The CATT Synthetic Environment (SE) Core program is responsible for integrating the OneSAF Objective System (OOS) to replace the Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT) Semi-Automated Forces (SAF) system and into the Aviation CATT (AVCATT) family of virtual simulators to replace the OneSAF Test-bed Baseline (OTB) SAF. CCTT SAF currently utilizes the Model Reference Terrain Database (MrTDB) format and AVCATT’s OTB utilizes the Compact Terrain Database (ctdb) format so a key objective is to align virtual simulators on a terrain format common with live and constructive to facilitate the LVC-IA initiative. The SE Core program is responsible for the development of Standard/Rapid Terrain Database Generation Capability (STDGC) to support current and future simulation systems through a common architecture and processes.  SE Core has agreed to extend the existing Environmental Data Model (EDM) supporting constructive simulations to capture live and virtual training requirements. The common data model will control the database generation processes as well as the runtime software so this effort comprises a key element of the strategy to align LVC environmental representations. Constructive. PM Constructive Simulations (CS) has agreed to enhance the ERC reused from WARSIM Synthetic Natural Environment (SNE) to support LVC-IA requirements.  The OneSAF program is working with the Urban Operations Focus Area Collaborative Team (UO FACT) to integrate projects as they mature to fulfill some of these high resolution requirements through community standard implementations.  Near term candidates include the Standard Mobility API and the Structural Weapons Effects API.   Variant terrain formats complicate the database generation challenges and impede interoperability so aligning next generation LVC systems on the OneSAF Objective Terrain Format (otf) format is expected to improve interoperability and reduce Army’s Total Ownership Cost (TOC).  The OneSAF program has agreed to extend the otf to meet LVC requirements. Standard formats is another key element of the CPC strategy to align LVC training and so the otf format has been nominated as a standard to the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO).  Test/Training Transformation. PM Instrumentation, Targets and Threats Simulators (ITTS) is a leader in the Test & Training Transformation (T3) initiative working to align the Test Enabling Network Architecture (TENA), Virtual Proving Grounds (VPG) and other test initiatives on CPC ERC common formats/standards supporting Army and Joint Transformation. Yuma Proving Grounds (YPG) is identified as a developmental tester for FCS and serves as a major proponent for VPG.  Discussions are underway to influence each of these initiatives to migrate toward the CPC ERC to facilitate T3.  Common Product Component.  The Common Product Component (CPC) Office has been established at PEO STRI, also under PM FF(S).  The mission of the CPC office is to implement the common component methodology across the PEO. While many approaches are evaluated to identify the best approach for eliminating redundancy and progressing toward common component and reuse, the first pilot C4I adapter common component was begun in January 04, laying the foundation for the CPC methodology and paving the way for the expected second common component -ERC. A Standard Operation Procedure for CM has been approved by the Boards of Director to change the acquisition process within the PEO and policy mandates common component reuse as a first resort during development of new software systems. FCS Embedded Training. The FCS program has selected OOS as the constructive simulation driver for FCS embedded training.   Existing live, virtual and constructive programs were selected to provide specific functionality and the OneSAF program office was selected to serve as technical integrator. The common terrain format and common data model provide a migration path to align the environmental representation in LVC training systems with next generation Battle Command, Mission Planning/Mission Rehearsal and other applications in FCS.   The FCS Geospatial Working Group (GWG) was chartered in January 2004 to address various issues relating to the environmental representation in FCS.  The FCS Training IPT has been on the leading edge of efforts within the GWG to select a Data Element Dictionary (DED) and to define the environmental elements of the FCS Common Data Model (FCDM) expressed as country extensions of the NATO Generic Hub (GH-6).Community Concerns. Concern has been expressed that the migration of the STRI family of systems toward a common environmental representation is a step away from the commonality and interoperability with operational systems that is fundamental to transformation.  In fact, the migration toward common formats and standards supporting LVC-IA interoperability but unique to M&S can and should be viewed as a bridge toward the desired end state.   While force transformation dictates leaps in technology, there is an associated risk with such leaps. In preparing for the leap toward formats and processes common with operational systems, the associated risk may be mitigated by logical intermediate steps.  Aligning LVC environmental representations on common formats and processes paves the way for a “collective leap” by the M&S community that is much lower risk than if all these applications were making the leap from a variety of disparate formats and processes.     Environmental Database Transformation.  The Database Simulation Architecture Group (DSAG) has been established by PEO STRI to assess the state of environmental database technology as it exists today within the M&S domain. The stated objective is to define a road-map toward the desired end state of joint interoperability interpreted as supporting the requirement for next generation systems to be net-ready and compliant with emerging GIG-ES.  As stated earlier, the SE Core STDGC is the program of record to realize this transformation within STRI and RDECOM STTC but there are tremendous technology gaps that must be bridged.   PEO STRI and STTC are partnering with multiple organizations to provide the infrastructure to bridge these gaps:The STTC Rapid Urban Database Science and Technology Objective (STO) was formulated to address the data deficiencies that today preclude rapidly generating urban terrain databases for training.  The STO is now aligned with and directly supporting SE CORE and the STDGC process.The LVC Environmental Database (EDB) SIL is being established to provide the linkage between the STTC STO, the STDGC developers and STRI next generation systems that must be supported.The FCS Training SIL is being established to provide the linkage between the various STRI initiatives and the FCS SOSIL.  The challenges facing SE Core STDGC are daunting and total success will likely not be achieved first time around even with these supporting initiatives.  The challenge and risk is mitigated though these supporting initiatives and by alignment of the LVC systems on common data standards and formats.  The challenge is being further mitigated through aggressive collaboration intended to influence and leverage activities external to STRI as described later in related work.Research Initiatives. RDECOM-STTC is trying to mitigate some of the risks involved in SE Core's Standard/Rapid Terrain Database Generation Capability (STDGC) by prototyping a framework for unifying Commercial and Government “off the shelf” (COTS/GOTS) terrain generation tools into a integrated urban database construction system.  This framework is designed to encapsulate the details of the generation tools behind a common, intuitive interface with plug-in APIs providing the flexibility to incorporate additional tools as required.  An overarching Master Urban Data Model (MUDM) will comprise a superset of all urban database content requirements for data providers while permitting individual programs/users to express individual project requirements in a common standard fashion.  Other tools will be provided to automatically verify data values and collect important metrics to support process improvement.The users will import data through an interface with encapsulated COTS/GOTS plug-ins which accept the data, automatically process the data to correct problems and improve correlation and then store the data within a Master Urban Database (MUDB).  Developers will use a write API employing the MUDM to identify and supply required attribution and to correct data inconsistencies.    COTS/GOTS tools will use the API to read and write terrain data and the API will be used to capture metrics for process improvement initiatives.  Automated CM processes will be developed while data manipulation may be automated or manual    Graphics Processing Units for Computer Generated Forces Research Project.  Another RDECOM-STTC effort has focused on accelerating the line of sight, path finding and collision detection computations for constructive simulations using Graphics Processing Units (GPUs).  A method has been developed to accelerate line-of- sight computation for computer generated forces [7].  This hybrid algorithm exploits the computational power of GPUs to perform visibility culling combined with exact visibility computations on the CPU.The algorithm works by first rendering the terrain from above orthographically. This initial rendering must be performed only once for a static terrain. Then, for each query, a line segment is rendered between the two query points with a reversed depth test. With the depth test reversed, only pixels for which the line is below the terrain will pass the depth test. Therefore, a query has line of sight if no pixels pass the depth test as determined by an occlusion query. The hybrid GPU-CPU ray-casting algorithm has several optimizations. To perform exact tests, rays are traversed through a 2D grid imposed on the terrain. The maximum height of the terrain is stored within each grid cell and ray-triangle intersections are only performed for cells in which the ray falls below this maximum height. A mailboxing system is used to avoid testing a ray against the same triangle multiple times when it intersects multiple grid cells. When presented with a large query workload, the algorithm attempts to utilize the GPU and CPU simultaneously. While one batch of queries is culled the non-culled queries from the previous batch are processed by the CPUs (Fig. 2).The algorithm initial implementation has been tested on a one meter triangulated terrain. The terrain region is nearly 400 kilometers (km) on each side. The point pairs in the benchmark queries have a maximum separation of 4km and are offset 3m from the surface. The hybrid CPU-GPU algorithm averages 4µs per query using an Nvidia 6800 Ultra GPU and a Pentium 4 3.4GHz CPU.  This algorithm is currently being integrated into OOS, reducing the time of line of sight computation 100-200 times and thus permitting more complex scenarios to be run. Related Work.   PEO STRI recognizes the body of relevant work that is underway across DOD and is actively supporting many of these initiatives.  There is an especially keen awareness that the quality and availability of environmental data must improve dramatically to meet many of the challenges faced by FCS embedded training and other STRI programs and so there is a special emphasis on programs that aim to reconcile this deficiency. Joint Geospatial Enterprise Services (J-GES). The FCS Milestone B Acquisition Decision Memorandum (ADM) directed “OSD, Joint Staff (JS), National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA), PM FCS, and Army assess required threshold and objective capabilities and recommend adjustments to the National System for Geospatial Intelligence (NSGI) Operational Requirements Document (ORD) and associated funding as required to meet FCS geospatial needs for increment 1.” [8] This action was a significant factor in the formulation of the Army Geospatial Data Integrated Master Plan Working Group (AGDIMPWG) established by Headquarters, Department of the Army (HQDA), Deputy Chief of Staff, Operations (G3).  [9]  PEO STRI served as co-lead with representatives from US Army Topographic Engineering Center (USA TEC) and PEO C3T for Trade Study Team Three defining the vision for “common services and application toolkits”.   Figure 3 illustrates the proposed methodology for aligning the legacy domains on common environmental representations.   Figure 3.  AGDIMP Figure 9, Achieving Common Geospatial Services [10]The mission planning community’s Battlespace Terrain Reasoning and Awareness (BTRA) program has already formulated a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) with the NGA to integrate key BTRA functionality into NGA’s CJMTK. The FCS embedded training SIL will assess C/JMTK for adequacy in meeting the M&S community’s requirements.  The FCS Training IPT has been an active participant in refining the NSGI ORD as prescribed by the FCS ADM. [9]   Additionally, draft specifications for Unified Profile for Mission Specific Data (UP-MSD) levels 1-5 are being closely scrutinized to ensure training requirements are included and the FCS GWG will evaluate the prototype MSD data-sets upon delivery. In response to deficiencies cited in the AGDIMP, the J-GES Initial Capabilities Document (ICD) is being formulated.   PEO STRI is supporting the TRADOC Program Integration Office for Terrain Data (TPIO-TD) in the formulation and staffing of this ICD. The objective is to complete staffing for a Milestone A decision by mid 2005 in preparation for a Milestone B decision in early 2006 establishing J-GES as a new program. The J-GES Army Prototyping Program (APP) has been established by the US Army Topographic Engineering Center (USATEC).   The purposes of the APP include Use geospatial technology to enable complex sharing, updating, analyses, and synchronization of geospatial data.Provide relevant information to be accessed by users of geospatial data or information.PEO STRI and the FCS program are coordinating with J-GES APP managers to ensure FCS requirements, including embedded training are supported to the extent practical.   The intent is to formulate a linkage between the APP and the STRI SILs to support “geospatial experimentation”. Joint Rapid Distributed Database Development System (JRD3S).   JFCOM J7 has initiated the JRD3S program in support of the Joint National Training Capability (JNTC).  The scope of the JRD3S ICD spans the breadth of the Joint Event Life Cycle (JELC) process.  PEO STRI and RDECOM-STTC have been actively supporting the formulation of the ICD and required documentation to support a Milestone A decision during FY05. While the objectives of JRD3 are much broader than the required environmental databases, J7 has recognized the specific deficiencies associated with terrain database production processes and especially the required geospatial “source data”.  To address this deficiency, J7 has partnered with the Special Operations Command (SOCOM) to propose the Geospatial Intelligence Database Management (GIDM) system as a potential candidate for an Advanced Concept Technical Demonstration (ACTD).   J7 has developed a prototype system that is being used to provide a Proof of Principle (PoP) demonstration during FY2005 and the STRI LVC EDB SIL is intended to function as a node in this network.  Summary.  In this paper, we have tried to instill in the reader an appreciation for the variety of initiatives aimed at seeking to address the broad range of challenges facing “Force Transformers” in the M&S environmental realm and yet, we fear we have only scratched the surface.   PEO STRI is keenly aware of the stakes of transformation and is working diligently to align programs internally to the extent practical in order to ensure that the migration to the Future Force is as painless as possible.  In parallel, STRI is seeking to leverage and influence those external initiatives that hold greatest promise for addressing these challenges.   In moving toward higher levels of interoperability, STRI is cognizant of Alberts’ advice of the “need to move away from a centralized, top-down, engineering oriented process to a production process that works from the bottom up; one that creates fertility, seeds ideas, nurtures them, selects the most promising, weeds out the losers, and fertilizes the winners.” [2]   While STRI must continue to field quality systems, the network of SIL’s that is being established in collaboration with related external initiatives provides the means to aggressively pursue promising new technologies and the CPC methodology provides the means to rapidly integrate the most promising capabilities. While some worry that the migration of the STRI family of systems toward a common environmental representation unique to M&S is a step away from the commonality with operational systems that is fundamental to interoperability, the migration can and should be viewed as a bridge toward the desired end state.   Aligning LVC environmental representations on common formats and processes paves the way for a “collective leap” by the M&S community that is much lower risk than if all these applications were making the leap from a variety of disparate formats and processes.     References[1] Alberts, Dr. David S., Hayes, Dr. Richard, E., “Power to the Edge”, DOD Command and Control Research Program (CCRP), June 2003, p. 226.[2] Ibid, pp. 227-228.[3] Alberts, Dr. David S., Gartska, John A., Stein, Fred, COL (RET), “Network Centric Warfare”, second edition, revised, DODCCRP, August 1999, p. 165[4] Ibid, p. 240.[5] Ibid, p. 134.[6] Power to the Edge, pp. 5-6.[7]  Salomon, B. Govindaraju, N., Sud, A., Gayle, R., Lin, M., Manocha, D., Butler, B., Bauer, M., Rodriguez, A., Eifert, L., Rubel A., and Macedonia. M., ‘Accelerating Line of Sight Computation using Graphics ProcessingUnits ’. Proc. Of Army Science Conference, 2004.[8]   Future Combat Systems (FCS) Acquisition Decision Memorandum (ADM) (Milestone B), Under Secretary of Defense, Acquisition, Technology and Logistics, 17 May 2003.[9] Army Geospatial Integrated Master Plan Working Group, Department of the Army, Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff, G3, 8 July 2003. [10] Army Geospatial Data Integration Master Plan, Draft, version 0.97, 7 April 2004,  p. 25.Author BiographiesClark D. (Dan) Stevens, LCDR USN, RET, is a former Naval Aviator and Aeronautical Engineering Duty Officer with over ten years experience as an ASW Mission Commander flying the S-3 Viking.  He is a graduate of the Naval Postgraduate School (M.S. Computer Science, 1993), and the Naval War College (1988). He served as the STRICOM Environment Team Lead for development of WARSIM/JSIMS SNE from 1996 to 2000 as the OneSAF Environment Lead from 2000-2004 and as the FF(S) Environment Lead since then. Julio de la Cruz has an undergraduate degree in Electrical Engineering from the City College of New York and a Master degree of science from Texas A&M University.  Mr. de la Cruz has over fifteen years experience in government and private sector. Mr. DeLaCruz previous positions include lead systems engineer for constructive and virtual simulation acquisition systems. As the lead for Synthetic Natural Environment at the Simulation Technology and Training Center, Research Development and Engineering command (RDECOM-STTC) he oversees research and science and technology objectives focused in the development of current Database Generation Systems/tools technology to address the defined Army need in Modeling and Simulation.Maria Bauer (US Army RDECOM-STTC) is the Principal Investigator for the DARPA-sponsored GPU research project and the Computer Generated Forces Scalability ATO. She holds a BSEE from the University of Miami, a MS in Engineering Management from the University of Central Florida and is a PhD candidate in Industrial Engineering. Chan Huynh (CPC) is a Systems Software Engineer in the Common Product Component (CPC), PM FF(S) of PEO STRI. Ms. Huynh holds a Master of Science in Software Engineering from the University of Central Florida (May 2003). Prior to joining the CPC team, Ms. Huynh supported the OneSAF/WARSIM team, mainly the Synthetic Natural Environment area.Latika (Bonnie) Eifert is an engineer at RDECOM. She is focused on the development and integration of technology for synthetic natural environments in the Modeling and Simulation arena.  Latika is a graduate of Louisiana State University, with a B.S. in Electrical Engineering, and an M.S. in Computer Engineering from the University of Central Florida. Latika worked at Lockheed Martin and SAIC supporting a wide variety of hardware and software testing.  She has also supported various efforts in modeling and simulation and system engineering efforts within the DoD.Douglas Todd Kohler (US Army RDECOM-STTC) is a Computer Engineer in the Constructive Engineering Product Support Group of PEO STRI.  He has over eighteen years of experience with various defense programs for the Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps, and the Army. Currently Mr. Kohler is responsible for supporting unmanned vehicles for the Training IPT in support of Army’s Future Combat System.   Mr. Kohler holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Electrical Engineering from University of Central Florida and a Bachelor of Science degree in Industrial Technology from the University of West Florida.Bruce Robbins (Constructive) is the Environment Lead for the Environment Runtime Component for PM OneSAF at the Program Executive Office for Simulation, Training and Instrumentation (PEO STRI) in Orlando, FL.  Bruce holds a B.S. in Aircraft Engineering Technology from Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University with a minor in Mathematics.  He has over 10 years experience in the M&S community in visual and SAF related areasEdgar Barbosa (Constructive) is the lead engineer for WARSIM SNE (Synthetic Natural Environment) at the Program Executive Office for Simulation, Training and Instrumentation (PEO STRI) in Orlando, FL.  Edgar holds a B.S. and an M.S. in Computer Science from the University of Central Florida and is a graduate of the US Army’s intern program. William Samper (Live) is currently assigned as the PEOSTRI Lead Engineer for the CTIA program. Experience includes fifteen years of engineering and two years of project director experience working with Department of Defense (DOD) military acquisition systems and simulation technology in Army, Navy, and Marine programs. Supported acquisition procurement processes for multiple services through all phases of the life cycle process that include the following programs:  Corp Battle Simulation (CBS) and After Action Review, Functional Description of the Battlespace, WARSIM program, and Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT). Batch 1 non-culledBatch 2Batch 1culledRender Terrain ResultsLOS QueriesCPU2ExactTestCPU1ExactTestGPU CullingFig 2: To utilize both the GPU and CPU(s) simultaneously we batch LOS queries. Culling is performed on one batch of queries. Then while exact tests are performed on the non-culled queries, the second batch is culled.  EMBED Word.Picture.8  