SISO DIS Study GroupRadio Communications Tiger TeamStatus ReportApril 3, 2005, 2005 Rev 1.14The Radio Communications DIS Study Group Tiger Team issues this report periodically. Maintained by: Stephen Jones  HYPERLINK "mailto:sjones@simphonics.com" sjones@simphonics.com813-623-9917 X102Revision HistoryREVDESCRIPTIONDATE1.7Submitted Prior to Teleconference on February 15th 2005.15-Feb-051.8Intermediate Internal version19-Feb-051.9Incorporated changes from Peter Ross, Alan Berry.  Other misc. changes.  (Changes and significant rewording of PCR 69 proposed standard text)1-March-051.10Changes per Teleconference on March 1st, 20054-March-051.11Corrected syntax, spelling errors, and added non-controversial inputs from Dr. Peter Ryan and Peter Ross.4-March-051.12Changes made after March 17th teleconference17-March-051.13Changes incorporated from Peter RossChanged the proposed text for TBD1 slightlyAdded text to PCR 118March 22, 20051.14Changes based on March 22 teleconference and cleanup before spring SIW3-Apr-05GeneralThis document is a status report of the radio/transmitter Tiger Team of the SISO DIS Study Group.  The purpose of the team is to produce text changes and additions to the existing IEEE 1278 standard in the area of radio communications.  These changes will be clarifications, additions, and incorporation of de-facto standards. MembersThe following members are currently part of this effort although not specifically limited to these participants.	Grayden Figart,  HYPERLINK "mailto:Figart.Grayden@grayhawksystems.com" Figart.Grayden@grayhawksystems.com, (540) 663-1317		Paul Halliday,  HYPERLINK "mailto:phalliday@simphonics.com" phalliday@simphonics.com (813) 623-9917	Frank Hill,  HYPERLINK "mailto:fhill@sdslink.com" fhill@sdslink.com (404) 464-4511		Susan Hilt  HYPERLINK "mailto:susan.hilt@ngc.com" susan.hilt@ngc.com (321) 235-3804	Stephen Jones,  HYPERLINK "mailto:sjones@simphonics.com" sjones@simphonics.com, (813) 623-9917 X 102	Michael L. Mulhern,  HYPERLINK "mailto:michael.l.mulhern@lmco.com" michael.l.mulhern@lmco.com	Peter Ross,  HYPERLINK "mailto:Peter.Ross@dsto.defence.gov.au" Peter.Ross@dsto.defence.gov.au 	Dr. Peter Ryan,  HYPERLINK "mailto:Peter.Ryan@dsto.defence.gov.au" Peter.Ryan@dsto.defence.gov.au CURRENT PCR STATUSText in bold are suggested standard text changes.  Text in italics is rationale text.PCRTitle/Description66DIS Radio Clarification (Radio Type field Ambiguity)This PCR has been closed due to lack of interest, discussion and inability to determine the original intent.68Transmitter PDU center-earth location convention (De-facto Standard). This text has been modified as suggested by Dr. Peter Ryan to remove redundant text.Proposed new text in section 4.5.7.2.3“The antenna location XYZ of 0,0,0 (All bits of the 192 bit field equal to zero) shall indicate that signals from the transmitter shall not be subject to any effects of electromagnetic propagation.” 69Crypto fields usage in Transmitter PDUOriginal text PCR text has been significantly changed based on numerous inputs:Modify 4.5.7.2.1 – Information contained in the Transmitter PDU:Remove the “if utilized“ text from part L, such that it now reads:L) Specification of the crypto or secure voice equipment (also provides information to ensure that the transmitting and receiving crypto gear are utilizing the same crypto key.)Modify 5.3.8.1 - Transmitter PDU:N) Crypto System. This field shall indicate the encryption capability of the transmitter regardless whether it is operating in plain or secure communications mode (see section 9.1.4 of EBV-DOC).  If the transmitter has no encryption capability, then this field shall be set to zero.O) Crypto Key ID. This field shall consist of 16 bits.The high-order bit shall indicate the encryption mode. When cleared it shall indicate that the crypto equipment is in the baseband encryption mode, and when set it shall indicate that the crypto equipment is in the diphase encryption mode.The lower 15-bits of the Crypto Key ID shall indicate the pseudo crypto key.  If the transmitter has no encryption capability, or it is operating in plain communications mode, then the crypto key shall be set to zero.  If the pseudo crypto key of the transmitter and receiver match, they shall be considered to be using the same encryption key.  Note that this pseudo crypto key is not an actual crypto key, the nature of which varies among encryption systems and is classified. Include in 4.5.7.2.3 – Receipt of Transmitter PDU: Plain communications shall be indicated if either the Crypto System or Crypto Key ID is set to zero.  Successful secure communications shall be indicated when both the received Crypto System is compatible with the simulated receiver and the Crypto Key ID value matches the value present in the simulated receiver.  Unsuccessful secure communications shall be indicated when either the received Crypto System is incompatible with the simulated receiver or the Crypto Key ID value does not match the value present in the simulated receiver.Modify EBV-DOC section 9.1.4:Refer to Annex A for change request form.Rationale:Due to lack of standards guidance regarding operation of plain and secure communications modes by the same simulated radio, a de-facto standard has emerged whereby plain communications are indicated if either the “Crypto System” or “Crypto Key ID” fields are set to zero (and secure communications are indicated if otherwise). Not all radio implementations adhere to this de-facto standard.Three semantic permutations of the crypto fields can be derived from the de-facto standard (see below). The “Crypto System” field should always indicate the type of crypto system that is being used, even if the encryption equipment is not keyed.  Crypto SystemCrypto Key IDCommunications Mode – Encryption CapabilityZeroAny valuePlain communications – has no encryption capabilityNon-zeroZeroPlain communications - has encryption capabilityNon-zeroNon-zeroSecure communications - has encryption capabilityExample usage:CaseTransmissionReception(Receiver using Sys=2, Key=82)Crypto SystemCrypto Key ID100Plain Successful 210Plain Successful 3081Plain Successful4181Secure Unsuccessful (Sys and Key mismatch)520Plain Successful 6082Plain Successful7282Secure Successful 70Modulation field usage in Transmitter PDUInclude in 4.5.7.2.3 - Receipt of the Transmitter PDU: If any of the System, Major Modulation, or Detail Modulation fields are set to zero, those fields shall not be used to determine the effects of the transmission on the receiving radio.Include in 5.2.23 Modulation Type record:Fields not used shall contain zero.Rationale: (Alan Berry) The intention of this change is to improve interoperability between radio receivers of varying fidelity, by enabling radio transmitters to indicate that one or more Modulation Type (System, Major Modulation and Detail Modulation) fields are not used.In this context, fidelity is gauged by the number of Transmitter PDU fields that are evaluated by the receiver in order to replicate the performance of an equivalent real world radio. For example, a low fidelity receiver evaluates few fields, excluding the Modulation Type field, whereas a high fidelity receiver evaluates many fields, including the Modulation Type fields.Under the current standard, radio transmitters must set the Modulation Type fields to values defined in SISO enumerations document. Some radio transmitter implementations set these fields to arbitrary values. Low fidelity receivers are able to receive communications from these transmitters because they do not evaluate Modulation Type fields, whereas high fidelity receivers will often ignore the transmissions because the arbitrary values are not supported.71Precision of Frequency field in Transmitter PDUProposed new text in section 4.5.7.2.3“Radio receivers shall evaluate “Transmit Frequency Bandwidth” field when determining whether a signal is valid for reception”  72Intercom using IEEE 1278.1The TRANSMITTER PDU text will be modified as follows:Proposed new text in section 4.5.7.2.3. This text has been modified as per Dr. Peter Ryan’s suggestions in version 1.4 of this document.“The Transmitter PDU may be used to model simplified intercoms, otherwise known as simple intercoms.  When used in this manner the frequency field shall be set to a value greater than one and less than 3000 hertz, where this value indicates an individual intercom channel. The Major Modulation and the Detail Modulation fields shall be set to zero. The Antenna Location field and the Relative Antenna Location field shall be set to {0,0,0}, where all bits of the 192-bit field are equal to zero.”Rationale: There is a need for simple intercoms in order to provide simple communications without using the intercom PDU’s that were introduced in IEEE-1278.1a.  Radio frequencies below 3,000 Hertz were chosen to be intercom “channels” since these are not used for radio communications.  In fact the lower limit of the ELF (Extremely Low Frequency) band is 3000 Hertz, which is for all practical purposes the lower limit of the radio spectrum. 113Transmitter PDU Bandwidth (Closed).118Signal PDU – Number of Samples (Also CVSD enumerations additions)PROPOSED ENUMERATIONS CHANGESThe existing EBV document section 9.2.2 contains the encoding schemes for audio. Enumerations to be submitted for additional de-facto CVSD flavors as:7, CECOM CVSD255, CCTT CVSDRational:While these variants of CVSD are not compatible with the MIL-STD-188-113 version and are in some cases are incorrect implementations of the MIL-STD-188-113 version, they are never-the-less de-facto versions now that do exist in a considerable community. PCR TBD 1Dynamic Compression Scheme and Sample Rate Conversion (Stephen Jones)Proposed new text in second paragraph of section 4.5.7.3.3. When the encoded signal contains audio, the receiving simulation application shall decode the encoded signal if the simulation application supports the specified Encoding Scheme and Sample Rate so that the signal will be properly decoded and received.  If the simulation application does not support the specified Encoding Scheme and Sample Rate the signal shall not be made audible.Rationale:Many existing vendor systems do not convert incoming signal PDUs to the desired sample rate or decode compression schemes automatically. The operator/user dictates sample rate and compression schemes in the receiver, and when a transmission is received at a different sample rate, the audio is pitch shifted and sounds incorrect or garbled audio is heard. (Donald Duck or Mickey Mouse)  Sample rate conversion and compression scheme decoding should be applied on the fly to all incoming signals so that any transmission that meets the standard will be received properly.  This and other similar limitations of equipment cause interoperability issues and lead to the formation of standards outside of the existing standard that establish specific vendor equipment settings for a given exercise.PCR TBD 2Transmitter/receiver-side audio effects (Dropped and Closed). TITLE  \* MERGEFORMAT SISO DIS Study Group Radio Communications Tiger Team Status Report V1.14 Page  PAGE  \* MERGEFORMAT 4 of  NUMPAGES  \* MERGEFORMAT 6