Name of Forum or Group: Medical Modeling & Simulation Study GroupChairWilliam BeavinVice ChairDr. Kenneth Curley/Harvey MageeSecretaryRick SeveringhausNote: Much of the core medical expertise in the MM&S Study Group (SG)  has been provided by representatives from the Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center (TATRC), Dr. Ken Curley (Chief Scientist) and Mr. Harvey Magee (Portfolio Manager).  Both have been prominent among the SG’s leadership. TATRC’s interest in SISO has been to explore how best to address the needs of the medical community for development of simulation standards, as one aspect of increasing the use of simulation and modeling products within the broad medical community. Note: Dr. Curley was unable to attend the Forum, and Bill Beavin was not at this SIW; the Forum was led by Mr. Magee.Objectives for this Workshop:1.	Complete activity and discussions for this study group.2.	Develop agreement and an outline for drafting of the Study Group’s final report.3.	Address need for, and characterize, follow on activities to continue to grow interest in MM&S among the SISO community.Comments and Recommendations:1. Over the past year, there have been a number of MM&S activities occurring outside the SISO SIW venue:-        American Telemedicine Association, Tampa, FL, May 04 ( HYPERLINK "http://www.atmeda.org/conf/annualmeet.htm" http://www.atmeda.org/conf/annualmeet.htm)-        International Meeting on Medical Simulation, June 04, Cambridge, MA ( HYPERLINK "http://www.medicalsim.org/symposium2004/" http://www.medicalsim.org/symposium2004/)-        Advanced Technologies Applied to Combat Casualty Care (ATACCC), St Pete Beach, FL, Aug 04 ( HYPERLINK "http://www.usaccc.org/ataccc/" http://www.usaccc.org/ataccc/)Within these three national meetings, informal gatherings of interested people took place, facilitated by Dr. Curley and Mr. Magee. At each, SISO and simulation standards activities were mentioned as venues of potential interest to the medical community.Out of these meetings, in response to a perceived increase in medical community interest, Dr. Curley sought and received approval for a Panel Presentation / Discussion at the 13th Annual Medicine Meets Virtual Reality (MMVR) Conference, held in Long Beach, CA Jan 2005 (see  HYPERLINK "http://www.nextmed.com/mmvr_virtual_reality.html" http://www.nextmed.com/mmvr_virtual_reality.html).   The Panel focus was open standards for medical applications, was chaired by Dr. Curley and Mr. Magee, and offered seven presentations on different aspects of open source standards for medical simulation. Within this venue, Rick Severinghaus (SISO Executive Committee), on behalf of SISO, presented a briefing, “Making a Case for Simulation Standards.”  2.   What is needed most to grow MM&S interoperability is a prototype effort in which the following two elements are developed to the point of acceptance among existing medical communities already working on simulation aspects of the medical profession.Define existing object models. Develop “how to” guide for existing developers TATRC reported that a few initiatives of this type are underway. The intent of one effort in particular, is to show that, based on an open architecture approach, interactions between surgical instruments and human tissue can be modeled, including haptic feedback. 3.	It is readily apparent after a year’s effort by the Study Group that the medical community’s MM&S efforts are not as yet coherent enough to support development of any single “MM&S interoperability standard.”  It was the SGs purpose to “… to identify by major category the full range of M&S applications needed by the healthcare community and to define, in the context of these applications, the relevant information exchange requirements.” The conclusion of the SG is principally that, across the broad medical MM&S community, there are many small pockets of interest, each of them not yet sufficiently developed to provide a critical mass of shared interest to drive a dedicated interoperability standards development effort, either within a medical community domain, or within a SISO venue.  It is apparent that a logical next ‘big’ step would be to demonstrate that some medical community simulation modeling project/product (as yet to be completed) could be made compliant with an interoperability standard (HLA, DIS, or another suitable standard). It is the opinion of the Study Group that within the next five years there will be medical community recognition of the need for many interoperable simulations, and that the initial driver for such recognition will come from within government driven medical activities.  As an example of such need recognition, there is growing medical community recognition that simulation of “tool-tissue interactions,” a major challenge both medically and technically, may be of significant value in the training domain, with potential applications for civilian and military medical technicians, nurses, and physicians. 4.    Although there is a large body of work addressing medical simulation and medical modeling, the MM&S Community of Interest as a whole has not expressed a strong interest to participate in SISO workshops. The primary reasons for this are 1) medical personnel are already overloaded with respect to conference attendance, and 2) other venues, principally MMVR and ATACCC, provide more natural opportunities to present medical domain papers (including those on MM&S standards and interoperability) and to interact with MM&S colleagues.5.   Based on the completion of 4 MM&S Study Group meetings and SG attendance at medical venues outside SISO, the SG will prepare and forward to the SAC and EXCOM a final Study Group report with recommendations for future activity. Development of a specific interoperability standard will not be a part of the recommendations; however, recommendations will be offered to facilitate growing the interest of the medical community in the value of interoperability standards developed under the auspices of the SISO.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)9Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)11Peak attendance (including joint sessions)N/ATotal papers presented0“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussionsSISOs presentation at MMVR, Long Beach, CA, January 2005Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):1.	N/A2005 SPRING SIW OUTBRIEF FORM