Real-Time Range Operations Components for Integrated Testing (ROCIT) Collection and Distribution of Data Using the Test and Training Enabling Architecture (TENA) and the Integrated Level Hierarchy (ILH) Meta-Data StandardsJason BolinU.S. Army Redstone Technical Test CenterHuntsville, AlabamaCSTE-DTC-RT-F-FL, Bldg. 7884Redstone Arsenal, AL 35898-8052 HYPERLINK "mailto:dbrowning@rttc.army.mil" jbolin@rttc.army.milDavid R. BrowningU.S. Army Redstone Technical Test CenterHuntsville, AlabamaCSTE-DTC-RT-F-FL, Bldg. 7884Redstone Arsenal, AL 35898-8052 HYPERLINK "mailto:dbrowning@rttc.army.mil" dbrowning@rttc.army.milRyan NormanU.S. Army Redstone Technical Test CenterHuntsville, AlabamaCSTE-DTC-RT-F-FL, Bldg. 7884Redstone Arsenal, AL 35898-8052 HYPERLINK "mailto:dbrowning@rttc.army.mil" rnorman@rttc.army.milChris EdwardsERC IncorporatedHuntsville, Alabama555 Sparkman Dr., Suite 1622Huntsville, AL 35816 HYPERLINK "mailto:darryl@amtec-corp.com" cedwards@rttc.army.milJosh SellsERC IncorporatedHuntsville, Alabama555 Sparkman Dr., Suite 1622Huntsville, AL 35816 HYPERLINK "mailto:darryl@amtec-corp.com" jsells@rttc.army.milKeywords: Integrated Level Hierarchy (ILH), Test & Training Enabling Architecture (TENA), Range Operations Components for Integrated Testing (ROCIT), Unmanned Systems Initiative (USI), Redstone Technical Test Center (RTTC)Abstract:  The ROCIT Initiative, funded through Virtual Proving Ground (VPG), was created as an effort to modernize range business processes through the enhancement of infrastructure, test planning, test execution, and data collection. Redstone Technical Test Center (RTTC) was able to demonstrate its successes with ROCIT in the FY04 Unmanned Systems Initiative (USI) Exercise performed at RTTC. During the USI Exercise data was collected and published across multiple networks and hardware platforms. This was made possible by close coordination between RTTC’s TENA Firing Division Object Model and VPG’s ILH standard meta-data. ILH standard is a universal Army Developmental Test Command (DTC) naming convention for “Systems” under test, related “Projects”, and all other meta-data necessary to uniquely identify a digital “Resource”. All Army DTC facilities have participated in the development, deployment, and population of the ILH.In order to maximize reusability on either a centralized or distributed scale, the RTTC Firing Division Object Model utilizes the TSPI, Radar, and GPS TENA standardization candidate Object Models.  Use of standardized object models facilitated the reuse of generic RTTC or TENA-level applications, such as data loggers or a 3D Viewer.  Therefore, data was easily distributed amongst physical or simulated TENA-enabled range assets.  This data was then automatically referenced into ILH by using its TENA-provided ILH meta-data association.  In addition, data that is easily distributed within TENA can be compared to range truth data that is also available on the TENA Network.  For example, a TENA-enabled range asset, such as a Laser Tracker, was automatically directed to the perceived location of a USI entity based on its GPS information.  By using TENA, the Laser Tracker was able to quickly acquire the target and provide range truth data because it had an accurate estimate as to the location of the USI entity.  This resulted in the USI entity being acquired by the Laser Tracker for a longer period of time and, thus, more accurate test data. The ILH meta-data standards enabled the TENA collected data to be programmatically referenced in the ILH to await data reduction at the engineer’s convenience. Once reduced, the collected data can then be published across physically disconnected networks and published to DTC’s central repository Vision Digital Library System (VDLS) where the data can be shared and searched across the command.The USI Exercise proved the ROCIT Initiative to be a success at RTTC and showed that when you have standards in place such as the ILH meta-data and the RTTC Firing Division Object Model, data can be distributed, cataloged, manipulated, published, stored, and searched quite easily.IntroductionThe Redstone Technical Test Center (RTTC) Firing Test Division has been deploying capabilities resulting from the Range Operations Components for Integrated Testing (ROCIT) initiative. ROCIT, which was funded through the Virtual Proving Ground (VPG), was created as an effort to modernize range business processes for the testing of rockets, missiles, sites, seekers, and helicopter components through the enhancement of infrastructure, test planning, and test execution. ROCIT is the integration of the software tools, networks, and range hardware with the goal to test better, faster, and cheaper and achieve capabilities to support range testing now and 10 years into the future.  The FY04 Unmanned Systems Initiative (USI) Exercise was the first opportunity to bring ROCIT test planning, test execution, post-test analysis, and distributive testing capabilities to bear on a complex projectThe USI Demonstration incorporated live, virtual, and simulated robotic elements in an operational tempo exercise. Virtual components were being generated from Ft. Rucker, the labs on Redstone Arsenal were generating simulated entities, and live entities were active on the RTTC, Flight Test Range. The live entities included an Unmanned Ground Vehicle (UGV) firing munitions at a Tactical Operation Center (TOC) emulation and Unmanned Arial Vehicles (UAV) acting in a battle damage assessment role. Support for the USI exercise at the Flight Test Branch included the utilization of the ROCIT network, servers, tools, data systems, and control center infrastructures. The Test and Training Enabling Architecture (TENA) which RTTC had evaluated for performance and chosen as the test architecture, was utilized as the architecture to move test metadata, real-time range data among instruments, and to move data from the tactical layer into the range instrumentation layer. However, the truly revolutionary capability demonstrated during the test was the reliance on TENA and the data flow that moved real-time data in near real-time from the range to the center’s data repository utilizing the Integration Level Hierarchy (ILH). The ILH which was also developed under the guises of the VPG, is a metadata standard that enables the dissemination of test metadata with an agreed upon schema and taxonomy. TENA combined with the (ILH) enabled the near real-time movement of the logged test data from the data collection instrumentation to the RTTC data stores and the RTTC digital Library system (RDLS) without the user ever having to manually transfer files or metadata.   Integrated Level Hierarchy (ILH) Data standards have been designed, developed, approved and promoted by all test centers to establish a standard database architecture known as the Integrated Level Hierarchy (ILH).  The ILH database schema is the minimum required data architecture each test center’s data system must use to communicate with other test centers.  Metadata within the ILH provides a “card catalog” on what is being tested, who conducted the test, project information on tests being conducted, types of tests conducted, test event information, and unique identification of test articles. See Figure 1.1 for the ILH database schema. All of this metadata is used to identify, store, and retrieve digital objects known as resources. The referenced digital objects are items such as documents, test data, images, models, simulations, and software.To insure intra-range data integration, the ILH enables the development and real-time deployment of metadata standards via database table replication across the command. The ILH structure and metadata will enable distributed queries for data pertaining to distributed tests and enable standards for external connections SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 1.1: ILH database schema  The ILH focuses on the management of metadata that allows users to locate and retrieve resources that are digital objects. Document Management Systems also concentrate in managing digital objects and since the ILH is a database schema and standardized metadata the need arose for an interface to view resources, hence the integration of ILH and a document management system, LiveLink. Each test center across the command has their own local Document Management System which is integrated with the ATEC Vision Digital Library System (VDLS), see Figure 1.2. The integration of the Redstone Digital Library System (RDLS) with the ILH has provided numerous capabilities such as document check-in, check-out, access control, version control, compound documents, audit trails, workflows for automating document change requests, review, approval processes, extensive indexing and search capabilities, and a unified interface to ILH resources. The ILH structure formed the data backbone for the ROCIT tools and infrastructure. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 1.2: Overarching view of ILH, VDLS, and local test center LiveLink integration.ROCIT Range Operations Components for Integrated Testing (ROCIT) development was initiated in an effort to modernize range business processes. This has enabled RTTC’s Firing Test Division to test better, faster, cheaper, and achieve capabilities to support testing for advanced weapons systems well into the 21st century. This was accomplished by implementing the technologies necessary to improve test planning, test execution, post test analysis/reporting and distributed test capabilities. Efforts were funded through VPG, with goals of automating the test planning, execution, and post-test processes within the Firing Test Division at RTTC. At the end of FY ’04, ROCIT was established at RTTC’s open air ranges and is poised to support testing of Army transformation systems at Redstone and additional remote ranges. The various process components of ROCIT are tied together by ILH.  ILH metadata is initially attached to a test event in the test planning phase and this information follows the test for the rest of its lifecycle. Early in the development of the ROCIT capabilities it was determined that a standard architecture would be required for the real-time movement of test data and control of test instrumentation. A performance comparison of several data transport and control mechanisms architectures was conducted with TENA being chosen as THE test architecture for ROCIT.TENA The Test and Training Enabling Architecture (TENA), is an object-oriented data transport architecture. TENA is technically driven by interoperability, reusability, and composability requirements. Interoperability requirements necessitate TENA applications to work together to achieve the goals defined by a user or users. Reusability requirements involve TENA components, applications, or systems that can be used in configurations beyond those for which they were originally designed. Composability requires an ability to rapidly assemble, initialize, test, and execute a system from members of a pool of reusable, interoperable elements. In short, TENA is a complete real-time data transportation solution for test execution data.For the USI Experiment a standard ILH object model was used to transport ILH metadata to all TENA applications that wished to subscribe to it. The object model was designed based on the ILH schema described above. The Object model was designed as a “snapshot” of the schema, as depicted in Figure 1.1, containing all the metadata and all of the references between tables. The only difference between the ILH schema and the ILH object model is that re-cursive relationships contained in the ILH schema can be navigated in a Relational Database Management System (RDMS), however a single instance of an ILH object can not be traversed to find parental relationships. The ILH Object does however contain all the ILH metadata necessary to uniquely identify a Test event as well as necessary metadata about the digital resource.  This enabled the TENA controlled instruments and hardware to receive an ILH Stateful Distributed Object (SDO) publication state so that it was aware of what ILH Test event they were collecting data for, and after test completion this ILH information was used to automatically insert the collected files into the database through the use of a HotFolder. HotFolder A HotFolder is a folder on either a local or networked machine that has a Windows service watching it at all times for the creation of XML files. Upon dropping an XML file into the HotFolder, code is executed that proceeds to look for and then parse the ILH Resource Header information contained in the file so as to insert a new resource in the database.The ILH Resource Header contains the minimum amount of ILH metadata to uniquely identify and associate a digital resource with a test. The test metadata contained in the ILH Resource Header is generated from the ILH SDO update received via the TENA architecture. The header also associates any “child” files (such as pictures or documents) to the same test. The Windows service which is parsing the XML file then uses the ILH Header information to store the file or group of files (resources) and to update the ILH database with metadata describing the resource. After the resource is inserted into the ILH a trigger is fired from the Resource table that calls a console application that will find the correct spot in the RDLS folder structure to publish either a reference or an object to RDLS for the newly inserted resource.The difference in publishing a reference and an object deals with the final resting spot of the resource. If the file will reside on a file server with only a PDF link to the file contained in RDLS then it is called publishing a reference. If the file will actually reside inside RDLS with all its check-in, check-out, and access controls in place on said file then it is called publishing an object. For the USI exercise HotFolders were relied upon heavily for the movement of not only collected test data but were also responsible for an ingenious database updating scheme across disconnected networks. Further details about the processes used in this exercise can be found in the USI Exercise section below.Unmanned Systems Initiative (USI) ExerciseThe USI Exercise demonstrated RTTC’s success with integrating TENA, ILH, and RDLS.  Before the onset of testing the TENA test event controller operator chose the ILH Test to which colleted data would be associated. This was chosen from an ILH tree view control which enabled the user to navigate through the Systems and Projects to finally reach the Test event that data was to be collected for. This information was then published using the standardized ILH object model to all ILH subscribing TENA applications such as the Laser Trackers, Track Mount, RADAR etc. The information contained in the ILH SDO was then used by the applications controlling the instrumentation after the test was completed to create an XML ILH Resource Header file so that HotFolders could be utilized in the insertion of the collected data files. The TENA applications, instruments, and hardware controlled by TENA created their XML ILH Resource Header file and programmatically wrote the files to a HotFolder. The command to write the file off to the HotFolder was also handled via TENA by the use of a Test Execution Control SDO.This integration of TENA, the ILH object model, and HotFolders enabled range instrumentation to programmatically insert their collected data files immediately after a test into both the ILH database and the document management system RDLS with no user intervention. Previously, an engineer manually accessing every piece of instrumentation, copying the data to disk, and then if time permitted, locating the correct repository location and hand typed information into the database. The new capability has allowed the engineers to begin spending more of their valuable time on data reduction and verification instead of data harvesting and storage.Since the USI Exercise dealt with the operation of and live firing of both UAV and UGV vehicles over a network it was necessary for safety reasons that the entire exercise be conducted on its own disconnected network called the Test Network. This presented many challenges for the automated data collection task since the data collected during the exercise which was dropped into a HotFolder needed to be moved to the non secure administrative network. Another less obvious issue dealt with the ILH database updates that are replicated down from headquarters and which now needed to also update a disconnected ILH database that resided on the test network. A solution was devised that involved the purchase and proper configuration of a NAS, database triggers on every table in both the admin and test network ILH, several console command line applications, and five different HotFolder services which worked in conjunction to overcome security and network limitations. The exact coordination of events that occurred is so intricate and complex that it would encompass a paper unto itself, for a more detailed explanation please contact the author. See Figure 1.3 for a flow chart of the process mentioned above. EMBED Visio.Drawing.6  Figure 1.3: Intricate Process of data movement between two networks, two databases, five HotFolders, RDLS, and numerous command line applications.SummaryThe extensive work required for RTTC to support the USI Exercise allowed for encapsulation of all aspects of the ROCIT Initiative including network, servers, tools, data systems, and control center infrastructures.  RTTC has chosen TENA as its architecture of choice throughout the entire testing process from moving test metadata, to providing real-time range data among instruments, to moving data from the tactical layer into the range instrumentation layer. During the USI Exercise, RTTC not only used TENA as described above but also demonstrated how TENA can be used for overall range test execution control and for facilitating ILH test metadata distribution.Without the ROCIT Initiative, which combined ILH and TENA to the Flight Test Range’s new network infrastructure, RTTC participation in the USI Exercise would not have been as effective because the automatic control of instrumentation and streamlined data delivery process would not have been possible.  However, ROCIT enabled RTTC to further enhance its extensive capabilities for test support. The USI Exercise proved the ROCIT Initiative to be a success at RTTC and showed that when you have standards in place such as the ILH and TENA, data can be distributed, cataloged, manipulated, published, stored, searched, and even moved across disconnected networks quite easily and all with minimal user intervention.What is being tested…Project which testing is being conducted for…Who conductedtest event…Type of testConducted…Actual Test Event,Test Number…Resources, the dataProducts of testing …VDLS DMSILHILHILHILHILHILHILHLiveLink DMSLiveLink DMSLiveLink DMSLiveLink DMSLiveLink DMSLiveLink DMS