DEVS Standardization Study GroupChairGabriel WainerCarleton University. Ottawa, ON. Canada.Vice ChairBernard ZeiglerACIMS. University of Arizona. Tucson, AZ.SecretaryHessam SarjoughianArizona State University. Tempe, AZ.James NutaroACIMS. University of Arizona. Tucson, AZ.Trevor PearceCarleton University. Ottawa, ON. CanadaFabrice BernardiUniversity of CorsicaHwang MoonWayne State UniversityTotal: 120 members (April 2005)Objectives for this Workshop:Advance with the task of 3 teamsTeam 1: Building DEVS language+librariesTeam 2: implementation of services to interoperate at least two existing 		DEVS toolsTeam 3: discussion of the contents of a DEVS kernelOrganization of Educational activitiesCreation of a DEVS tutorial on-lineTutorial at Spring SIW Several tutorials during the year SCSC/SPECTS/WintersimSIW meetings will always start with a 1-hour tutorial for newcomersDiscussion on advances of Team 1- 3 members : created versions of graphical-based tools with educational purposesTools used for teaching DEVS concepts (Carleton University, McGill, Univ. Marseille)- Extending the experience to other members- Joint paper under preparation (4 members)A case study/set of requirements, tools features to compare definedDifferent teams will define the model using different DEVS tools (PyDEVS, DEVSJava, CD++)Groups of students started working on a model of urban traffic. Some advance reported. Results expected by June 2005.Advances of Team 2Initial discussion on interoperation of ADEVS and CD++ toolkits already startedMay 2005: a new student will face interoperation of CD++ and DEVSJava toolsWork period: May 2006-April 2006 Advances of Team 3Discussion startedBasis for a Product NominationMain core of a Product Development GroupNot yet ready to face this task in full detailResults of Team 1: basis for future discussionResults of Team 2: identify a common interface to become a source for the kernelComments and Recommendations:Team member started seeking funding for a DEVS workshop organizationWill invite partners from Industry, Government and AcademiaWill be held in the country providing the funding (France? Canada – SISO Canada?)Other members encouraged to follow this model (and organize a workshop within SISO SIW if US funds are obtained) Different ongoing activities Seeking funding opportunities for the year 2005-06Good basis for the creation of a Product Nomination, and organization of a PDGNeed one more year to finish the current developmentsWill prepare a SG Interim Report in April’05, summarizing the work of the SG Requested renewing the SG for one yearAverage attendance (excluding joint sessions)13Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)13Peak attendance (including joint sessions)N/ATotal papers presentedN/A“No-show” presentationsN/AOther presentations and panel discussionsN/ARecommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations): HYPERLINK "download.cfm?Phase_ID=2&FileName=05S-SIW-050.pdf"05S-SIW-050