Name of Forum or Group: System Acquisition and Product DevelopmentChairJim CoolahanVice ChairTim JahrenSecretaryCrash KonwinObjectives for this Workshop:Sharing actual experiences from both industry and government regarding M&S standards, information sharing, reuse, collaboration, business cases, policy and process, as applied to system acquisition and product development (SAPD).Identifying approaches to key M&S issues in SAPD, and lessons learned in M&S application to SAPD.Comments and Recommendations:New Western European Armaments Organization (WEAO) three-year research and technology project (Simulation Based Acquisition Server, or SIMBASE) involving use of ISO 10303 (STEP) standards bears watching by the SAPD community.To assist in high-level decision-making on development of new capabilities and systems, more attention needs to be paid to the development and use of models that can weigh cost vs. performance/capability tradeoffs. To enable effective distributed execution of simulations in the Global Information Grid (GIG) environment, more attention needs to be paid to latency management in evolving GIG services.New “full cost recovery” approach to fund large-scale simulation resources in NASA will present challenges for existing simulation facilities.  Similar changes in some DoD-provided simulation resources/services have resulted in their demise. Composability of models and simulations for system-of-systems engineering involves issues of “vertical” composability (sequentially, via data) of simulations at different levels of aggregation in addition to “horizontal” composability of simulation applications at run-time.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)31Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)35Peak attendance (including joint sessions)64Total papers presented6“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions2Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):1.	05S-SIW-106, Simulation and Software Development for Capabilities Based Warfare: An Analysis of Harmonized Systems Engineering Processes2005 SPRING SIW OUTBRIEF FORM