International Mission Training Research (IMTR):Competency-Based Methods for Interoperable Training,Rehearsal and EvaluationWinston Bennett, Jr.U. S. Air Force Research LaboratoryWarfighter Readiness Research DivisionMesa Arizona, USAJonathan BorgvallPatric LavénSwedish Defence Research Agency (FOI)Swedish Air Force Air Combat Simulation Centre (FLSC)Kista, Stockholm, SwedenSara Elizabeth Gehr, The Boeing, CorpBrian Schreiber, Lumir, Inc. U. S. Air Force Research LaboratoryWarfighter Readiness Research DivisionMesa Arizona, USAGeorge AlligerRebecca Beard The Group for Organizational EffectivenessAlbany, NY USAKeywords:Mission Essential Competencies, International Mission Training Research, Competency-based training, Peace Support Operations, Distributed simulationABSTRACT: This paper describes a process to define the core knowledge, skills, and experiences required for successful mission performance in complex environments. This process, called the Mission Essential Competency (MEC) process includes a hierarchical decomposition and analysis of aircrew functions, skill and knowledge requirements, and developmental experiences required to build aircrew proficiency. MECs are structured descriptions of aircrew performance requirements in the combat environment. Various training methods and media are compared to identify those best able to provide the most important experiences and support the training requirements defined by current readiness and continuation training requirements. We will describe how MECs are being used to identify training gaps, define unique and common training objectives and scenario specifications, and specify metrics for training evaluation. The development of common definitions and specifications is a critical requirement to enhanced interoperability and data generalizability across mission areas and coalition training events. Example data and results from mission areas where the work has been completed will be provided and discussed. Finally, we will highlight how we are extending and generalizing the process with the Swedish Air Force Air Combat Simulation Centre (FLSC) to help define common mission training requirements for Peace Support Operations and interoperable distributed training and rehearsal events via International Mission Training Research (IMTR).IntroductionOrganizations throughout the international simulation community have invested heavily in developing simulation environments aimed at providing a better user experience. One of the key issues that must be addressed is related to developing commonly defined requirements for the training to be accomplished with these environments.  A related question is the degree of interoperability among definitional processes, and the nature of the actual requirements amongst international partners and collaborators working together on distributed simulation. Finally, assuming that we can define these requirements and develop scenarios and syllabi, what are the implications for routinely training, rehearsing, and evaluating coalition operations using the environments?These questions have relevance for the more traditional mission areas of interest across coalition partner nations. However, an interesting question to be addressed is the extent to which we can answer these same questions for a new or emerging mission area, such as Peace Support Operations (PSO).  This paper describes the process US Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) is implementing with researchers at FLSC and Subject Matter Expert (SME) pilots from the Swedish Air Force (SwAF), to examine and address the questions from the vantage of PSO and the integration of the SwAF into coalition operations in UN, NATO/OSCE (Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe) and the European Union (EU).Over the past few years researchers from the US Air Force, in collaboration with partner researchers from other countries, have conducted a series of applied examinations to determine: a) if common cross-country requirements can be defined and b) if those requirements are both palatable to the operational communities of interest and of use in driving training development and assessment,  (including specifying important environmental fidelity characteristics for distributed simulation systems for training and rehearsal) [1].  The work has resulted in a substantive corpus of lessons learned and successes that are being used collectively to improve distributed simulation capabilities and the training and assessment that uses the capabilities [2] for all the partner nations.Ongoing Research ExplorationsAs part of the research, a methodology  has been developed called Mission Essential Competencies or MECs.  MECs are defined as the: “Higher-order individual, team, and inter-team competencies that a fully prepared pilot, crew or flight requires for successful mission completion under adverse conditions and in a non-permissive environment” [3] [4]. The MEC structure encompasses knowledge and skills (KS) and developmental experiences. The Warfighter Readiness Research Division of the  AFRL has also developed a methodology to link these experiences to the KS they support and then directly to the higher level MEC [5]. Finally, field survey data from the MEC process is gathered from operators in each mission area.  The data are summarized in a series of reports, and operational personnel review and interpret the data to identify training gaps and opportunities to address those gaps (including but not limited to increasing the application of high fidelity simulation).We have demonstrated that MECs, the process, and the gap analyses generalize across many of the missions conducted in coalition operations that follow traditional doctrine and concepts of operation. Examples of these include air to air operations, air to ground/combat strike operations, air battle management, and most recently package commander operations. What we now know is that in a coalition distributed training event we can design, implement, and evaluate scenarios and syllabi that can be used by USAF or other nation crews with very little adjustment or refinement. The missions, the required knowledge and skills, and the developmental experiences necessary to achieve proficiency are easily transferable from one nation conducting that mission to another.Moreover, the MEC definitions are being used as input to the simulator design and development process to ensure that the simulations that are developed and fielded are capable of supporting the training requirements and assessment needs identified with the MEC process.Current research with the Swedish Air Force Air Combat Simulation CentreThe entire Swedish Armed Forces has over recent years undergone a major transformation, shifting in focus from defense against invasion to a defense with reactive units ready for deployment nationally or internationally. The extended international contribution by the Swedish Armed Forces is participation in multi-national PSO. As a partnership for peace member, this means that doctrines, procedures, equipment and education are adapting to support interoperability according to international standards (i.e., UN, NATO/OSCE, EU). It is an ongoing process, but parts of the Swedish Armed Forces have been, currently are, or are ready to be deployed on multi-national PSO abroad.Focusing on the SwAF fast-jet fighters (i.e., JAS 39 Gripen), there are currently four operational squadrons. The knowledge, skills and experiences within multi-national PSO varies among the individual pilots as well as the squadrons, with the highest mission readiness found at the SwAF Rapid Reaction Unit JAS 39 Gripen (SWAFRAP JAS 39) based at the F17 Blekinge Wing. SWAFRAP JAS 39 has a 30 day alert for deployment on international, multi-national PSO lead by UN, NATO/OSCE or EU. If deployed, they have a capability of staying on deployment for six months. After another 12 months they are ready for a new deployment.The SwAF Gripens contribute as fighter or reconnaissance (limited) assets during international, multi-national PSO. The standard groupings are two-ships or four-ships of JAS 39 Gripens, but additional flight set-ups such as two-ships in Mixed Flight Force Operation four-ships (e.g., together with a two-ship of F-16) are also trained during international exercises. SWAFRAP JAS 39 use single-seat Gripens (currently edition A but eventually edition C) operationally, but there are two-seaters (currently edition B but eventually edition D) as well. The two-seaters are currently used for training but they might be used for other purposes in the future.The PSO mission area that SWAFRAP JAS 39 currently contributes to internationally is Air Defense (AD) and that is also the focus of the first MEC-process conducted within the IMTR-project. The specific PSO AD mission types for which the SWAFRAP JAS 39 has been training are Combat Air Patrol, Sweeps, Escorts, and Offensive Counter Air (lead for fighter assets in Composite Air Operations). These are the PSO AD mission areas where SwAF pilots have the highest mission readiness, but other areas (e.g., Air-to-Surface) might be implemented in the future. Large-scale scenario training for PSO AD missions is conducted during various kinds of distributed simulation exercises at FLSC and at live exercises (squadron, national and international level).There are several objectives for conducting a MEC-process for SwAF PSO AD within the IMTR project. As stated, the ongoing transformation from defense against invasion to reactive defense units with an international emphasis has been and still is a great challenge in many ways. For the SwAF this has meant new demands on the equipment; but of even higher interest in this case is the demand on the pilots’ competencies. They should no longer only be ready to perform their missions according to Swedish procedures but to perform them in another way, in new geographical areas according to other procedures and in co-operation with other nations.Concerning SwAF PSO AD simulator training, FLSC has for the last couple of years provided an extensive training program focused on developing these emerging, additional competencies among the pilots. Most pilots at the SwAF operational and training squadrons have experienced the training at FLSC, and many of them have also gone through extensive training for multi-national PSO AD at live exercises. To enhance training in the future, there is a need to establish the core knowledge, skills, and developmental experiences identified as vital for full mission readiness by SME pilots, and to feed that back to the continuous evaluation and development of the training and research program. Collaboration with other nations on international mission training research, will add great value to the process of maximizing interoperability via enhanced individual, team, and inter-team training on a national and international level. Distributed simulation exercises with other nations, using scenarios that are tailored according to the MEC-processes for the pilots of each nation, is a very promising way of reaching this goal. The rationale is that scenarios created to support the development of knowledge, skills, and experiences identified as important for the US and Swedish pilots respectively will strongly contribute to enhanced mission readiness and interoperability in multi-national operations. Another important benefit of this collaboration is the fact that well defined individual, team and inter-team competencies as well as skills and procedures will be of great support when validating operational units before deploying them into the multi-national arena.ConclusionsThere is considerable potential and a growing body of evidence to suggest that tremendous efficiencies can be gained in coalition mission training research and applications through the development and institutionalization of common approaches to defining requirements, driving scenarios and instructional events, and assessing the impact of the training. Further, the effectiveness of what we hope will become routine distributed training and rehearsal events at the coalition level will substantially improve shared understanding of training environment capabilities, mission and training objectives, and metrics for quantifying impacts and return on national investment.  “Train as we fight” will only be successful if we realize the mutual and multinational benefits of shared research, application, and operations. References[1]	McIntyre, H.M., Smith, M.E., and Bennett, W., Jr. (2002). Exploiting high fidelity simulation for aircrew coalition mission training.  Paper presented at the Interservice, Industry, Training, Simulation and Education Conference (I/ITSEC), Orlando, FL.[2]	Gehr, S.E., Schurig, M.A., Jacobs, L., van der Pal, J., Bennett, W., Jr., and Schreiber, B.S. (2005). Assessing the training potential of MTDS in exercise First WAVE. Paper presented at symposium on the Effectiveness of Modeling and Simulation – from Anecdotal to Substantive Evidence, Warsaw, Poland October 2005.[3]	Colegrove, C. and Bennett, W., Jr. (2005). Competency-based training: Adapting to warfighter needs.  Presentation at the RAeS Conference: Multi Role and Networked Simulation, London UK.[4]	Colegrove, C. and Alliger, G. (2002).  Mission essential competencies: Defining combat mission readiness in a novel way, SAS-038 Symposium, Brussels Belgium.[5]	Symons, S., France, M., Bell, J., and Bennett, W., Jr. (2005). Linking knowledge and skills to mission essential competency-based syllabus development for distributed mission operations. Technical Paper Manuscript Submitted for Publication.Author BiographiesWINSTON BENNETT, JR. is a Senior Research Psychologist and team leader for the training systems technology and performance assessment at the Air Force Research Laboratory, Human Effectiveness Directorate, Warfighter Training Research Division, in, Mesa AZ. He received his PhD in Industrial/Organizational Psychology from Texas A&M University in 1995.  JONATHAN BORGVALL is a researcher at the department for Man-System Interaction, Swedish Defense Research Agency. Mr. Borgvall holds a Master of Science degree in Cognitive Science from Linköping University. His current research interest lies in methods, procedures and tools for enhancing interoperability and mission readiness through distributed simulator training programs. Mr. Borgvall is part of the International Mission Training Research team at FOI.PATRIC LAVÉN is a former Swedish Air Force Viggen pilot logging about 1000 fixed-wing hours now working for the Swedish Air Force Air Combat Simulation Centre (FLSC), Swedish Defense Research Agency. Mr. Lavén is a simulator instructor and exercise manager for the operational section at FLSC. He is also part of the International Mission Training Research team at FOI.SARA ELIZABETH GEHR is a Human Factors Design Specialist with the Boeing Company.  She works at the Air Force Research Laboratory, Warfighter Readiness Research Division, in Mesa, AZ, where she is the task order lead for coalition and international mission training research.  She received her Ph.D. in Experimental Psychology from Washington University in St. Louis in 2001.BRIAN SCHREIBER is a Senior Research Scientist with Lumir, Inc. at the Air Force Research Laboratory Human Effectiveness Directorate, Warfighter Training Research Division.  He has an M.S. in Human Factors from the University of Illinois.  He has been actively involved in military aviation research since 1994.GEORGE ALLIGER is Vice President of Solutions for The Group for Organizational Effectiveness (gOE). He received his Ph.D. in Psychology from the University of Akron. He has taught and consulted for over twenty years in the areas of: training needs analysis; employee and management development; measurement, certification, and evaluation; statistical analysis; surveys; competency development and assessment; computerized testing and on-line performance support systems; job/task analysis; and personnel selection.REBECCA BEARD is Executive Vice President for The Group for Organizational Effectiveness (gOE). She received her Masters of Science degree from Old Dominion University in 1982. Since then, she has conducted research and consulted with various branches of the military and the private sector in the areas of training, competency development, team effectiveness, change management, and organizational development.