Constructive Simulation Reuse for International ApplicationsOrWhen COTS Is What You GotsJames I. Montgomery, Ph.D.US Army PEO STRI12350 Research ParkwayOrlando, FL 32826-3276james.montgomery@us.army.milABSTRACT:  Commercially available constructive models and simulations have reached a level of maturity and generalization that make it possible to offer them as Commercial-Off-The-Shelf (COTS) solutions to many rather specialized requirements.  This presentation describes a recent United Kingdom Ministry of Defense (UKMOD) acquisition for the Battlegroup Command and Control trainer (BC2T).  The decision to procure the BC2T as a predominantly COTS trainer was based on the desires to maximize system capabilities, minimize lifecycle costs and insure a timely fielding.  1.  The SituationWhat is a military service to do when faced with an immediate critical training shortfall and a limited budget?  This was the situation that the British Army found itself in prior to the acquisition of the Battlegroup Command and Control Trainer (BC2T).  The actual requirement for the BC2T was as follows:“In order for the British Army to meet its commitments under UK defence policy to deliver the required military capability, it requires well-trained units held at high readiness to conduct a range of military operations in the joint, combined and increasingly multi-national arenas. In recognition of the many other tasks that military units have to fulfil and the high turnover of manpower that affects them, maintaining all units at high readiness for extended periods is unsustainable. A formation readiness cycle (FRC) has therefore been introduced, in which training is progressive and geared to attaining specified Collective Performance (CP) levels for the delivery of military capability.”When faced with this situation the British Army chose to seek to overcome this capability gap through the acquisition of a new training system.  Furthermore, it was decided that the system to be procured should be one that was based on Commercial-Off-The-Shelf (COTS) technology.  The decision to pursue a COTS solution was based on the belief that The state-of-the-practice in Command and Control trainers was of a level of maturity to permit several offerors to propose viable solutions.That a COTS solution should be available quicker since development efforts would not be required.That the lifecycle cost for a COTS solution should be less because technology is being reused and support costs could potentially be shared with other users.2.  The road from the Requirement to the ActualityIn a perfect world the organization that uses a system, defines the requirements for the system, and procures the system would all be one and the same.  However, this is not a perfect world.  In both the United States (US) and the United Kingdom (UK) each of these functions are often performed by a different activity.  Due to seemingly continual rearrangements of responsibilities and the complexity of the system this paper will not provide specific names and functions of the various commands and departments that are responsible for performing the various system acquisition functions.  Rather, the reader that is interested in more information on UK Ministry of Defence procurement is invited to visit the MOD Contractors Bulletin at  HYPERLINK "http://www.contracts.mod.uk/" http://www.contracts.mod.uk/.  For information on US acquisitions an initial reference would be  HYPERLINK "http://www.acq.osd.mil/dpap/" http://www.acq.osd.mil/dpap/.  Since this is not a perfect world, it is normally necessary that a team of personnel who are at a minimum knowledgeable in Government acquisition rules and procedures; the technology associated with the procurement; and the military subject matter area (for example conducting military training, a combat arm, a support service, etc.) must translate what the User states in the User Requirement Document (URD) into a System Requirement Document (SRD) that is specifically structured to provide the basis upon which the Government can commit to the purchase of goods and services.  From late June through the first of September 2002, I found myself in the unusual situation of being a US Department of the Army civilian employee with the responsibility of developing the SRD for the UK Army’s Battlegroup Command and Control Training (BC2T) system.  In June 2002, I was assigned as the Chief Scientist at the British Army, Land Simulation Centre, Land Warfare Centre, Warminster, UK.  I was the first Engineer and Scientist Exchange Program (ESEP) member assigned to the UK under a revitalized ESEP agreement.  Normally, the development of a SRD would be a collaborative effort conducted by a Government Integrated Product Team (IPT) composed of journeymen or senior level experts.  However, due to the season of the year, training requirements, and other circumstances, several of the members of the IPT were either receiving specialized just-in-time-training to prepare them for their participation in the BC2T acquisition process or they were on block leave.  Therefore, I, the new guy on the block, was told to do the right thing and that any problems would be worked out in September when everyone was back to work at the end of block leave.  What could have been a disaster actually resulted in the production of a SRD that fully supported a successful BC2T solicitation, proposal evaluation, and contract award.  Prior to being assigned to the ESEP program I had been an Operations Research Systems Analyst (ORSA) with the US Army Simulation Training and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM) for over twenty five years.  During various time periods at STRICOM I had been responsible for all aspects of training device procurements leading to contract award.  I was very relieved when I discovered that the intent and actuality of our military procurement systems were very similar due to both our legal systems having English Common Law as their basis and the fact that the UK has recently undergone an evolution similar to the US’s Acquisition Streamlining.  Even more similar is the fact that for both our Armies, a weapon system’s requirements are developed by a User’s Representative who probably will not be the one who actually uses the system for its intended purpose.  The User Representative in both Armies typically is a staff officer or Non Commissioned Officer at a school or other higher level headquarters.  These individuals normally have many years of experience, but in their current duty position are separated from units and may lack currency in the users’ needs and current technical COTS capabilities.  This divergence in focus may result in a URD that would be difficult, if not impossible to implement, because it is based on an  invalid’s historical knowledge or calls for unduly advanced technology having been influenced by dreams of the “state-of-the possible.”  These situations can result in the perfect solution to a nonexistent problem.  Fortunately, the BC2T URD did not suffer to a great extent from either of these two problems.  In fact, the actuality was that due to the decision that the BC2T would be a Commercial-Off-The-Shelf (COTS) procurement, the URD in some areas was probably under specified when describing the technical level of sophistication desired.  Prior to my arrival in England, the BC2T team provided training device contractors an opportunity to demonstrate any capabilities that might be used to fulfill a BC2T requirement.  The purpose of this market survey activity was to educate the offerors in the requirement and to provide the MOD with a limited list of companies who had the demonstrated potential to fulfill the requirement.  This list of “qualified providers” was used to target the development and distribution of the BC2T solicitation.  Due to the “Procurement Sensitivity” and proprietary nature of the actual BC2T solicitation and proposal evaluation processes, this paper will not discuss specifics such as the offerors names, proposed prices, or technical details of the proposed solutions.  However, I can and will discuss how to translate a generalized URD into a specific SRD that can be the basis of a solicitation that an offeror can respond to and the Government can evaluate and award an executable contract.  The current UK MOD procurement philosophy is very similar to Performance-Based Contracting (PCB) in the United States.  The Performance-Based Contracting Desk Reference provides the following definition of PBC: “PBC is structuring all aspects of an acquisition around the purpose of the work to be performed. It emphasizes objective, measurable performance requirements and quality standards in developing statements of work (SOWs), selecting contractors, determining contract type, and incentives, and performing contract administration. The main idea is to pay for results, not just efforts, as in the case of a typical cost-plus-fixed-fee (CPFF) contract.” The problem that presented itself with writing the BC2T SRD and resulting request for proposals is that there were several levels of abstraction between the user’s real requirement and, first, the translation to a performance based description of the requirement and, secondly, the generalization of the requirement to permit a COTS solution.  The following are an example of how a user interface display device might have been defined.The user’s URD envisioned a fifty two inch plasma screen display: The procurement activity’s SRD might have said “The display device shall be of a size and resolution to permit a 95th percentile member of the target training audience to read text with a 90 percent accuracy when viewed from a distance of 15 meters with an off center viewing angle of up to 15 degrees.”The Request for Proposal might have read “The display device shall conform to generally-accepted-commercial practices.”As one might guess from the above examples, the likelihood of the BC2T user in a Regimental Training Wing ever seeing the desired 52 inch plasma screen display device are almost nonexistent.  My initial task was to be the Wizard responsible for performing the alchemy to transmute the base URD into a precious SRD that when integrated into a Request for Proposal would insure that the resultant COTS solution would provide the Best Value, at the Least Cost, on or before the Required Date. Furthermore, an unstated but essential requirement of today’s RFP is that any requirements and their evaluation plans be so specific that all Government decisions can overcome any and all challenges or protests.  The final BC2T SRD that went into the RFP contained approximately 214 numbered evaluation factors distributed as shown in Table 1.  The determination as to the types and numbers of evaluation factors was a balancing act between a traditional specification based acquisition wherein the Government told the contractor what and how to build and the PBC view that the RPF would only describe the required performance and where tradeoffs between performance and cost were encouraged in order to achieve a Best Value solution.  TABLE 1Evaluation Factor TypeNumber of FactorsFactor DescriptionSummary31Major topic areas used to collect associated scores from detailed evaluation factors.  These factors were not independently scored.Go-No-Go79Requirements that were evaluated as being unacceptable if not met.  Many of these types factors were concerned with compliance with Health and Safety Rules and Regulations.  Also included in this class were overall decision criteria such as the use of COTS hardware.Superior-To-Unacceptable93This class of requirements includes areas for which it is possible to define a range of acceptable solutions.  This methodology is an expansion of the Go-No-Go criteria in that below a certain level of performance the proposed solution is rated as being a “No-GO,” while above the cutoff the increased capability is recognized with a higher raw score.  This increasing-at-a-decreasing rate philosophy is used to avoid purchasing more capability than is required.  Narrative Evaluation11Narrative Evaluation factors were primarily associated with how the contractor proposed to manage and control the program.  These included such items as Program Management Plans, Integrated Logistics Support Plans, and Risk Management Plans.  3.  The Economics of Achieving a Best Value COTS SolutionWhile the considerations discussed above appear to be significant, they seem almost trivial when one looks at the additional complexities that come with the decision to make the BC2T procurement Fixed-Price COTS.  In a traditional Cost type development program, concerns are principally related to financial and schedule risks, and are assumed by the Government.  The risks are that the project will cost more and take longer.  However, in the end the capability gap will be fulfilled unless the budget runs out first.  With a COTS solution there is a significant probability that no proposed solution will fulfill all of the requirements at a satisfactory level of performance.  By design with a COTS procurement, “What You See is What You Get.”  The contractor’s proposal may appear to promise full compliance, but in his mind he is only offering to provide his existing product with minimal integration effort and little, if any, new development.  Implicit in a proposal provided in response to a Fixed-Price COTS requirement is an allocation of bid price between fixed costs, integration efforts, new development, and profit.  Since the exact nature of this allocation is normally not known to the Government, the proposal evaluation becomes a three step process.  First, the evaluators must assess the technical capability as shown during the demonstration phase of the evaluation process. Next, using this baseline, they must develop an objective assessment of the actual shortfall versus what the contractor says the shortfall is.  Finally, they must assess how much effort will be necessary to close the gap between the baseline and the SRD requirements.  The end product of this three phase process is an assessment of the magnitude of the risk that an acceptable “Best Value” solution can be reached.  Failure to reach an acceptable solution can be due to two possible scenarios.  The first and some what easier to decide case, it is when the proposed COTS product will never be capable of fulfilling the SRD requirements no matter how much money is thrown at the problem.  The second case occurs when it is determined that either through additional development or integration with other COTS products, the proposed solution can be matured into an acceptable solution.  To properly assess the risk in this instance, the evaluators must make an educated estimate of all of the following:  The magnitude of the shortfall, the contractor’s costs to develop or acquire the proposed solution, and how much of the contractor’s bid price is available to address the problem or whether the contractor is willing to spend more than the bid price to deliver an acceptable solution.  Therefore, the funding available to overcome the shortfall is an unbounded area that on the lower extreme is an unknown amount that results when the sum of the contractor’s unknown fixed costs and desired profit is subtracted from the bid price and on the upper end is determined by the again unknown willingness of the contractor to incur a loss on the program.The proposal evaluation problem can be depicted through a series of hypothetical Cost versus Capability diagrams.  In these graphs the vertical axis will represent Cost and the horizontal axis will represent Capability.  In attempting to plot the Capability versus Cost curve for any procurement, there is a possible solution area bounded from the top by an equality line representing the Government’s available budget.  On the left, the boundary is zero and to the right, the area is unbounded.   With respect to Capability, two basic types of capability curves were encountered.  The first case is that where the COTS solution is technologically limited so that no amount of resource expenditure would result in a Best Value compliant solution.  This case is shown in Figure 1.  The second situation is the case where the baseline COTS solution is capable of achieving SRD compliance at one and only one point.  This is illustrated by Figure 2.  Since the BC2T procurement was a Best Value acquisition, tradeoffs between performance and cost were permitted.  Therefore, there is a Best Value area of capabilities to the left of the vertical Fully SRD Compliant line that are acceptable if the cost is low enough, Figure 3.  Likewise, to the right of the Fully SRD Compliant line there is an area in which the Government might be willing to pay a higher price for more capability, Figure 4. Therefore, the Competitive Range is composed of those proposals that have a Bid Price that is less than the available allocated budget and have at least one point on the System Capability Curve that falls in the Best Value Region.  The BC2T solicitation resulted in at least one example of each of the possible situations described above.   SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 1 SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 2 SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 3 SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 44.  Moving from COTS to CustomThe management organization and style used with the BC2T program is the result of the paradigm shift from the traditional situation where the Government would release an RFP that stated requirement in terms of specifications to today where contracts are specified in terms of required performance, and the Government and contractors cooperatively participate in management through an Integrated Product Team.  The requirement for close cooperation and openness was especially evident in BC2T because of its high visibility on the government side and the potential for the contractor to make additional sales.  As previously discussed, the goal with a COTS procurement is to mature the capabilities of the baseline system into one which provides an acceptable Best Value solution.  For BC2T it was determined that the program would use a three phase spiral development schedule.  To insure confidentiality, this paper will only present a generalized discussion of the factors that must be considered in the management of any COTS maturation process.  For the government, and probably the contractor also, the first objective is to determine exactly what the proposed system can and can not do.  During the contractor’s proposal development it is probable that the only persons who have “used” the system were software engineers/designers whose primary goal was to demonstrate “How well the system did what they knew it could do.”  However, the government’s goal at this stage is to determine “What does the system do?”  The outcome from this initial review is a contractor produced Program Plan that provides descriptions of the effort and provides a schedule for the following: Milestones such as Phase - begin and end, System test - begin and end, and Fielding all defined with a moderate level of generality and probably quantified only as to calendar year quarter,Yardstones such as phase development cycles, interim tests, and equipment delivery dates are defined with high level of detail for the next phase and lesser detail for future phases.  The timing of these items might be exact down to the week of a month.In a Fixed Price procurement, the Government can only comment on the plan and, aside from persuasion, not direct the contractor to modify or change their Plan in any way.  However, it is normally in the best interest of the contractor to listen to the Government’s comments.  If the contractor does not heed the Government’s suggestions, it is probable that the system will not be found to be acceptable during phase and final testing.  Up until the time that the ESEP assignment ended in May 2005, the BC2T IPT had functioned in an exemplary manner. 5.  Summary and Lessons learnedThe BC2T acquisition was a unique experiment that to date, just prior to fielding, has been successful in providing a Best Value solution.  Due to both internal and external factors, the fielding has been delayed but workarounds appear to be leading to correcting the problems.  Working on the Government BC2T IPT was a rewarding and educational experience that has provided me with several new insights and reinforced other lesions that I had forgotten.  Some of the most significant lessons that I believe can be learned from the BC2T program are as follows:  COTS procurements can provide successful solutions in carefully selected situations where the range of required capabilities can be well defined.A COTS procurement should only be contemplated when several offerors can physically demonstrate during the market research phase a 50 to 75 percent solution.The Government can agree to and accepts a single entity as the User Representative with authority to make tradeoff decisions.The contractor clearly indicates a commitment to deliver a Best Value compliant system even if additional resources are necessary.The Government is disciplined in preventing “Requirements Creep.” The proposed COTS system is either well documented or the offeror states a willingness to make system experts available early in the maturation process.JAMES I. MONTGOMERY has been a Department of the Army civilian Operations Research/Systems Analyst for twenty-nine years.  He earned his Ph.D. at the University of Central Florida and is a graduate of the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College.  In addition to his civilian experience he is a retired Army Reserve Signal Corps officer with over twenty-eight years of reserve and active duty experience. LTC Montgomery's military assignments included company commander, division secretary of the general staff, aide-de-camp, and Command/Brigade C-E staff officer.  He currently is a Customer Support Advocate and International Point of Contact for Cooperative Programs in the Program Executive Office for Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation (PEO STRI). Located at http://knownet.hhs.gov/acquisition/performDR/PerformanceSupport/get.htmRequired CapabilityCAPABILITYCOSTSystem Capability CurveBudgetBest Value RegionCAPABILITYCOSTRequired CapabilitySystem Capability CurveBudgetBest Value RegionCAPABILITYCOSTRequired CapabilitySystem Capability CurveBudgetCAPABILITYCOSTRequired CapabilitySystem Capability CurveBudget