INTEROPERABILITY IN CRISIS MANAGEMENT: ORGANIZATIONAL, POLITICAL,TECHNOLOGICAL AND CULTURALRichard SeveringhausJoseph S. McDonnell, PhDDynamic Animation Systems, Inc12015 Lee Jackson Hwy Suite 200Fairfax VA 22033703 503 0500 HYPERLINK "mailto:rseverin@d-a-s.com" rseverin@d-a-s.com,  HYPERLINK "mailto:jmcdonne@d-a-s.com" jmcdonne@d-a-s.comJan TegnerAnders MattsonSaab SystemsEtcKeywords:Crisis management, interoperability, system of systems integrationABSTRACT: In natural disaster crisis response, and in command and control of response agencies and their personnel, management quality, timeliness, efficiency, and effectiveness have been addressed at length in news reporting and in post-event review and analysis efforts by governing agencies. Issues with coordination and cooperation, organizational relationships, and integration of communications channels are cited frequently as sources or causes of shortfalls in crisis response. Most of these issues have in common interoperability, or rather lack of it, in one or more aspects, at multiple levels of human and technological interaction.This paper will address the need for interoperability on multiple levels of organizations, either intra- or international, if organizations are to achieve levels of interoperability sufficient to allow effective crisis management response. As vividly illustrated in recent natural disasters -  hurricane Katrina in the US, earthquakes in Pakistan, tsunamis in Southeast Asia, to cite a few - the interoperability required far exceeds that provided by the technical and semantic interoperability provided by computer based simulations and interface protocols. The focus in this article will be on the kinds and types of interoperability that can be provided via simulation and hardware standards, and the needs and limitations of the simulation community in designing solutions to help reduce the kinds of crisis management response shortfalls that arise in nearly every publicly reported natural disaster.1. Scope of ArticleIt is by no means easy to compress an analysis of what Modeling and Simulation can do to benefit Crisis Management planning, response, and execution, into a 12 page paper.  But that is what this paper attempts to do. The basis for asserting this can be done is this: in principle, most of the details of 1st responder procedures, of C2 concepts and structures, and of policies and processes are captured in one or more languages, and are readily available for study.  What is lacking, however, is an active recognition and acceptance of a fundamental premise that applies to large scale crises. That premise is this: When disasters occur, the people in place to respond have typically never worked together as a team, and the volumes of plans and procedures at hand are rarely of sufficient depth of content to be followed in ‘cookbook’ fashion in a way that leads to resolution of the disaster in an efficient manner. The “killer app” in achieving effective crisis management is cooperation and coordination - among organizations, among systems, among responders, and between affected populations and response forces. We see this time and again, from natural disasters such as hurricanes Katrina and Rita, to human instigated disasters such as toxic gas contamination of a subway in Tokyo.  Most crisis response efforts focus on design and implementation of a hierarchy of known institutions, with the underlying assumption that the people in those institutions will be trained, adequately prepared, and of a mindset to actively and correctly respond to crisis events as they unfold.  The view taken in this paper is different. Our focus is on recognizing the boundaries which exist across four domains – Cultural, Political, Organizational, and Technological.  Notionally, these four domains and there relationships are shown in Figure 1. For the purposes of this article, we assert without proof that there exist sufficient and adequate process, procedure, and plans to cover the last two domains.  We further assert that within those processes, procedures, and plans there is, for the most part, sufficient detail to provide for effective coordination and cooperation among response teams and command and control nodes. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT However, this sufficiency and effectiveness, we assert, does not exist to the degree necessary in either the Cultural or Political domains. Our contention is that interoperability across these two domains is a key missing element in execution of crisis management response plans, for most large scale disasters which exceed the scale of being considered a “local” incident (for discussion purposes, think of ‘local’ as any incident for which response can be handled by a single set of coordinated organizations – as in a fire or flooding incident within a large city that affects only people and property that fall under the jurisdiction of the local city government.  Any incident effects which ‘spilled over’ to affect other political/organizational jurisdictions would be considered ‘regional,’ meaning an incident for which effective response requires coordination and cooperation across organizations that do not normally interact in real time to respond to natural or man-made disasters). Within figure 1, the arrows connecting POLICY and STD (standards) are intended to illustrate necessary and ongoing day-to-day interchange via dialogue of concepts, ideas, and debate, which together constitute the basis, in a very real sense, for how people in organizations will act, and react, when faced with crisis management responsibilities. The real question for interaction between Policy and Standards is one of adherence to established guidelines and requirements. Where Figure 1 applies to intra- or international interfaces among organizations, the “MUST USE” arrow may become problematic, as all the well formed guidelines, procedures, and operating profiles established at the Organizational level cannot overcome resistance to cooperation and coordination at the Cultural and Political levels. The necessary interoperability across Cultural or Political domains is where the application of M&S ties in and becomes a major contender for affording a capability for diverse organizations to practice coordination and cooperation in advance of the need to respond to a real crisis. There is need to carefully define what is meant here. By coordination and cooperation (“C&C”) is meant the practical ability for people representing independent organizations to work with counterparts in other organizations, in the sense of knowing the capabilities, limitations, operating rhythm, communications styles, and decision making styles of players thrown together in a ‘team environment’ to respond to an unfolding crisis. To be effective in crisis response, each responsible responder must understand 1) who he/she is dealing with, 2) how much, and for what, each team member can be relied upon for decisions and actions, and 3) the expected timescales for executing communications and decisions between and among organizations.  This form of interoperability is at a level distinct from that experienced by forces ‘on the ground’ at the site of an incident. It is the form of interoperability which facilitates, or impedes, the flow of information, actions, and activities to response forces actively engaged in the physical processes of disaster response, protection of life and property, and repair and recovery activity. And what makes this form of interoperability so hard to implement is this: in large scale disasters, the people at all levels of crisis response are pushed well beyond their normal experience, as expressed in the quotation that begins this paper.  Rarely have the people involved worked together under conditions of high stress, information uncertainty, and inadequate situation awareness, and it is this unfamiliarity of situation which is compounded by the immediate need to learn how to work with unknown persons in multiple organizations whose only common reference point is a set of “plans” both too voluminous and too complex to read, absorb, and execute in real time.Genesis of a Multi-National CrisisFigure 2 La Palma IslandThe reason for so much emphasis on coordination and cooperation can be simply illustrated by a brief look at a disaster with potential for multinational, multi-continent effects.  Figures 2 and 3 provides two views of the island of La Palma in the Canary Islands chain. It is a volcanic island, and it is active – the Cumbre Vieja volcano.It last erupted in 1972, and in 1949 before that; during the 1949 eruption, the western part of the volcano detached itself and actually began to slide – a large part of the mountain - into the Atlantic ocean before abruptly stopping. The huge landslide, with a volume of 500 cubic kilometres, double the size of Isle of Man, stopped after moving just 4 meters, but there is a risk that future massive eruptions would make the whole western flank of the volcano to fall into the Atlantic, creating a giant tsunami that would devastate much of the Atlantic Rim - including the East coast of USA. Figure 3 Simplified geology of La Palma. Thick gray dashed line shows the location of a rift zone proposed by Carracedo (1994). Taburiente and Cumbre Nueva are calderas. The landward scarps of these calderas may mark the headwalls of giant landslides.  This would be a crisis of huge proportions, one involving multiple governments and a number of organizations across the glove. Steve Ward at University of California Santa Cruz, and Simon Day at the Benfield Hazard Research Centre in Santa Cruz, have modelled Cumbre Vieja and what the tsunami would be like if the whole western part of the volcano were to fall into the water. It would create an initial bulge of water 900 meters high, and waves 100 meters high would devastate the neighbouring islands. The Northwest African coast would be hit by 50 to 100 meter high waves an hour later, and one to four hours after that, Spain and the UK would suffer from 7 to 10 meter high waves. The Florida coastline would be hit by 20 to 25 meter high waves nine hours after the volcano collapsed into the sea.Some geologists believe there is near future risk of a Cumbre Vieja eruption.  The effects of such a disaster are hard to imagine.  But Figure 4 attempts to illustrate the far-reaching and devastating effects were a tsunami generated by part of the mountain crashing into the sea.Even though this scenario is frightening, Reynir Bödvarsson, a seismologist at the University of Uppsala in Sweden, thinks that this specific scenario is  very likely to happen in a near future. But there are several other locations, where it is much more likely that geological disturbances could create a natural disaster of similar magnitude. South of Sumatra, not far from where the earthquake was located that led to the tsunami the 26th of December 2004, is a very unstable area.  On the island of Sicily a volcano could create a tsunami in the Mediterranean, which would have severe impact on the coast line. Other locations, in California, in western South America, in Portugal, and around the islands of Krakatau, Hawaii, and Japan are also likely to suffer from earthquakes or volcano eruptions.Figure 4 Cumbre Vieja generated tsunamiA review of Figure 4 reveals immediately the scale of crisis response and management that would be required in the wake of a Cumbre Vieja generated tsunami. Many coastal nations would suffer greatly, and disaster response would require involvement of multiple national governments and a number of international organizations.  It is an interesting question to ask, if such an eruption occurred in the Canary Islands, would governments along the northeast coast of South America even be notified of Cumbre Vieja eruption during the postulated 6 hours before 15 to 20 meters [dd] waves crashed ashore?  Would crisis response teams even think of the possibility of a tsunami having such effort thousands of miles and continents away from the site of the volcano?Addressing Crisis ResponseThere is a solution to this problem – not a complete one, of course, but one which can offer significant capability for allowing ‘practice’ of the level of C&C necessary for effective crisis management.The solution is asserted to be robust use of modeling and simulation technologies to help bridge and close the gaps between cultures, political entities, and response organizations.The issue of interoperability in the human domain is a huge one. In a paper presented at the Conference on Crisis Management and Information Technology in Helsinki, September 2003, the United States Institute of Peace characterized the issue this way: “Interoperability means not only technical and political compatibility, however, but also the will and the means to communicate, to cooperate, and to collaborate: in short, sharing a common culture of communication (emphasis added). As we well know, when systems are not politically, organizationally, or technically interoperable, information becomes “stove-piped” within a given organization, and systems cannot easily collaborate.”  [2] A graphical representation of what this means is shown in Figure 5 below  The intent is to illustrate that all 4 components - Cultural, Political, Organizational, and Technological – must be present for effective crisis management to be achieved. Not shown in the figure is the web of communications paths that must exist to interconnect nodes in multiple ways. Though not shown, it is the communications linkages that enable effective action, once cultural, political, and organizational issues are addressed. Analysts at the Institute of Peace extracted the following 4 key lessons from their assessments of crisis response across the globe. You will note that none are ‘new’, and all meet a criterion of being of common sense:1. Communications must flow in all directions, all the time. 2. An organization’s mission matters. 3. Information structures need to be flexible (but not ad hoc). 4. “Lessons learned” need to be learned and trained toward. [3]What is striking here is that this paper was published over 2 ½ years ago, and yet if you were able to peer into the organizational structure any crisis management team, you would likely find all of these issues remain unresolved. There is a particularly good article which gives one a good, and reasonably detailed, analysis of the interplay among cultures, politics, organization, and technology in responding to an outbreak of Exotic Newcastle Disease (END), which attacks poultry and other birds, spreads quickly, and is deadly to poultry.   The article, reference [aa] addresses the outbreak of END in the Western United States in 2002-2003, and resulted in mobilization of crisis response forces which remained  SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 5 Political and Cultural Interoperabilityin place for some 11 months, and involved nearly four dozen agencies and thousands of personnel, at a total cost of some $176 million. The remainder of this paper addresses use of M&S technologies in the context of this real world crisis response effort. The END outbreak is orders of magnitude less devastating then the tsunami described above, but the achieved response and the issues raised in post event analysis are highly illustrative of the need for “… planning, implementation and evaluation—before, during and after an event” as quoted in the sidebar at the beginning of this paper. PoliticalIt is with the political sphere that much of the plans and policy are formulated and put in place, to be used by crisis response teams when disasters strike. However, real world limitations in resources rarely allow testing and evaluation of such plans and policies, and it is even rarer to find instances in which crisis team members across all involved organizations actually worked together to practice, to learn the basics of inter-agency communication, and to learn to know their counterparts in other organizations. This lack of interaction can be an important factor delaying ramping up of crisis response teams when the alarm sounds. Making plans and policies actionable requires interaction of people and systems, and interaction requires people who actively use the procedures in a network.“Social networks are generally characterized by regular contacts between a stable set of actors dealing with a recurring issue. The network that was developed to battle END does not meet these qualifications, and indeed might be termed a latent network. There was preplanning for animal health incidents, but not specifically for END. The preplanning was still helpful when the outbreak did occur, because staff at CDFA, OES, and USDA had a sense of what emergency resources existed and who should be contacted. But knowledge about who to contact is not the same as having a functioning network, and the early participants had to effectively construct a real network out of a latent one as the emergency developed (emphasis added). Staff from other government agencies were provided by means of mutual-aid agreements with the agencies in question, most of which had to be reached after the outbreak occurred. Coordinating groups were established to create such agreements and attract recruits from other agencies.” [aa] Beyond the issues of establishing processes….“Processes that rely on cooperation from different organizations rely, to some degree, on trust. Trust in other actors inspires confidence, leads to delegation, and reduces transaction costs. Not surprisingly, trust is a factor that marks successful networks (Milward and Provan, 2000). Trust is based on repeated positive experiences of successful partnerships and met expectations. It takes time to develop, but time is not a luxury that emergency networks have.”  Pp. 24Prior practiceGiven a reasonably active social network, and a degree of trust among people, the next goal to strive for in emergency prepearedness is familiarity with and proficiency in expected roles and responsibilities. This require practice. From the END crisis analysis: Dr. Mark Davidson, who worked as a deputy incident commander in the task force, comments: “There are definite advantages in that ongoing relationship because they work together on a routine basis on the management of day-to-day programs. So when you are thrown in the crisis mode you are in, they already have those established working relationships and don’t have to develop them during the response.”  P.25Davidson’s comment, in some form, can be founding most after action analysis of incidents.  Clearly, “prior practice” can improve the chances of good performance by crisis response teams. Practice requires resources, and so is frequently determined by organizational attitudes towards provision of practice time. Practice within individual organizations typically is achievable to some degree; but it is practice across organizations, that enables  (as discussed above) higher levels of performance. It can be such practice, held in the benign atmosphere of training, that can reveal important shortfalls in inter-organizational communications, resource allocations, and capabilities, and illuminate mismatches in roles, responsibilities, and authority. OrganizationalAgain, from the END analysis,“There were several potential sources of conflict among agencies. A main source of conflict was the different disciplinary and organizational backgrounds among the actors involved. The participants brought to the task force the perspectives of their home agency or training, which often clashed with the perspectives of others. … If the organizational culture of the home agency shaped how individual task force members and the task force acted collectively, respondents also believed that the task force developed its own culture, which aided network effectiveness. The development of a new culture takes time. It is difficult to create and foster a new culture not only because of the influences of the home agency culture, but also because the task force was trying to define its own culture as it was engaging its task.” Pp24A characteristic of major crisis events not well recognized is the impact of the time scale of occurrence on the ability of response forces to be effective.  Faster evolving events can overwhelm even reasonably trained and experienced crisis management teams, because often the time required to notify team members and gather them to incident scenes and Incident  Command Post is very long compared to the timeline of the disaster event. Where this is the case, crisis teams start out late, which too often results in 1st responders, Incident Commanders, and higher level response team being forced to operate in reactive mode for long periods of time, during which the damage caused be the even continues to expand.Figure 6 illustrates this effect qualitatively.  Each “X” within the figure represents a significant event in a crisis event (e.g, for a hurricane event, X’s would represent changes in Force category, overflow of river levees, landslides, loss of important structure (bridges), recognition of toxic gases, etc.).  On each graph is shown the window in time over which response forces tend become overwhelmed as the power and time of unfolding events goes well beyond the experience and expertise of the crisis response team. For more rapidly evolving events, less time is available for response teams to gather and start effective actions. This loss of available reaction time is shown by the horizontal red line below each time-axis. Illustrated are 3 cases, for which the most rapidly generating event causes a loss of over half the available response over what might be hoped or planned for by responsible organizations.   SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 6a Crisis scale vs generation time SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 6b Crisis scale vs generation timeShown also on each graph are nominal levels of complexity at which crisis events transition from local to regional events, and similarly to events of national and international impact.Figure 6c is intended to illustrate the kind of rapidly developing catastrophe for which no crisis response plan is adequate, unless all team members are on hand, experienced, well-informed, and proficient in multi-agency, multilevel cooperation and coordination. Recent examples include the 2004 Sumatran tsunami, and the double crisis of hurricanes Katrina and Rita in the United States. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 6c Crisis scale vs generation timeWhat has evolved as “standard” by numerous governments in the use of an Incident Command System as the organizational framework for crisismanagement. But it is important to recognize what an ICS is not. “The ICS is essentially a series of management principles and a structural design. It offers a standard model for how to manage emergencies, but does not describe specific management procedures and actions. It was therefore up to the task force participants to apply and adapt these principles [to the emergency at hand] to END in California.”Further, to be effective, leadership must recognize, “…as different agencies come to work together, they first have to decide how they will organize to cooperate. The ICS provides a basic model that these agencies can take and use rather than spending time developing a wholly new structure. The agencies still have to decide who fills in the boxes that make up the ICS structure, but the structure itself is established. The ICS also establishes a clear line of command. Public networks tend to be characterized by a search for consensus. In an emergency situation, rapid response is more vital than consensus, and so clear lines of authority must be established. The positions of incident commanders and area commanders in the ICS model make clear who the key decision makers are.”  P. 26At this point the thrust of the arguments in this paper should be clear: effective crisis management requires cooperation, coordination, and practice before crisis occurrence, and even with that, there will be significant human interaction issues to address in real time, including which resources and capabilities to bring on-line.“The involvement of some organizations may not be immediately clear. Why, for example, did an animal disease task force come to rely on officials from the California Department of Forestry and Fire Prevention, and the U.S. Forest Service? Such officials did not have substantive expertise on animal disease. Instead, they offered a wealth of experience managing large-scale emergencies. This included an understanding of how to apply the ICS model and principles, expertise on the logistics involved in organizing thousands of workers, and experience with emergency planning on a daily planning cycle. The task force veterinarians lacked similar practical experience managing emergencies. These actors also had the advantage that their involvement could be requested by actors already involved in the task force. The OES could call on any state organization to lend its support, and the USFS is part of the Department of Agriculture and therefore a sister agency of APHIS.”  [bb] Many of the issues discussed here can be addressed via simulation and gaming based training. Another finding in the END crisis addresses the importance of planning, which is one of the benefits that sim-based training can provide. The finding is disguised as an issue of ‘trust,’ but the meaning is clear.Cultural“There were a number of keys to the success of the task force, all of which involved an ability to adapt to the environment and develop appropriate management responses. Networks are typically based on trust between members, trust that has developed over time. Time is not a resource in much supply in emergency networks. To the extent possible, the task force sought to establish trust, and leaders from the two main agencies involved offered a model of cooperation that was noted by members of the task force. Members of the task force also came to share norms based on the sense of urgency of their mission and the long workdays they faced together. Another success factor was the ability to adapt and apply a command and control structure—the Incident Command System—to an animal disease outbreak.”   Pp.4-5/“A final point on the issue of trust: The development of trust-based relationships prior to an outbreak can have major benefits. Since participants will be largely focused on the task at hand during an emergency, getting to know one another will not be a high priority. But representatives of the organizations likely to form an emergency network can meet beforehand. Dr. Ugstad puts it this way: “Even if you deviate from what you have put together in that plan, you still have gained a lot by going through that planning process, just by knowing who or what agency you need to be in touch with. You can spend an awful lot of time just trying to find out where do you go to get the answers to this. If you do an adequate amount of planning, you can save a lot of time spinning your wheels trying to find out who to talk to.” [cc]Technological“The EMRS was developed by APHIS employees and outside contractors, and had been used first in a test exercise in Florida in 2000. The software was still in development when it was used in 2001 during the outbreak of avian influenza in Virginia. Some members of the task force did not think it was ready for the END outbreak but felt they had little alternative but to use it. A chief advantage of the EMRS was that it was flexible enough to be adapted to different needs, and the task force could use experts from the Virginia outbreak to tailor it. Consistent with other aspects of the END response, the software continued to be developed while the outbreak was occurring. For example, during the outbreak, a tool to centrally track financial costs was added. In addition, an administrative component was added to track equipment, vehicles, personnel, contacts, training, and assignments. Finally, a task management component allowed the inclusion of information related to meetings and tasks.” p.28  SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 7 Notional Component Interoperability Relationships - Crisis ResponseImplementation IssuesFrom all of the above, it should be clear that 3 of the key elements in crisis response are 1) avoiding conditions of overload within the crisis response team, 2) providing as much a priori ‘practice’ as possible  for team members, especially for those having a leadership and coordination role, and 3) getting the communications “right” among diverse response organizations, some having quite diverse cultures, and in some cases using different languages, Put simply this paper argues that all 3 elements of crisis response can be markedly improved through the application of modeling and simulation tools, processes, and practices. LanguageSummaryThere were a number of keys to the success of the task force, all of which involved an ability to adapt to the environment and develop appropriate management responses. Networks are typically based on trust between members, trust that has developed over time. Time is not a resource in much supply in emergency networks. To the extent possible, the task force sought to establish trust, and leaders from the two main agencies involved offered a model of cooperation that was noted by members of the task force. Members of the task force also came to share norms based on the sense of urgency of their mission and the long workdays they faced together. Another success factor was the ability to adapt and apply a command and control structure—the Incident Command System—to an animal disease outbreak. [pp 4-5]RecommendationsIt is instructive to use an example to illustrate the benefits of applying M&S to make response forces more prepared for effective response to a crisis.  From the incident we have been using as an example, 4 top level recommendations were developed:1. Preplan—but expect to plan some more once the emergency occurs.2. Identify the resources needed to deal with the emergency and match them with the competencies of organizations.3. Create trust where you can; find alternatives where you can’t. 4. Take advantage of technology innovation to dramatically improve emergency network coordination and efficacy.5. Establish, formalize, and communicate basic procedures that familiarize workers with their tasks. Recommended ReadingIf there is just one article you have time for to gain a perspective on the challenges face in crisis response management, the following article is highly recommended: “Leveraging Collaborative Networks in Infrequent Emergency Situations,” by Donald P. Moynihan, IBM Center for The Business of Government, June 2005. References[1] In SIGNAL, AFCEA’s International Journal, Virtual Exposition Crosses International Borders. By Sharon Berry, December 2001.[2] Interoperabilty in Crisis Management: Creating a Common Communication Culture,  Richard H Solomon, President, United States Institute for Peace, Sheryl J Brown, Director, Virtual Diplomacy Initiative, United States Institute for Peace, Conference on Crisis Management and Information Technology, Helsinki, Finland, 12 September 2003, p. 6. Available online  at  HYPERLINK "http://www.usip.org" www.usip.org , released online August 2005 ( HYPERLINK "http://www.usip.org/virtualdiplomacy/publications/reports/17.html" www.usip.org/virtualdiplomacy/publications/reports/17.html )  HYPERLINK "http://www.keele.ac.uk/depts/por/disaster.htm#em" http://www.keele.ac.uk/depts/por/disaster.htm#em Disaster and Emergency Management on the Internet, from Staffordshire Raynet, the Radio Amateur’s Emergency Network in Staffordshire. HYPERLINK "http://www.gwu.edu/~guides/sciences/crisis.html" http://www.gwu.edu/~guides/sciences/crisis.html  Crisis, Disaster, and Risk Management, a guide to Web information resources for researchers working on topics in crisis and emergency management.  Gelman Library, The George Washington University.[aa]   Donald P. Moynihan, Leveraging Collaborative Networks in Infrequent Emergency Situations , IBM Center for The Business of Government, June 2005,  p. 16.[bb] Ibid, p. 17.[cc] Ibid. p. 25 HYPERLINK "http://www.gwu.edu/~guides/sciences/crisis.html" http://www.gwu.edu/~guides/sciences/crisis.html  Crisis, Disaster, and Risk Management, a guide to Web information resources for researchers working on topics in crisis and emergency management.  Gelman Library, The George Washington University.[dd]  Steven N Ward & Simon Day: “Cumbre Vieja Volcano – Potential collapse and tsunami at La Palma, Canary Islands”  American Geophysical Union, pp. 4, June 2001.Author BiographiesRICHARD J. SEVERINGHAUS is a consultant and analyst with Dynamic Animation Systems, Inc. He has extensive experience  in operating and managing stand alone and networked virtual simulators, and experience in crisis management response at local, regional, and national levels. Within the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO), he serves as Chairman of the Executive Committee, and is a member of the Executive Committee of SimSummit. ANDERS MATTSONJAN TEGNERJOSEPH S. McDONNELL, PhD is a senior computer scientist and program manager with Dynamic Animation Systems, Inc.“…preparedness for crisis means being ready to deal with incidents outside of what is normal. It comprises planning, implementation and evaluation—before, during and after an event.”Per-Åke Nilsson, technical adviser for command and control systems, SWEDET, National Board of Health and Welfare, Sweden [1]In the Field reportingTechnologicalOrganizationalRegional C&C feedbackPoliticalCultureResponse & recovery directionNat’l LeadersNat’l LeadersNat’l LeadersC&C DirectionInteragency Coordinationn LdrshpB LdrshpA LdrshpAgency BAgency AAgency nResponse ForcesPOLICYSTDTECHNOLOGICALPROFILEPROFILEPROFILEORGANIZATIONALPOLITICALCULTURALPROFILEFigure 1.Notional Relationships - Diagram for Crisis Response InteroperabilityMUST USELeadership LIAISON - promotes standardCR practice; establish willingness to coordinateAgreements of open pathways for inter-organizational cooperation & coordination Component ProfilesOverarchingGuidelinesMatrix of orgs & systemsAgreed upon standards for how to work with other organizations – simulation domainPOLICYSTDIMPLEMENTATIONSPROFILEPROFILEPROFILEMULTI-AGENCY AGREEMENTSM&S STANDARDSCONCEPTUAL MODELSPROFILEMUST USEAgreed upon models & concepts for how to work with other organizations – human domainComponent standardsPrimary StandardsMatrix of M&S systemsaRegion in which response leadership and 1st responders are beyond normal experienceinternationalnationalregionallocalXXXXXXXCrisis complexityTime0.6aRapidly unfolding crisis – response capability exceeded more quicklyinternationalnationalregionallocalXXXXXXXCrisis complexityTime0.45aSudden, large scale crisis – response capability quickly overwhelmedinternationalnationalregionallocalXXXXXXXCrisis complexityTime