Effects Based Assessment of Crisis Response Operations -GAMMA “Global Aggregated Model for Military Assessment”Dr. Uwe DompkeStephan LeitnerNATO C3 Agency.PO Box 1742597 AK The HagueThe Netherlands+31-70-374-3636, +31-70-374-3642 HYPERLINK "mailto:uwe.dompke@nc3a.nato.int" uwe.dompke@nc3a.nato.int, stephan.leitner@nc3a.nato.int Daniel D. Eustace29 Queensgrove RoadToronto, Canada M1N 3A9+1-416-694-2969Eustace@sympatico.caKeywords:NATO, Effects Based Approach to Operations (EBAO), Effects Based Operations (EBO), Crisis Response Operations, Operational Analysis, Wargaming, Asymmetric Operations, Diplomatic, Informational, Military, Economics (DIME), Political, Military, Economics, Social, Infrastructure, Information (PMESII), Component Based Architecture, Intelligent Agents, Multi Criteria Decision Making, Decision Support ToolsABSTRACT: GAMMA is a highly aggregated simulation and assessment model which is designed to evaluate military courses of action (COA) at the operational level in high and low intensity conflict scenarios and thus supports COA selection as a decision aid. GAMMA includes strong interdependencies of military and non-military issues, multinational (including Non-NATO) operations, asymmetric warfighting, multi-faction conflicts, tasks other than (traditional) military tasks, and severe political constraints on military (or non-military) operations. GAMMA uses PEMC (Political, Economic, Military, Civil – also known as DIME (Diplomatic, Informational, Military, Economics)) action-reaction modelling and simulation. The aggregated or detailed state in a given scenario is assessed using PMESII (Political, Military, Economic, Social, Information, Infrastructure) effects.The concept of GAMMA is based on an open architecture, which describes all interacting objects such as military units, assets, geographic objects etc. in very general terms.  New types of entities, for example new military unit types of all services or non-military elements such as refugees, civilian population, or civilian organisations (such as The Red Cross), infrastructure elements such as power plants or cities etc. can be defined and instantiated easily without requiring program changes. GAMMA includes an agent-based module, which allows to model agents, entities or organizations that create incidents (positive and negative). The impact of these incidents and of the planned actions on a given situation is assessed by a multi-criteria decision support tool called ZETA, which is integrated into GAMMA. This tool gives feedback on the PMESII factors over time and the degree of achievement of the Operational Endstate.1. IntroductionThe operational environment NATO is operating in changed very much from it’s beginning in cold war times to an era of transformation we are now in.  The old enemy of the cold war is gone but the alliance must now protect their member states against new threats from international terrorism, hostile dictatorial regimes and rogue states. Conflict prevention and crisis management play a major role to limit the outbreak of violence and NATO must remain to be prepared to operate in a hostile environment across the full range of Article 5 and Non-Article 5 operations. The NATO Crisis Response System (NCRS) is built to enable NATO to react in this environment in a timely, co-ordinated and discriminate manner. A major point therein is the political control by the Atlantic Council over the crisis response measures, which can span diplomatic or political, information or civil, military and economic measures. The military is now more than ever part of an overarching approach to solving real world problems. It has now not only to combine the services in a joint perspective and to integrate other nations in a multi-national coalition but must coordinate with other national and multinational agencies and organizations. These could be other state-related agencies (like the foreign service) or other governmental (e.g. UN) or non-governmental (e.g. Red Cross) national or international organizations. In either case the military – civilian interaction has to be enhanced on all levels of operation (strategic, operational, tactical). To better deal with these challenges the concept of Effects Based Operations (EBO) or in NATO terminology Effects Based Approach to Operations (EBAO) is under development. EBAO is based on a holistic understanding of the operational environment looking at both physical and behavioural aspects of a  system (ie conflict state) to be changed taking all instruments of power of the PEMC spectrum into account (see figure 1). The conflict state is described by its associated PMESII (Political, Military, Economic, Social, Information, Infrastructure) elements in a system of systems approach. Elements with their links and relationships represent the system. The effects based approach comes into play in looking at the effects (required changes in the system state) that have to be achieved to reach the desired endstate. In order to achieve effects, actions throughout the PEMC spectrum have to be carried out using all available and capable resources. Figure 2 shows a view of the processes in EBAO (see [1]). It starts with the assessment of the system state in Effects Based Planning (EBP), which leads to situation awareness and understanding. In the planning phase the desired endstate is defined and the effects to be achieved, including their sequencing, to reach the endstate is assessed. The next step is to match actions and resources to gain the desired effects. EBP includes the synchronization of all actions and the development of an Effects Based Plan (EB Plan). Already during this process Operational Analysis (Ops Analysis or OA) with the use of respective tools helps to generate alternatives and to assess different courses of action. The chosen EB Plan is wargamed and validated. This plan then forms the basis for operational execution (Effects Based Execution or EBE). Effects Based Assessment tries to capture all relevant data to assess the status of the plan achievements during and following execution. This is done using the measures defined during the planning phase: measures of performance (MOP – action related) and measures of effectiveness (MOE – effects related). Operational analysis can support this process with various tools and a forecast of the situation based on the findings.Multinational Experiment 4 (MNE 4) was held in February/March 2006 to test the EBAO concept and to experiment with the use of supporting tools. This experiment and previous experience demonstrated that visualization, collaboration and assessment are the three main areas for tool support in EBAO (see also [4]). In MNE 4 the NATO planning tool EB TOPFAS (Tools for Operational Planning Force Activation and Simulation) was successfully used as the collaborative planning tool. It contains capability for the visualization of the plan (e.g. graphical display of effects, actions, resources and their synchronization). For the assessment of plans on the operational level fast running, highly aggregated models are required to give answers in due time within reasonable manpower restrictions. Because of the diversity of factors to be considered (political, military, economic, and so on) the tool must be transparent and self-explanatory for acceptance issues. The NATO Consultation Command and Control Agency (NC3A) has developed the tool GAMMA (Global Aggregated Model for Military Assessment) with its associated module ZETA (Effects Based Tool for Assessment) to address these requirements. GAMMA was successfully used during MNE 4 and has an interface to EB TOPFAS. In section 2 of this paper the development and use of GAMMA is described followed by section 3 describing the architecture of GAMMA. The GAMMA incidents model with its intelligent agents is the main component for the modelling of red (opposing) and green (neutral) forces behaviour and described in section 4. The effects based assessment in GAMMA is done in the ZETA module, which is described in detail in section 5. Section 6 summarizes the paper and gives an outlook regarding planned applications and extensions of GAMMA.2. Development and Use of GAMMAThe development of GAMMA started in 1999 based on an identified requirement for Course of Action (COA) assessment in the Operational Planning Process (OPP); this requirement was not being addressed by any existing system at the time. The first prototype included besides of a (geo-) graphical user interface land/air components for force-on-force warfare. The first prototype of GAMMA was used as a proof of concept in supporting Operational Planning Courses (OPC) and to support the JOPG (Joint Operational Planning Group) in exercises (e.g. Allied Action).In 2000 the concept for a first module for asymmetric operations was developed. This concept was implemented in a proof of concept prototype and discussed with other military users and scientists from NATO, various nations (e.g. German Armed Forces College) and during conferences (e.g. Computer Generated Forces Conference now BRIMS - Behaviour Representation in Military Simulations Conference). In 2001, the redesign and implementation of GAMMA as a component-based system began following software engineering best practice (see [2]). The use of the prototype during OPCs began in 2003 with the land and air symmetric modules (GAMMA 2.0). Users of GAMMA were the members of the OA team at the OPC coming from NC3A, NATO HQs and nations. In 2004 the incidents model was implemented (GAMMA 2.1).In 2004, the development of an effects based assessment tool (code name ZETA (Zoran Effects Based Tools for Assessment)) began. The initial concept was developed during an OPC by Eustace and Leitner with input from operational planners from various HQs, Special Forces subject matter experts (SMEs), information operations (InfoOps) and psychological operations (PsyOps) SMEs and OA analysts. These ideas were further developed and implemented in a stand-alone prototype (first as an Excel spreadsheet and then with more functionality in Visual Basic). This prototype was used during OPCs for the assessment of COAs in an asymmetric environment. Following proof of concept in the standalone version, the functionality of ZETA was implemented in GAMMA and linked with the incidents model (GAMMA 2.2). The component-based architecture of GAMMA has not only proven to be an enabler for seamless integration of the new component but also shortened the development time and effort by reuse.GAMMA/ZETA was used in MNE 4 by the NRF (NATO Response Force) and the CTF (Combined Task Force US JFCOM (Joint Forces Command) lead) as the assessment tool for operational, effects based plans.GAMMA is fully configurable regarding the modules used (land, air, incidents, and effects based assessment). It has been used with different scenarios (Zoran Sea Crisis, Atlantis exercise scenario, Afghanistan (MNE 4), German Armed Forces College exercise scenarios located in Spain and Northern Africa). GAMMA supports standard NATO data models with its XML interface. A prototype interface between GAMMA and the NATO collaborative planning tool EB-TOPFAS is built.3. Architecture of GAMMAGAMMA is an object-oriented component-based system using Microsoft Common Object Model (COM+). It is based on an event driven simulation model, which can be run in an interactive (man in the loop) or a closed mode.Figure 3 shows the GAMMA Object Architecture. Gamma has its own object management component.The independent components operate together to form the GAMMA model. They are implemented as COM Dynamic Link Libraries (DLL). This way it is possible to configure GAMMA without recompiling of the source code. For example, it is possible to operate the GAMMA model with either a deterministic or stochastic combat resolution model simply by reconfiguring the system touse a different component delivered as a DLL. Figure 4 shows the components in GAMMA.The Geo-Graphical User Interface (Geo-GUI) is a Commercial Of The Shelf (COTS) component, which is used by all other components in GAMMA. The Admin component includes the simulation manager and all system utilities.The Events component includes an event handling mechanism to synchronize the different simulation components.The Object Repository realizes the object management during runtime.The Data Provider with its XML interface allows GAMMA to collaborate with other simulation environments, planning systems like TOPFAS or Command and Control Information Systems (CCIS).The Orders system allows using GAMMA in a closed mode by defining conditional orders for the objects. It consists of an order generator with a graphical user interface and an order interpreter.The Statistics component allows the user defined tabular and graphical representation of simulation results. It can also export data to Microsoft Excel.The Land and Air component are both deterministic highly aggregated force-on-force simulations.The Land Extended component was development for Defence Planning and is based on a heterogeneous Lanchester model. It has its own intelligence model and uses the Move component.The Incidents model is based on intelligent agents and simulates the generation of incidents. It is described in more detail in section 4.The ZETA component is an effects based assessment tool. It is described in more detail in section 5.4. GAMMA Incidents ModelAs described above Crisis Response Operations in multi-sided low intensity conflicts are of major concern in current operational planning and execution of missions. An independently acting agent model is integrated into GAMMA in order to provide support for such scenarios.Agents are used in GAMMA to represent paramilitary or terrorist groups (insurgents), groups of civilians such as local populations, NGOs and IOs. Each agent is described by its general character, its intentions and current state, which includes agitation level, perception of the environment and memory (see figure 5). The general character includes a level of violence acceptance and readiness to risk. Agent intentions can be measured by its interest in the specific PMESII factors (e.g. political or military interest). Based on the environment and the characteristics of the agents, the incidents model creates incidents. Incidents are scenario specific and can be defined by the user. Examples are:DemonstrationPublic riotOccupation of media or embassyRobberyDrugs traffickingDestruction of private propertyDestruction of military infrastructureSniper attackBomb attackSuicide BombingEach of these incidents has a target object, which can be:CitiesCivil personsBuildingsIndustrial plantsMilitary elementsEtc…With each potential incident a pre-determined violence and agitation level must be met by an agent in order to provoke a specific incident. The violence level of an agent may change over time. Triggers for changes could be special events such as collateral damage or other actions such as information operations or psychological operations. The agitation level describes the ability of an agent to provoke incidents. It will be lower following an incident and the agent will need time to refresh his ability.Risk assessment is conducted by the agent and depends on the current situation at the target object in relation to an incident (eg. Enemy patrols, protection levels of critical infrastructure, etc).The decision by the agent which incident is created in a specific situation depends also on his interests. GAMMA provides two different methods: 1. The importance for different PMESII factors (ie potential targets) will be specified for each incident and will be taken into account when looking at the interest of the agent, 2. The ZETA model (see section 5) is used to find a suitable incident, which optimizes the impact by the agent on the current situation. The incident model provides a statistical output indicating which type of incidents occurs over time in specific locations (see figure 6). This output can be used for manual analysis by the OA expert or be used as input to the ZETA model.Figure 6:  Number and type of incidents over time5. Effects Based Assessment in GAMMA (ZETA)ZETA is a generic time-step based dynamic simulation designed to explore and display interdependencies and influences of factors within a system. The system may be defined as a theatre of operations, or may be scaled to higher or lower levels of definition. The model was developed in order to provide operational analysis decision support to the joint operational level campaign planning process in the context of asymmetric conflict occurring most likely within a Phase IV stability operation utilizing effects based approach to operations (EBAO) theory. The tool may be utilized as a stand-alone computer simulation in order to provide independent operational analysis advice to the planning group; as a supporting tool to a manual war game or as a “what-if?” tool to explore changes to any factor that may influence the system and the resulting achievement of the desired endstate.ZETA is highly dependent on the availability of data in order to model a given scenario. It has been designed to interface with other tools supporting the effects based planning process. In particular, ZETA is designed to derive certain data elements from the Effects Based Tool for Operational Planning and Force Activation System (EB TOPFAS), which, in turn, interfaces with the Transport Feasibility Estimator (TFE) and Operational Net Assessment (ONA). It is designed to be used by an experienced Operational Analyst trained in the use of the tool.5.1 General Description and PurposeFigure 7 shows the general layout of ZETA. The tool consists primarily of two symmetric tables each representing an embedded sub-model: the system or PMESII model, (hereafter referred to as the PMESII) and the effects based plan model (hereafter referred to as the effects-action-resources dashboard, or simply “Dashboard”). The criterions contained within these two tables are linkable and dependent in a variety of ways. Two other sub-models feed into the main tables: the Blue resource sub-model assigns Blue resources to the Dashboard based on their availability and capabilities and the OPFOR sub-model assigns OPFOR resources to the PMESII based on their availability and capabilities. There are two different versions of the OPFOR sub-model: a standalone version and a version that integrates results from the GAMMA incidents model previously described.The intent of the PMESII is to depict the system in question (for example Afghanistan) and all of its relevant sub-systems and system elements that the military planners wish to change in some manner. It may or may not contain all of the available system elements contained within a given system in reality, but it will contain all of the system elements selected by the planners for inclusion in their effects based plan. The aggregated value of the PMESII represents the functionality of the system state (or at least those aspects under consideration) over time. This may well represent the projected timeline for the achievement of a military endstate based on the achievement of a new or changed system state.The intent of the Dashboard is to replicate the effects based plan as designed by the planners in EB TOPFAS. It will contain all of the actions and effects contained in the effects based plan.Available Blue resources are assigned to actions as per the effects based plan (either manually or via an optimization routine) and as these actions and associated effects are achieved to higher value levels, the original capacity of OPFOR to generate incidents within the PMESII (i.e.. attacks) is diminished. Blue resources can also be assigned to actions that have a direct impact on elements within the PMESII.At start state all actions and effects in the Dashboard, and all sub-systems and system elements in the PMESII are assigned a series of values including weight, criticality, recovery/degradation and a start state functionality value resulting from a SOSA. These values and how they interact over time will be described in section 5.6 below.Tool functionality includes the ability to link criteria within or between the Dashboard and the PMESII, set conditions for the assignment of Blue resources, assign Blue and OPFOR resources in accordance with planners assumptions or develop optimized allocation strategies and output all results to text or excel files for manipulation and further analysis. A graphing capability (see figure 8) allows the analyst to track the aggregated system value over time and relate it to other values such as the aggregated Dashboard value and the number of OPFOR incidents being generated. In addition, the values of specific actions and effects contained in the Dashboard may be displayed along with the values of any sub-system or system element in the PMESII. As ZETA is a deterministic model, the alteration of any single value in the scenario may be traced through to the aggregated level, thus allowing for a correlation of factors leading to a sensitivity analysis.Given this capability, the operational analyst has a tool that may be used to assist planners in determining a number of critical planning milestones, issues and decision points, for example:Timelines for the achievement of actions, effects, and the overall endstateResource availability and allocation options and issuesSystem element conditions over timeImpact of OPFOR and other actors on the system and the achievement of the endstateSensitivity analysis with respect to any element in the plan or systemSub-models within ZETA will now be described in turn:System or PMESII Sub-Model;Effects Based Plan Sub-Model;Blue Resource Sub-model; andOPFOR Sub-Model.5.2 System or PMESII Sub-ModelIn EBAO theory, an operational level military plan will be designed to achieve an endstate that will frequently be related to a change in some aspects of the system in question (for example, a nation under stress). The change from one system state to another is called an “effect.” It is assumed that it is not possible to change an overall system state without first changing some aspects of its associated sub-systems and system elements. The essence of Effects Based Planning is to determine which sub-systems and system elements need to be changed and in what manner in order to achieve the overall endstate. This is achieved by conducting a System of Systems Analysis or SoSA. A system may be represented by or filtered through its Political, Military, Economic, Social, Infrastructure and Informational (PMESII) sub-systems. These sub-systems in turn incorporate many specific system elements. System elements may be physical or non-physical, for example, actors, organizations, structures, systems or conditions. For example, a political sub-system could consist of political actors such as a President, institutions such as legislative bodies, and conditions or effects such as the ability to hold free elections. It should be noted that a PMESII approach to describing a given system is only one possible approach.The functionality value of a system (0 – 100%) at a given point in time is thus assumed to be the aggregated functionality value of all of its system elements. However, these system elements are not static in nature; they are affected by two dynamic and inter-related processes: actions purposively taken by actors inside or outside the system to alter the functionality or attributes of system elements (either positively or negatively) and the tendency of system elements themselves to change in some manner on their own over time (recovery or degradation). The change in system elements may also be physical or behavioural.The PMESII approach has been selected for ZETA in order to conform to EBAO theory and take advantage of the integration of the Operational Net Assessment Tool (ONA) with EB TOPFAS. This integration allows military planners to select system elements from ONA that they wish to act upon in order to achieve an effect. The system state functionality value is derived from the values of its associated sub-systems (PMESII) and their associated system elements. System element values may be derived in one of three ways:1. As an analyst input (usually assigned at start state to simulate the functionality of a given system element).2. As a calculated value. The value of a system element is the result of an algorithm that incorporates the original value, the effect of incidents generated by OPFOR against that system element and the weight, criticality and recovery or degradation values assigned to that system element. The algorithm calculates the interaction of these factors and displays the new value in the next time step. Assigning a positive recovery or negative degradation value simulates how a system element may change on its own over time.3. As a linked value. The value of one system element may be linked to another system element value or to a value in the Effects Based Plan model (this will be described next). 5.3 Effects Based Plan Sub-ModelThis sub-model is structured in a symmetric fashion to the PMESII sub-model. It contains, in synchronization matrix format, the actions and effects designed by the planners and it may be imported directly from EB TOPFAS. Like the PMESII sub-model, each of the actions and effects are assigned weight, criticality, recovery/degradation and start state functionality values. The aggregation of these values may be considered an overall mission measure of effectiveness (MOE). Individual values related to actions may be considered a measure of performance (MOP), whilst individual values related to effects may be considered measures of effectiveness (MOE). Similar to the PMESII sub-model these action and effect functionality values may be derived as an analyst input, a calculated value or a linked value.If ZETA were to be utilized by an OA cell to perform campaign assessment, it would be possible to input actual real world MOPs and MOEs following mission execution in order to compare plan versus results; this is but one more potential use for the tool.5.4 Blue Resource Sub-ModelOperational level military planners recognize that given the complex nature of a system, more than merely military resources will be required to alter sub-systems and system elements. In the holistic view of EBAO, PEMC resources take actions to alter system elements in order to achieve strategic effects. The holistic application of PEMC resources and actions at the military operational level is a distinct feature of EBAO and is a significant challenge for military planners. It is recognized, for example, that while an operational level military commander may not have the ability to command and control the non-military drivers that are present and operating within the same battlespace, it is critical that he be aware of their intended actions and effects in order to ensure a seamless and coherent operational campaign. PEMC resources may be considered to possess capabilities to achieve actions over time. Capabilities are both absolute and relative. An absolute capability refers to the inherent nature of a resource (for example, the capability of an infantry soldier to dig a trench). A relative capability compares how much more efficiently one type of resource may perform an action as compared to a different type of resource. For example, an individual soldier is capable of digging a trench; so too is an Engineer Brigade. If the action required is to dig 100 trenches within one hour, the Engineer Brigade would be considered more capable. ZETA uses this concept and compares like and unlike resources on the basis of performing the same action over time: the shorter the time required to perform the action, the more capable the resource.The Blue Resource Sub-Model allows the OA to allocate available PEMC resources against actions in the effects based plan. The resources may be allocated manually or via an optimization routine. The availability of resources will be determined in the effects based plan and they may be imported directly from EB TOPFAS (in the GAMMA integrated version of ZETA) or directly from the Transport Feasibility Estimator or TFE (in the standalone version of ZETA). The allocation of resources will be based on the allocation of a specific resource to a specific action for a specified period of time or the tool itself, via the optimization functionality, can allocate the most capable resource available to the most important action (weights and criticality) that remains to be accomplished. The tool may be calibrated to allow for resources to be allocated to more than one action in the same period of time. 5.5 OPFOR Resource Sub-ModelThere are two versions of this sub-model; the standalone version and the GAMMA integrated version. Given the focus here on GAMMA, and the previously described incidents model, this sub-model description will be brief.The intent of this sub-model is to allow the OA to simulate potential actions and behaviour of OPFOR acting within the system. It may be assumed that OPFOR act in complex ways in order to achieve their own operational and strategic endstate. In EBAO theory these courses of action are determined during Red and Green Teaming. The results of this process and input from traditional intelligence preparation of the battlespace processes are utilized to model how OPFOR may act. It is not assumed that OPFOR will always act negatively; they may in fact choose to act positively on specific system elements in order to achieve moral or informational leverage. This sub-model allows the OA, based on the inputs previously described, to determine how individual system elements would be altered based on the type of actions taken. Thus it may be seen that the system functionality values as described in the PMESII sub-model above, are now further altered by direct actions that are being taken by OPFOR. 5.6 Optimisation of Blue and OPFOR BehaviourAs described earlier ZETA can be used as tool to either track the development of an ongoing operation, assess operational plans based on the assumptions of the planning group or to assess a situation by trying to foresee the Blue or OPFOR actions and hence forecast trends.For the latter case, ZETA has built-in optimization routines to either allocate OPFOR incidents to the different targets within the PMESII or allocate the Blue resources to actions as captured by the Effect-Action-Resource-Dashboard in each time step.ZETA describes the system by the effects-action state (achievement of actions and effects over time) and the PMESII state. Both states are calculated in each time step based on the actual states taking the respective Blue and OPFOR resource allocations into account. In the modelling of ZETA and to simplify the optimization process some assumptions are made.A basic assumption is that the OPFOR maximum number of incidents is inversely proportional to the Blue achievement of the effects-action state. This means that the direct impact of Blue actions on OPFOR capabilities is measured by the effects-action state and its impact on the number of possible incidents.This assumption simplifies the optimization process by decoupling Blue and OPFOR planning. ZETA doesn’t look in its current implementation into game theoretic aspects of the optimization of the Blue and OPFOR planning.ZETA in its current version optimizes Blue and OPFOR behaviour for every subsequent time step. It doesn’t look ahead and accept unfavourable periods of time, which lead to a higher outcome in the future.With these assumptions in mind ZETA attempts to optimize the resource allocation of Blue and OPFOR within a given strategy. A strategy in ZETA is a by the user given relative allocation of effort to different criterions (e.g. 30% to effect 1). This allocation can be based on several conditions over time regarding the achievement of effects and actions or the status of the PMESII.The optimization functionality also permits the OA to enter conditional statements that will determine when or how resources will be allocated. For example, allocate Resource 1 to Action 1, only if Action 2 has been achieved to x%.6. Summary and OutlookThe transformation to an Effects Based Approach to Operations requires especially for Crisis Response Operations efficient decision support tools which are very flexible, configurable, timely and may be operated in the OA cell of the headquarters with their limitation in manpower and skills.GAMMA was developed by NC3A to fulfil exactly these requirements. GAMMA is a NATO tool of choice for EBAO assessment in asymmetric operations and has been successfully tested in MNE 4. GAMMA is already used to support individual training in NATO and the nations and will be validated for its operational use in NATO and national headquarters. GAMMA has an interface to the NATO collaborative operational planning tool TOPFAS and GAMMA will be integrated into the DARPA Integrated Battle Command (IBC) Demonstrator.As a prototype, the GAMMA (ZETA) model is under constant scrutiny, revision and development: the following future developments are envisioned.1. PEMC (DIME) ConceptWhile the tool currently models only military resources, the importance of understanding how all PEMC (DIME) resources are acting within a system is critical for the operational military commander. It is intended that this problem be studied further and an initial conceptual model for incorporation of PEMC (DIME) resources in GAMMA (ZETA) will be developed.2. ValidationWhile the model has undergone extensive “face validation” through utilization by OA in courses, exercises and multinational experiments, much needs to be done to validate aspects of the model, in particular, the Blue resource capability concept and the OPFOR modelling concept.3. Planner InputIt has been demonstrated that to the extent the military planners have direct input to the model, the greater weight is placed upon the results. As such, there needs to be a simple and yet effective methodology for the planners to provide input to Dashboard values, PMESII values, resource capability values and OPFOR courses of action. It may be possible to provide some of this capability directly within EB TOPFAS.4. Improved VisualizationIn a complex planning scenario the tool will contain large quantities of data and this data will contain many linkages and conditions. At the same time, the dynamic nature of a system and how both PEMC (DIME) and OPFOR resources are impacting it is equally complex. Therefore, the tool will be enhanced to provide better visualization for the OA and planners thus improving their ability to use the tool.7. References[1]	Dirim Ufuk: ”Emerging Tools to SupportEffects Based Approach to Operations”, Effects Based Approaches to Operations Conference, 20-21 April 2006, Café Royal, London[2]	Uwe Dompke, Stephen Yates, Wolfgang Nonnenmacher: “GAMMA (Global Aggregated Model for Military Assessment) – Design and Functionality”, Conference Proceedings I/ITSEC, Orlando, 2002[3]	Uwe Dompke, Alexander von Baeyer Eds: Long Term Scientific Study on Human Behaviour Representation, Brussels: NATO Research and Technology Organization, 2001[4]	NATO: `The Alliance's Strategic Concept: Approved in the Meeting of the North Atlantic Council in Washington, D.C., on 23 and 24 April 1999,' NATO Press Release NAC-S(99)65, 23 April 1999[5]	John G. Allen: “Decision Support Tools for Effects Based Operations Campaign Planning and Management”, DARPA ICB Project, Alexandria, VA, August 2005[6]	U. Dompke, W. Nonnenmacher: “GAMMA (Global Aggregated Model for Military Assessment) – Design, Intelligent Agents and Conflict Analysis Module”, 11th CGF and Human Behaviour Representation Conference, Orlando, FL, May 2002Author BiographiesDR. UWE DOMPKE is Principal Scientist and Project Leader at the NATO Consultation, Command and Control Agency (NC3A) in The Hague, The Netherlands. He works in the field of Decision Support Tools with Human Behaviour Representation (HBR) and is Co-Chairman of a NATO Study Group on HBR. He has led several NATO Study Groups on this topic. He is member of the Conference Committee of the BRIMS (Behaviour Representation in Military Simulations) Conference. He holds a Master’s degree in Computer Science and a Doctorate in Human Behaviour Representation in Military Simulations from the University of Federal Armed Forces Munich in Germany.DANIEL D EUSTACE is a consultant to the Operations Research Division of the NATO Consultation, Command and Control Agency (NC3A) in The Hague. His current assignment is at the NATO Joint Force Headquarters Brunssum, where is he involved with ISAF campaign design and assessment. Previously, he was a faculty member at the Canadian Forces College (CFC) in Toronto, Canada and served as an infantry officer at battalion and brigade level in both operational and staff roles. He holds a degree in political science from York University and a Master of Arts degree in War Studies from the Royal Military College of Canada.STEPHAN LEITNER is Senior Scientist at the NATO Consultation, Command and Control Agency (NC3A) in The Hague, The Netherlands. He implemented several prototypes of decision support systems including TFE and worked on the multi-criteria decision support tool ZETA. He holds a Master’s degree in Computer Science from the University of Federal Armed Forces Munich in Germany. 	NATO uses the term PEMC (Political, Economic, Military, Civil) in contrary to the term DIME (Diplomatic, Information, Military, Economic), because as alliance of nations NATO is more acting on a political level than having own diplomatic resources. In the following from a NATO perspective the term EBAO is used. The “Zoran Sea Crisis” is a virtual exercise scenario developed by NC3A. EndstateEffects Based Approach to OperationsPEMC ActionsPMESII EffectsConflictPoliticalMilitaryEconomicSocialInformationInfrastructurePoliticalCommunicationsMilitaryEconomicFigure 1: Effects Based Approach to Operations (EBAO)Figure 2: Processes in EBAO (see [1])Figure 4: GAMMA ComponentsLand ExtendedZETAAirMoveLandIncidents…Figure 3: GAMMA Object ArchitectureFigure 5: Independently acting agentsFigure 7: ZETA General LayoutFigure 8: ZETA Graphic OutputGeo-GUIEventsStatisticsAdminOrdersData ProviderObject Repository