The UK Need for Strategic Multi-Agency Emergency Management TrainingTrevor Jackson,Corinne JefferyQinetiQDarenth House, 84 Main RoadSundridge, Nr. SevenoaksKent, TN14 6ER United KingdomTel: +44 (0) 1959 547453 HYPERLINK "mailto:cajeffery@qinetiq.com" cajeffery@qinetiq.comTel: +44 (0) 1959 547404 HYPERLINK "mailto:tjackson@qinetiq.com" tjackson@qinetiq.comMichael Charlton-Weedy CEO EPCEmergency Planning CollegeThe HawkhillsEasingwoldYork YO61 3EG United KingdomTel: +44 (0)1347 821 406Fax: +44 (0)1347 822 575 HYPERLINK "mailto:michael.charlton-weedy@cabinet-office.x.gsi.gov.uk" michael.charlton-weedy@cabinet-office.x.gsi.gov.ukKeywords:Command and Control, Strategic, Multi-agency, Emergency Management, TrainingABSTRACT: Development and maintenance of resilience to emergencies and disasters is essential if responders are to be able to operate effectively and respond to meet the challenges of the multi-agency Integrated Emergency Management (IEM) environment. This paper is based on research conducted in support of strategic multi-agency emergency training, referred to as Gold Standard training,  for the United Kingdom (UK) Emergency Planning College (EPC) at Easingwold in York, which is part of the UK Civil Contingencies Secretariat (CCS) of the Cabinet Office. The research was conducted by QinetiQ on behalf of the EPC and identified, validated and quantified the needs, requirements and potential usage for such a Gold Standard command team training capability. It explains the UK government’s strategy for resilience training, with particular emphasis on joint multi-agency activities. The paper argues that such a proposed Gold Standard capability must take account of:Legislation and doctrine relating to UK resilience, how it has changed and its impact;Coherence of doctrine across agencies;The multi-agency nature of emergencies and disasters;The training audience, its structure, complexity and how the training audience structure is changing due to the impact of legislation and modernisation;Coherence in scheduling collective training and live exercises;The growing need for accredited training;The full range of possible scenarios that are relevant and realistic; The validation of plans, prior to live exercises;A best practice national approach to Gold Command team training.IntroductionThis paper is based on research REF _Ref134590596 \r \h [1] REF _Ref118710767 \r \h [2] conducted to support the procurement of a strategic, multi-agency collective training capability for the Joint and Battlefield Trainers, Simulations & Synthetic Environments (JBTSE) Integrated Project Team (IPT) of the Defence Procurement Agency (DPA) and the Emergency Planning College (EPC) Easingwold of the United Kingdom (UK). The purpose of the capability is to enhance UK resilience by providing the multi-agency civil command team training necessary for the effective management of emergencies and disasters  REF _Ref118710565 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [1].Previous work  REF _Ref119401726 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [2] conducted by QinetiQ for JBTSE IPT and the EPC, provided the first element of Project Gold Standard, which was a Scoping Study  REF _Ref119401726 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [2] and aimed at validating and quantifying the needs, requirements and potential usage for such a Gold Standard command team training capability.Training context OverviewDevelopment and maintenance of UK resilience to emergencies and disasters is essential if UK responders are to be able to operate effectively and respond to meet the challenges of the future strategic Integrated Emergency Management (IEM) environment. Project Gold Standard will provide a critical element of UK resilience, namely an environment in which strategic emergency management staff can be trained and exercised regularly in the processes and application of command, control and co-ordination that are critical to successful management and resolution of any emergency.If Gold Standard is to support the required training effectively, then its requirements must reflect the overall complexity of the operating environment, now and in the future, and be coherent with an overarching nation-wide training policy. REF _Ref133751808 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 21 illustrates the complexity of the overall context within which Gold Standard must be developed and the ways in which different elements will contribute to or influence the development of the Gold Standard capability. The subsequent paragraphs examine the elements of this context in greater detail, describing the specific ways in which they have influenced the Gold Standard requirements. Figure  STYLEREF 1 \s 2 SEQ Figure \* ARABIC \s 1 1 The context within which Gold Standard is being developedGeneral context As a result of the fuel crisis and severe flooding events of 2000, the terrorist attacks of September 11th 2001, the Madrid bombings, and more recently the 7th and 21st of July 2005 attacks in London, the profile and importance of UK resilience has never been higher. This profile has been intensified by media interest and subsequently has led to greater public awareness and scrutiny of the handling of emergencies. This has resulted in a re-evaluation of the UK’s level of resilience to such events and highlighted the need for collective training. This need was emphasised by the inquiries into the incidents at Clapham, Hillsborough and Kings Cross in the 1980s, and their criticism of joint operations and co-ordination.In 2003/04, a Regional Capability Mapping Exercise led by the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister (ODPM) confirmed the need for strategic multi-agency training. Leading on from this, early in 2006, the UK National Capabilities Survey (NCS) was launched. Seen as a crucial part of an ongoing programme to make the UK more resilient to disruptive events, it will provide an up to date assessment of national resilience capabilities, enabling the identification of priorities for future investment, training and policy development, and is expected to confirm the need for strategic multi-agency emergency management training. The NCS is broader and more comprehensive in its scope than the Regional Capability Mapping Exercise and will be repeated every two years. The NCS has been developed by the Civil Contingencies Secretariat (CCS) and the Regional Resilience Team (RRT) in the ODPM, in collaboration with Lead Government Departments and the Cabinet Office's Social Research Unit  REF _Ref127784943 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [5].Coherent approachA coherent approach to planning, training and exercising is needed as it has a direct effect upon the level of capability and resilience. For agencies to work effectively together, there is a need for “Co-ordination of planning, training and exercising for an effective combined response to any type of emergency.” REF _Ref119229747 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [6] More specifically, there is a need to develop a common understanding of doctrine, terminology, responsibilities, capabilities, limitations and procedures used by agencies involved in emergency management. This is necessary to underpin effective overall policy development and decision-making, including that associated with training.Collective understandingPrevious research REF _Ref118710767 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [2] has established that a shortfall exists in the level of understanding between agencies of each other’s operational needs. Equally, agencies need to be aware that they need to make their own needs and objectives understood. “All those who may be involved in responding to an emergency should be aware of the management framework within which the response is made REF _Ref119229747 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [6]”. This includes an understanding of:Other agencies, responsibilities;How senior level discussions will be coordinated; Liaising with strategic managers from other agencies; What the integrated media policy will be.Agencies are aware of how these needs are met within their own organisations and how they can be achieved, in theory, within a multi-agency environment. However, there is a need to develop a collective understanding of the responsibilities, capabilities, limitations and terminology used by all agencies involved in emergency management to enable and facilitate effective policy and decision-making. Legislation and doctrine The Deputy Prime Minister, announced a review of emergency planning in England and Wales in 2000 following the fuel crisis and severe flooding events. The outcome of this review was a decision that the existing legislation no longer provided an adequate framework for emergency planning and that new legislation was required. Consequently, a Civil Contingencies Bill (CCB)  REF _Ref119229517 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [6] was drafted and became law as the Civil Contingencies Act (CCA) 2004  REF _Ref118685703 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [8]. The Act’s key objectives are to:Create a modern framework for co-ordinating contingency planning and response at the local level, codifying and building on existing arrangements;Enhance co-operation and understanding in support of a regional level capability;Modernise the legislation under which the Government can respond to extreme emergency situations to turn it into a usable tool fit for the twenty-first century.A particular set of risks is excluded from consideration under the CCA. These risks are covered by the Control of Major Accident Hazards (COMAH) Regulations 1999, the Pipelines Safety Regulations 1996 and the Radiation (Emergency Preparedness and Public Information) Regulations 2001 (REPPIR). These statutory planning arrangements are for major industrial hazard sites, nuclear power stations (including MoD nuclear installations subject to Defence Major Accident Control Regulations) and oil and gas pipeline facilities. Relevant responders and organisations have a statutory responsibility under the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) legislation to prepare for events of a COMAH, REPPIR or pipeline nature  REF _Ref119383845 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [9]. These responsibilities make clear and focus the need that organisations have to prepare for and respond to i.e. known risks, emergencies and disasters.  Complementary to this is the guidance from the CCS to Lead Government Departments (LGD), which recommends that all government departments must maintain a state of readiness  REF _Ref119388179 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [9]  REF _Ref130052590 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [10].The CCA 2004, places renewed emphasis on the need for Integrated Emergency Management (IEM) and collective training. IEM comprises of six related processes and activities:Anticipate: knowing what might happen is important in being able to frame and scale an appropriate response. Assess: appreciating the spread, severity and consequences of anticipated hazards and threats needs to be set within a risk assessment framework. Prevent: it is intrinsically preferable to prevent an emergency than have to deal with its consequences. Prepare: not all hazards and threats are foreseen and not all of those that are can be prevented. It is therefore critical to have structures, processes and resources in place to deal with emergencies and mitigate their effects. Respond: emergencies are almost always responded to at the operational level by one or more of the ‘blue light’ emergency services. Recover: although the involvement of the emergency services may be relatively limited in time, the process of recovering from an emergency can take months or years and there are effects, perhaps most notably those of personal loss and trauma that extend over decades. The Gold Standard capability, as a minimum, is required to be able to cover response and recovery activities. Multi-agency The collective training need for the strategic management of emergencies is founded on the fact that civil contingency incidents are multi-agency by definition, as “there is no single agency within the United Kingdom that has all the skills and resources which may be needed”  REF _Ref119229747 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [6]. Consequently, a combined and co-ordinated response, uniting the expertise and resources of all agencies involved, is required. The level of capability or resilience provided is directly affected by the ability of agencies to work effectively together. “Co-ordination of planning, training and exercising for an effective combined response to any type of emergency is fundamental to the achievement of a successful outcome for all who may be involved in responding to a major emergency”  REF _Ref119229747 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [6]. In addition, an agency’s area of responsibility has a direct relationship on other agencies, as illustrated by:The Police generally co-ordinate all activities of those responding to an incident;Mass decontamination by the Fire Service is done on behalf of the Ambulance Service;The Coroner’s office liaises with Local Authorities to establish temporary mortuaries.These examples clearly illustrate the need for agencies to be collectively trained in a multi-agency environment. Training audienceThe training audience for Gold Standard is extensive and diverse. It consists of senior personnel from a range of emergency services, government departments, industrial, commercial and voluntary organisations as well as having a number of defined operating levels, these being:Local;Regional;National.The CCA changes the shape of the training audience and divides them into two groups - Category One and Two Responders. Those in Category One have seven specific duties relating to emergency preparedness and response placed on them by the CCA. These duties will have the effect of shifting the emphasis of operations away from response and into prevention and protection.  The structure of the training audience is also changing. For example, the key findings, of a recent Police structure review  REF _Ref119465930 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [11] was that the present structure of 43 Police forces is not “fit for purpose” for future challenges and must change. The review established a clear relationship between the size of a force and its ability to provide protective services (such as dealing with serious organised crime, counter terrorism, critical incident management, major crimes and public order). The solution recommended by Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary (HMIC) was to reconfigure the service, basing it on strategic forces with the necessary critical mass to provide effective neighbourhood policing and protective services  REF _Ref119466066 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [11]. A further example is the findings of a recent independent report  REF _Ref128195528 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [12] into the Fire and Rescue Service. It found that there is no statutory or operational structure to ensure the delivery of a coherent national response. The report stated that this gap must be addressed and recommended that, as a matter of priority, the Government should establish a strategic-level, high capability co-ordination infrastructure to deal with New Dimension work. A further recommendation was that the Fire Service should work in partnership with other emergency services in its creation.In addition, it needs to be noted that there is a training audience outside the scope of the Category 1 and 2 responders defined by the CCA; these organisations being the voluntary and military. The training audience ranges from the emergency services and government departments to industrial, commercial and voluntary organisations. The training audience consists of senior personnel from:  Police Service (currently 43 Forces);Fire Service (currently 58 Brigades); There are presently 28 strategic health authorities in the National Health Service;Maritime and Coastguard Agency has 19 districts; Central Government has about 8 departments that may realistically be required to act as LGD;There are some 150 Local Authorities with Category 1 responder liabilities;Local Authorities total 338;District Council 238;County Council 34;Unitary Council 47;Metropolitan Council 36;London Borough 33;Industrial and Commercial Organisations;Category 2 as defined in CCB 132 and Harbour Authorities;Military;HM Coroner; Environment Agency;Voluntary Organisations.Given the dispersed nature of the training audience and the need to reduce the impact on the individuals of attending courses, flexibility in delivery is required. A training capability that can be deployed, delivered remotely, and/or encompass geographically distributed training would support this. Accredited training With the introduction of the CCA, Government Ministers have the power to monitor the performance of civil protection duties  REF _Ref119383845 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [9]. The Government is not establishing a new inspectorate to monitor and enforce this power: it is expected that this will be done through Category 1 and 2 responder’s mainstream performance monitoring or regulatory regimes  REF _Ref119383845 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [9]. Subsequently, organisations are moving towards and requiring accreditation and assessment of performance. In support of this need, the recent Police structure review  REF _Ref119465930 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [11] states that “people charged with managing or delivering services must be able to evidence the requisite professional competencies required, hold the appropriate accreditation and have completed the necessary training; for example as a Gold Commander  REF _Ref119465930 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [11]”. The Chief Fire Officers Association (CFOA)  supports the assertion made in the National Framework Document 2004/05, that “Fire and Rescue Authorities (FRA) should ensure that staff are trained to professional standards and are familiar with risks”  REF _Ref128195721 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [13]. It has also been established that the National Health Service’s (NHS) long-term objective is to establish standards that can be used to assess performance. The National CBRN (Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear) Centre is looking to strengthen links with the Emergency Planning College and Morton in the Marsh (Fire Service College) for training delivery and accreditation. The Emergency Planning Society wants to move to a process of continuous professional development and assessment. To this end, on 24 June 2005, the EPC and Leeds University Business School announced a partnership that will directly contribute to improving the nation’s resilience to emergencies and disasters through the delivery of high quality training and education. The partnership heralds the move towards a ‘Centre of Excellence’ that will offer a unique range of qualifications from vocational to Master’s degrees in civil protection, risk management, business continuity, emergency planning and related subjects  REF _Ref127614239 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [11] REF _Ref127779773 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [14].Leeds University Business School will now be directly involved in the design, development and delivery of training products tailored to meet the needs of all services, agencies and individuals involved in resilience activities. This will bring the academic quality of a university of national and international standing to bear on the pursuit of higher operational performance standards amongst resilience practitioners nationally  REF _Ref127779773 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [14].Full range of scenariosGiven the changing environment created by new legislation, increased media interest and current threats, potential users have highlighted the need for training to be relevant and realistic  REF _Ref119483569 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [1] REF _Ref118710767 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [2]. This need adds weight to the need for training that covers the breadth of relevant scenarios, tailored for individual regions and authorities, based on their own risk assessments and responses.Any or all of these scenarios could arise in isolation, sequentially, consequentially or simultaneously (e.g. road accident leading to fire, explosion and release of toxic chemicals). They can be induced by nature, accident, technical failure or malice. Examples are given below:Fire and explosion involving:Gas, including Liquid Petroleum Gas (LPG) – landing, storage, processing, transmission, transport;Liquid fuels – landing, storage, refining, transmission, transport, distribution;Military, commercial or home-made explosives;Volatile chemicals – plants, process, storage, transport;Woods and heathlands.Toxic or radioactive chemical release - Includes all circumstances described above, including malicious release.Transport - Includes ships, ferries, passenger liners, trains, airplanes and road vehicles (with associated fires, explosions, toxic releases etc).Weather related - Storms, winds, rain, flooding, snow, cold and heat-wave.Human disease - This includes pandemic influenza, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), food contamination and viruses.Animal disease - Epidemic Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD), avian influenza etc.Disruption of essential supplies and services - Logistic and technical disruption of essential supplies and services oil, gas, electricity, water, telecommunications (including data transmission and control system operation), food, transfer and payment.Environmental impact - Any or all of the above may affect the environment, and correcting such damage is an important component of the recovery phase of operations.Plan validation  Due to the complex nature of emergencies and disasters, an effective plan is key in delivering the need for a co-ordinated and integrated response to such incidents. Often the only opportunity to validate such a plan is during a live exercise. Exercises have three main purposes:Validation of a plan or plans;Training - To develop staff competencies and give them practice in carrying out their roles in the plan; Testing - To test well-established procedures. In a multi-agency exercise, there may be several sets of objectives. There will be a core set, and each organisation may have its own  REF _Ref119383845 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [9]. A cost effective means of reducing any conflict in objectives prior to execution will maximise the use of multi-agency exercises. An enhanced ability to validate such plans prior to undertaking any form of live exercise or event could provide a cost effective way of ensuring the validity and robustness of the plan. How this would fit into the overall cycle of UK resilience can be seen in  REF _Ref119472905 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 22. Figure  STYLEREF 1 \s 2 SEQ Figure \* ARABIC \s 1 2 Gold Standard in the resilience cycleConstraintsIntroduction Any solution that is delivered to meet the requirements must invariably satisfy a range of constraints, such as mandatory health and safety directives. Such constraints can be expressed as additional requirements or, as in this case, the constraints on the Gold Standard capability have been explicitly separated out. They are presented in two distinct sections below:Constraints that apply generically to all equipments are presented in section  REF _Ref119397806 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT 3.2. Constraints that apply specifically to Gold Standard are presented in section  REF _Ref100494164 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT 3.3. General constraintsSafetyGold Standard must be safe to operate and use in accordance with manufacturers’ and industry procedures.LegalIt is a requirement that all equipment and procedures comply with national and ratified international law as well as Host Nation legislation where relevant. UK guidance and regulationsGold Standard must conform to the relevant existing (and planned) UK Directives and Guidance, including:The Lead Government Department and its role – Guidance and Best Practice Civil Contingencies Secretariat Cabinet Office, March 2004;Emergency Preparedness, Guidance on Part 1 of the Civil Contingencies Act 2004, its associated Regulations and non-statutory arrangements;Emergency Response and Recovery, non-statutory guidance supporting the CCA.Gold Standard-specific constraintsAvailability, in the region ofGold Standard will need to support standard exercises of up to 96 hours (4 days) duration, and long exercises of up to 336 hours duration (14 days) with a minimum of 48 hours (2 days) between major training exercises. It is, however, foreseen that the most common exercise duration for local responders will be one day.ManpowerGold Standard must support training with minimal numbers of support staff in order to permit training to be conducted in a cost-effective manner and reduce the burden on the organisations being trained. There is a distinction here between technical support staff (whose numbers should be minimised across the overall exercise lifecycle) and specialist observers, whose numbers may depend on the nature of the specific training event. The objective is to minimise the requirement for ‘lower controllers’ with its customary impact on routine operations.System upgradesIt must be possible to upgrade the Gold Standard system without unduly affecting planned training schedules e.g. avoidance of long periods of site closure while systems are modified.Support / durabilityGold Standard must be supported by all of the information and facilities necessary to operate, support, train with and sustain the capability throughout its service life. This will include:Provision of all training facilities necessary for the training of operators, maintenance and support personnel;Provision of all storage facilities necessary for the operation and support of Gold Standard;The ability to support the capability in whatever environment it is used in terms of manpower, spares, test equipment etc.Modification against future developmentsThe Gold Standard capability shall be able to be effectively modified in order to reflect developments in legislation, doctrine, Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and equipment. In other words, the Gold Standard solution must be designed from the outset to be open, extensible and modular.Wherever possible, appropriately trained nominated users should be able to perform such modifications. Current collective training capability Introduction The previous sections discussed the context within which the collective training need for multi–agency strategic management of emergencies sits. This section considers the current capability associated with the delivery of such training needs and the timeframes and throughput assumptions associated with the deliver of a Gold Standard training capability. The mission of the EPC is to deliver the doctrine and training to support UK resilience. To that end the College will train some 7,000 individuals this year, and support a range of training events and exercises nation-wide  REF _Ref119483569 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [1].  Key to collective training is the development of effective personal relationships and the building of trust. Individuals that may have to work together under the extreme pressures of an emergency or disaster therefore should train together. It is important to differentiate here between 'collective' training of teams and individual training. The latter is an important pre-cursor to collective training but not a substitute. Current capabilityThe majority of individual agencies do train for the strategic management of emergencies. There is, however, a significant gap between individual and collective training in the continuum of the UK’s resilience training. There are potentially up to 150 “Gold” level multi-agency command teams in the UK that could be required to manage emergencies, but they undergo limited collective training and there are no facilities designed or provided for the purpose  REF _Ref119483569 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [1]. In addition, one of the key finding of a recent report into Military Aid to Civil Authorities (MACA) was that, in general, military collective simulation training systems do not provide the ability to support MACA collective training completely  REF _Ref128198884 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [17] and subsequently will not support the civil communities’ collective training need. Frequency of trainingIt was established through questionnaires and interviews undertaken with a cross section of the UK’s stakeholder community that the majority of current training takes place on an annual basis. However, the study  REF _Ref118710767 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [2] identified that, due mainly to new legislation, the number of individuals requiring multi-agency training will increase. In the short term, the increases are based on agencies wanting to retrain to fully understand the implications of the legislation. In the longer term, these increases are based on the need for refresher training and the requirement to meet one of the key objectives of the legislation. “The creation of a modern framework for coordinating contingency planning and response at the local level” REF _Ref118685703 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [8]. The forecast increase in training includes the need to assess and test the capability of strategic multi-agency command teams and to support the move towards accredited training. It is also based on the following UK specific assumptions:There are 14 regions;Gold Command Teams consist of approx 20 individuals;Three gold command teams are trained annually;There are 10 core agencies;One Senior Individual for each of the core agencies requires annual training;There are between 150-160 Local Authorities with a Category One responsibility on the COMAH risk Register;COMAH plans need to be exercised and tested once every 3 years.The training gap CCA  Under the CCA, it is a requirement that plans should include provision for carrying out exercises and for training staff or other persons. This means that relevant planning documents now must contain a statement about the nature of the training and exercising to be provided and its frequency  REF _Ref119383845 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [9]. This goes beyond the majority of current practice.The CCA states that training should extend beyond the scope of those employed by the responding organisation and should include the staff of voluntary organisations, contractors and others, which may be required to support a plan.In terms of training practices and procedures, high-level practical guidance for Strategic Co-ordinating Groups (SCG) is provided by CCS and its guidance  REF _Ref119229747 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [6] REF _Ref119383845 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [9] REF _Ref119481859 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [11]. This practical guidance describes best practice for IEM and its training in general. The guidance provides approaches to exercising, de-briefing, etc. Lack of a coherent framework for training At present, there is a lack of a national framework for collective training and competencies associated with multi-agency strategic emergency management. Subsequently, this leaves doctrine open to interpretation within agencies and regions and has lead to what has been described by the practitioners as an ‘ad-hoc’ approach  REF _Ref118710767 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [2]. A best-practice national approach to Gold Command Team Training would provide a framework for the development of consistency and coherence within emergency management training. The approach could consist of the core competencies with associated performance standards and documented best practice. In turn, this would guide the development of a national framework for emergency management training. Training equipment conceptIntroductionThis section outlines the high level training equipment concept along with the associated functions to meet the training need outlined in Section 2.AssumptionsThe technical concept outlined in this section is based on a number of assumptions:A flexible solution is required based on a composable approach of training tools;Manpower overheads associated with the provision of training are to be kept to a minimum;The architecture of the training capability will be based around Commercial off the Shelf Technologies (COTS).Categories of userUsers fall into three categories: End user; uses the capability. The EPC client base (emergency management practitioners);Owner; procures the capability (EPC);Training staff; responsible for the delivery of training (may not be operators).Other categories of user potentially include staff conducting experimentation and concept development.Operational scenario timeline The view of an operational scenario timeline or training exercise cycle is shown in  REF _Ref119486579 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 51. It is presented here to provide familiarity with the various topics that support the training equipment concept. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure  STYLEREF 1 \s 5 SEQ Figure \* ARABIC \s 1 1- An operational scenario timelineFeatures of the technical conceptThe concept has the following features, each of which is defined in greater detail in the following paragraphs:Flexible;Deployable;Distributable;Scalable;Adaptable.Flexibility will be required due to the diversity of the training audience, tasks, skills and scenarios that are likely to be trained. This will mean that a set of training tools will be required that can be quickly and efficiently composed to deliver the required training. The training capability will need to be deployable in order to provide training to all agencies and at minimum resource cost, which may include providing training at the customers location through reach back to a central facility. This need comes from the current dispersed nature of the training audience. The training audience will not always be co-located. Therefore, the training capability will need to be distributable. This will pose a number of issues particularly in the management of distributed training. For example, if a training event is run distributed there will be a requirement for the training initialization to be co-ordinated across all sites.The training capability will need to be scalable and adaptable to accommodate differing sizes of training audience and different size, depth and breadth of scenarios to cover the full spectrum of tasks and objectives that are required to be trained. Both real and non-real time training capabilities will be required to enable the starting and stopping of training or focus on particular incident/events.Functions in the technical conceptSection 6.3 has outlined the technical concept for the provision of training. This concept will provide the required training capability through a combination of technical functions. The technical functions are illustrated in figure 5-2 and described in more detail below. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure  STYLEREF 1 \s 5 SEQ Figure \* ARABIC \s 1 2 Technical Functions for TrainingThe outer ring of functions is associated with the management of training and would represent the functions involved in the Integrated Training Management System part of the overall technical concept (Figure 5.2). These functions consist of the design, setup and control of the exercise, the ability to provide both a ‘hot’ debrief and an After Action Review (AAR) to the training audience, and the ability to provide a post exercise reporting capability to capture Lessons Identified/Learned. The issues associated with implementing such an iTMS capability over a distributed environment are technically challenging. Setup and scenario management consists of those activities that have to be undertaken by way of preparation for training – namely scenario generation, data collection, and setup.  It includes the definition of the required scope of the training as expressed through the training objectives that should be covered or emphasised during training and the authoring or modification of archived training exercises to provide the required coverage. It is of paramount importance that the scenarios that are generated contain appropriate tasks in order to develop the required competencies in the training audience. The aim would be to automate as much of the setup process as possible in order to reduce manpower overheads.During training, there will be a requirement that system initialisation is co-ordinated across all sites. Additionally, there will be a requirement that initialisation states (such as environmental factors) reflect the requirements of the training audience and are drawn from archived material. The aim would be to automate as much of the process as possible through the requirement being aligned to the modification of existing set-up data.During exercise run-time there is a requirement that support personnel are able to control the exercise. Specifically, there will be a requirement for Exercise Control (EXCON) and System Control (SYSCON). Controllers will be required to track and monitor student progress against training objectives. Furthermore, they may be required to direct the course of the exercise to ensure that learning objectives continue to be supported in light of the action of the training audience. The requirement for Control during exercises or other training events will need to be provided both effectively and efficiently. The dispersed nature of the training audience poses particular challenges for the co-ordination of EXCON activities.Feedback is an essential part of training and the training capability will need to be able to capture information during training in order to provide meaningful and objective feedback at the end of training or exercising in an easy to manipulate format to reduce manpower overheads. This may involve logging capabilities which may require feeds from communications and command systems used by the various agencies. This data can then be used during Hot De-briefs, After Action Reviews and in the Post Exercise Report. There will also be a need to log lessons identified. These should be stored in a central repository for access during the next exercise design phase.Data and data managementThe data required will include environmental data and scenario data. This will be of varying levels of fidelity depending on the level of detail of the scenario and the training audience composition. Data management will also be required to ensure synchronisation of the data across the training audience and timely injection of feeds. This will be particularly important for distributed training audiences. To promote efficiency, data should be re-used as much as possible.Scenario driverThere is a requirement to train across the full spectrum of emergency planning risks and scenarios and these must be represented in the equipment capability. The scenario driver may also provide a means of testing and evaluating plans through the use of validated models.Real/mock command centresThe Command centre and headquarters structures will need to be represented during training. This may mean replicating elements of the command centres either through control or a simulation driver.Control and stimulation of the training audienceThe two forms of control are HICON and LOCON. HICON represent the superior organisation to that which is being trained, with LOCON representing the subordinate elements of the organisation being trained. Typically this control is implemented through the use of people who stimulate the training audience by providing the regular flow of information up and down the chain of command.The training audience will also need to be stimulated with the data feeds from operational systems that they would have in a real life. This may involve using emulations of operational systems in order to provide a realistic look and feel to the data. These feeds include:Downlinks from helicopters and Closed Circuit Television (CCTV);Media links to satellite and terrestrial TV (eg CNN);Intelligence feeds from operational systems and lower commands;Communications systems such as telephone, radio and operational networks;Geographical Information Systems (GIS).Database access to information such as Met office data, medical information, hazardous chemical information etc. will also be required.Non-FunctionalThe non-functional elements of the technical concept include security, reliability, maintainability and availability. Each of these non-functional elements will have an impact on how the training capability will be procured and implemented.Conclusion Introduction The training need for strategic multi-agency emergency management training was established though a process of consultation with a cross-section of the stakeholder community and with a focus on potential customers/users of the target capability. Data was captured through analysis of literature, questionnaires, interviews, attendance at exercises and operations and the uses of focused User Requirements workshops. This analysis highlighted the need for such a capability. In addition, a number of key conclusions were drawn. Coherent approachA coherent approach to planning, training and exercising is needed as it has a direct effect upon the level of capability and resilience. For agencies to work effectively together there is a need for “Co-ordination of planning, training and exercising for an effective combined response to any type of emergency.” REF _Ref119229747 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [6] Common understanding There is a need to develop a common understanding of doctrine, terminology, responsibilities, capabilities, limitations and procedures used by agencies involved in emergency management. This is necessary to underpin effective overall policy development and decision-making, including that associated with training.The training audienceThe training audience is both extensive and diverse. It ranges from the emergency services and government departments to industrial, commercial and voluntary organisations. Subsequently the training capability will need to be deployed, fixed and distributed in order to meet the requirements of the audience.Emergency management plan testing The CCA legislation places agencies under a duty to plan for the response and prevention of emergencies. The result of this will be an increase in the need for training and testing of emergency management plans.Performance measurement, assessment and reportingThere is a need for a coherent assessment regime to support the validation of resilience levels, and as a basis for meeting legal obligations. Therefore, the training capability will need to be based on a coherent set of performance standards covering all aspects of strategic emergency management. To support this, training event data will need to be collected; this data will also need to support debriefing, dissemination of lessons learnt and After Action Reviews (AAR). The establishment of such performance standards is, however, likely to be an evolutionary process, and in any event such standards will have to reflect the diversity of the training audience.Frequency of trainingThe research has identified that the majority of training is conducted on an annual basis. There are some 639 agencies, not including an unidentified number of voluntary, Industrial and Commercial agencies and HM Coroners that make up the training audience. The audience consists of senior personnel from a wide range of agencies involved in emergency management.In the short term, an increase in training is expected, this is based on agencies wanting to retrain to fully understand and meet the implications of new legislation. In the longer term, the increase is based on the need for agencies to conduct refresher training. This is driven by the need to meet one of the key objectives of the CCA, which is the creation of a modern framework for co-ordinating contingency planning and response at the local level.ReferencesProject Gold Standard User, System and Service Requirements Document, DOCPROPERTY "PUBLICATION_NUMBER"QINETIQ/06/00474/1.0 17th March 2006Project Gold Standard Scoping Study, QINETIQ/04/00512 10th June 2004NATO Study Group SAS-013 Project Gold Standard, a Gold Team Command and Staff Team Trainer Capability for the Emergency Planning College Easingwold, Version 2.1 April 2005 HYPERLINK "http://www.ukresilience.info/preparedness/ukgovernment/survey.shtm" \t "_blank" http://www.ukresilience.info/preparedness/ukgovernment/survey.shtmDealing with Disaster, Revised Third Edition, Cabinet Office Civil Contingencies SecretariatDraft Civil Contingencies Bill Consultation Document – June 2003 Civil Contingencies Secretariat, Cabinet OfficeThe Civil Contingencies Act 2004, its associated Regulations and non-statutory arrangementsEmergency Preparedness, Guidance on Part 1 of the Civil Contingencies Act 2004, its associated Regulations and non-statutory arrangementsThe Lead Government Department and its role – Guidance and Best Practice Civil Contingencies Secretariat Cabinet Office, March 2004  HYPERLINK "http://police.homeoffice.gov.uk/police-reform/reform-programme/force-structures/level-two-structures" http://police.homeoffice.gov.uk/police-reform/reform-programme/force-structures/level-two-structures The Future of the Fire Service: reducing risk, saving lives - The Independent Review of the Fire Service, December 2002Office of the Deputy Prime Minister, Our Fire and Rescue Service, (a White Paper) June 2003Cabinet Office, Emergency Planning College and Leeds University Business School Announce Partnership, 24th June 2005Emergency Response and Recovery Non-statutory guidance to complement Emergency PreparednessClosing The Gap, A Review Of The ‘Fitness For Purpose’ Of The Current Structure Of Policing In England and Wales, by HM Inspector Of Constabulary Denis O’Connor CBE, Qpm 16th September 2005Unpublished report: AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to thank JBTSE IPT, Mike Niven and Allan Cox for providing support and encouragement in writing this paper.Author BiographiesTREVOR JACKSON MA is a senior researcher in QinetiQ and has over ten year experience in the development of training simulators. Recently he has been supporting QinetiQ’s Training Team Capability in developing its offerings in emergency management training. He has international experience of researching and developing crisis/emergency management training systems. Currently Trevor provides task leadership for crisis management related projects. This includes work undertaken for the UK’s Emergency Planning College into the training requirements for the procurement of a training capability in support of the strategic, multi agencies, emergency management. He is also a senior researcher for the Joint Collective NEC Training Capability (JCNTC) project, which aims to develop the joint training concept.  CORINNE JEFFREY has held a diversity of professional positions within the UK Ministry of Defence, DERA and now QinetiQ. Her experience spans technical, managerial, and operational domains in the fields of training and simulation. Currently she fulfils the role of Capability Team Leader for development of solutions for executive level training. A common component to her positions has been development and application of advanced interactive simulation systems, including training systems and Synthetic Environment techniques in general. Her recent work has focused on the impact of NEC on collective training and she has been responsible for developing a concept for Networked Enabled Training Capability (Land) and as well as work on the Joint Collective NEC Training Capability (JCNTC) for the UK MoD.MICHAEL CHARLTON-WEEDY CBE, has been the CEO of EPC since May 2003, after securing the appointment through an open international competitive selection.  He had previously served for 35 years in the Army, retiring in the rank of Major General with wide operational experience.  His earlier appointments included 2 years as a civil contingency planner in CCS over the Winter of Discontent (1979-80); as director of the Management Division of the Royal Military College of Science; in MOD as the Director of Land Operational Requirements responsible for the Army’s communications, IT and technology programmes; and at the Royal College of Defence Studies as the Army Senior Director of Studies. Those that may be required to respond to an emergency, in a professional capacity.    The term ‘Project Gold Standard’ was derived by the EPC and relates to the 3 UK levels of emergency management, these being Gold Silver and Bronze. The term ‘Gold’ refers  to the strategic level of command.   The Scoping Study was contracted through the Joint & Battlefield Trainers, Simulations and Synthetic Environments Integrated Project Team of the Defence Procurement Agency. Category one and two responders as defined by the Civil Contingencies Act (CCA) 2004 and inclusive of Military and Voluntary organisations. An overview of IEM can be found in section 3. Collective training involves 2 or more ‘teams’, where each team fulfils different ‘roles’, training to interoperate in an environment defined by a common set of collective training objectives REF _Ref134334208 \r \h [3]. The Category One seven specific duties can be found in “The Civil Contingencies Act 2004, its associated Regulations and non-statutory arrangements.” It needs to be note that the shape of the training audience within in the UK is not constant and the figures reflect a snapshot taken in November 2005.  Most exercises will have some elements of all three. UK comprises GB and Northern Ireland.  CCA06E-SIW-049PAGE  Page 		Page 