TADIL TALES – The Final VersionJoe SorrocheASRC Communications, Ltd.USAF Distributed Mission Operations Center (USAF DMOC)4500 Aberdeen Dr., SE, Building 942Kirtland Air Force Base, NM 87117505-853-0372, DSN 263-0372 HYPERLINK "mailto:joe.sorroche@kirtland.af.mil" joe.sorroche@kirtland.af.milRob ByersNorthrop Grumman Information Technology, DES2721 Discovery Dr., Suite 100Orlando, FL 32826Ph (321) 235-3866email:  HYPERLINK "mailto:robert.byers@ngc.com" \o "mailto:robert.byers@ngc.com" robert.byers@ngc.comAdin BurroughsNorthrop Grumman Information TechnologyCommunication & Information Systems Division4010 Sorrento Valley BoulevardSan Diego, CA  92121-1498adindb@gmail.comKeywords:Link 16 PDG, DIS, HLA, BOM, PDU, SISO. ABSTRACT: Over the past 3 years, the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO Product Development Group (PDG) Link 16 PDG has been developing a protocol for simulating Link 16 in Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) and High Level Architecture (HLA).  The SISO standard that was developed for Link 16 defines a simulation protocol in terms of the established DIS Transmitter and Signal Protocol Data Units (PDUs). There has been no change to the IEEE 1278.1a Transmitter or Signal PDUs; however, Link 16 specific enumerations have been created to populate the standard fields and records. The implementation of Link 16 exploits the fact that both these PDUs are variable length. In the case of the Transmitter PDUs, the SISO standard sets forth how the variable length “modulation parameter” fields must be populated.  In the case of the Signal PDU, Link 16 specific information is relegated to the variable length data fields. The HLA instructions are formatted in the form of a Base Object Model (BOM) that may be incorporated into a system Federation Object Model (FOM). Real-time Platform Reference (RPR)-FOM based simulations should be able to easily integrate the Link 16 BOM into their FOMs. Furthermore, there is a straightforward mapping between the DIS PDU implementations and the corresponding BOM components. This paper presents the SISO Link 16 Standard history, process followed, lessons learned, and final formats for Link 16 using DIS and HLA.1.	IntroductionThis paper presents the history, ballot process, and final Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) and, High Level Architecture (HLA) standard versions for Link 16.  Many thanks to all those that contributed to the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) Link 16 Standard throughout the years, and to those who endured the many meetings, telephone conference calls, and discussions until the end. HistoryIn 2001, Mr. Adin Burroughs, a Link 16 expert working at the Theater Aerospace Command and Control Simulation Facility (TACCSF), had a vision that tactical data link messages, specifically Link 16, could be transmitted using other simulation protocols, specifically the Institute for Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) 1278.1a and IEEE 1516.  In fact, at least five different protocols had been created, using the DIS Signal Protocol Data Unit (PDU), including the “TACCSF-J” format.   However, his vision was not only to exchange data, but to model the Link 16 network as well.  He knew that real Link 16 training was very difficult to obtain for operators, and implementing the capability to emulate Link 16 in existing simulators and data link translators would allow for realistic training for operators. As Distributed Mission Training (DMT) and Distributed Mission Operations (DMO) programs began to come online and distributed mission training became a reality, emulation and trial of theatre Link 16 nets would become more important. Interoperability between implementers was paramount, and something that the current DIS standard did not accomplish because it was not defined.Mr. Burroughs first presented this idea at the Inter-Service/Industry Simulation Evaluation Conference (I/ITSEC) in 2001.  He proposed a standard that would bring together the different implementations currently in the field.  He presented his first formal document [1] in July 2002.  At the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) Fall 2002 Interoperability Workshop (SIW), Mr. Burroughs presented paper 02F-119-SIW, and Tactical Digital Information Link – Technical Advice and Lexicon for Enabling Simulation (TADIL TALES) [2] was born.  Also, a Product Nomination (PN) was submitted to SISO to formally create a Tactical Data Links (TDL) Study Group (SG), and was elected Chair of the TDL SG.  Since then, several meetings and telephone conference calls were conducted to gather and discuss ideas from the Modeling and Simulation community.  Many different concepts and ideas were presented, and the first draft standard was completed after 3 SISO SIW SGs.The TDL SG decided that a Link 16 Product Development Group (PDG) should be created to develop and formally approve a standard for Link 16 network modeling and message transport using DIS and HLA.Link 16 Product Development GroupThe Link 16 PDG was created at the SISO Fall 2003 SIW, formed by the same officers and members as the TDL SG.  The first draft standard was produced, and many sites began to implement this draft standard.  In addition, this effort was funded by two separate programs:  The DMO Joint Synthetic Battlespace  (JSB) Infrastructure upgrade, an Air Force Agency for Modeling and Simulation (AFAMS) funded project, and, the Joint Expeditionary Force Experiment (JEFX) 2004. Distributed Missions Operations FundingIn March 2002, AFAMS awarded TACCSF a JSB Infrastructure Upgrade contract.  This contract sponsored Link 16 standard development and testing that was conducted at the TACCSF from September 2002 through February 2003.  The objective of this effort was to test the draft DIS Signal and Transmitter PDU templates, and either verifies their operation, or gather data for improvements to the draft standard.  Northrop Grumman, using its Common Connectivity Device (CCD), developed the software templates for the DIS Signal and Transmitter PDUs developed by the SISO TDL SG.  In addition, basic fidelity and interoperability testing would be conducted.  Although five levels of fidelity (0-4) were described, the highest, Fidelity Level 4 was not tested at this time.  The test results provided valuable data for verifying the DIS templates would exchange Link 16 data, and that the Link 16 network was adequately modeled.  In addition, these tests proved that interoperability was possible between levels of fidelity.  These tests also proved that Fidelity Level 4 was very difficult to implement due to the difference in latencies between the Link 16 radio network, and LANs.  The Distributed Missions Operations Center (DMOC), formerly TACCSF, simulations use the DIS protocol; so testing was limited to the DIS portion of the standard.  No HLA Base Object Model (BOM) development or testing was conducted.Joint Expeditionary Force ExperimentThe JEFX 2004 funded a DMOC experiment that tested Link 16 data exchange after modifications were incorporated from the DMO funded tests.  Experiments were conducted, and included fidelity testing as well as interoperability testing.  Test results verified the changes incorporated into the standard, and proved that simulations operating at different levels of fidelity could still exchange Link 16 data.  The Link 16 network was adequately modeled, and fidelity levels 0 through 3 were verified.  Fidelity Level 4 was not tested due to incomplete development of the standard and software at that time.  Only DIS systems were available for testing, so no HLA BOM development or testing was conducted.  Additional experiments are planed for JEFX 06, and the experiment results will be reported in subsequent papers.2.	Link 16 PDG Standard PreparationsAfter test and experiment results were incorporated into the standard, the Link 16 PDG worked towards a standard that was ready for the ballot process.  At the Fall SIW 2003 PDG meeting, new officers were elected.  Mr. Adin Burroughs and Mr. Joe Sorroche switched roles as PDG Chair and Vice Chair, since Adin was now part of the SISO Standards Activity Committee (SAC).  Preparation for the final version included some technical discussions that took months to resolve.  2.1	Link 16 Byte Order   One such discussion involved the byte order of the Signal PDU and the Link 16 message attached.  The DIS Standard [5] requires all messages sent on the network are of a Big Endian format, such that the left most bit is the most significant bit, and the bytes transmitted are such that the most significant octet is transmitted first.  Many legacy systems in use were the Silicon Graphics Architecture, which uses this bit ordering, so no byte swapping is required.  However, newer systems using Personal Computers (PCs) with INTEL architecture implement a Little Endian byte ordering, where the least significant byte is transmitted first.  So, for example, the Signal PDU’s largest field is 4 bytes, so any architecture that uses a little Endian bit order must use a system call for a byte swap on the field size, or 4 bytes.  However, if the field is 8 bits, no byte swap is required.  One suggestion was to divide the Link 16 message into 8 bit fields, so no byte swapping would be required.  The only device in the field at the time was the Northrop Grumman CCD, which read in the Link 16 messages 32 bits at a time, and did a 32-bit byte swap.  Since all test results were obtained using the CCD and were successful, it was decided not to change how the Link 16 messages are read in.  The standard specifies reading in Link 16 messages, including the JTIDS header, as 32 bit integer arrays, then byte swap if required.Link 16 BOMMr. Graham Shanks presented the Link 16 BOM concept, which would be integrated into existing Federation Object Models (FOMs).  However, the BOM was not a formal standard at the time, and the BOM PDG was in the standardization process.  Any changes to the BOM standard would be required in this standard as well.  In addition, some of assumptions were required to the BOM attributes proposed by Graham.  This portion of the standard required the most amount of time, due to continuous changes in the BOM, and deciding how the BOM would satisfy SISO-STD-001 (RPR-FOM 1.0) and its follow on, RPR-FOM 2.0.  It was during the last stages of BOM structure definition that another inconsistency was discovered.  The TDL Binary Radio Signal class was added as a subclass to the Raw Binary Radio Signal interaction class.  It was suggested that it be added to the Application Specific Radio Signal class.   That change would require a software modification to all HLA Link 16 BOM users in the field.  In addition, this change would be required in the DIS Signal PDU Encoding Scheme field, which would then require a change to the PDU field sizes and structure.  Since the Link 16 specific Signal PDU was designed first, it was originally defined as “Raw Binary Class”, as interpreted from the IEEE DIS Enumeration and Bit Encoded Values (EBV) Document [3].   The next section describes why the Signal PDU was defined as Raw Binary Class.2.3	Signal PDU Encoding Scheme One Signal PDU required field is the 16-bit Encoding Scheme enumeration field.  Bits 0 through 13 shall contain the number of Link 16 words included in the Signal PDU.  Initial design reviews showed there were four categories to choose from:  Encoded Audio, Raw Binary Data, Application Specific Data, and Database Index.  The Application Specific Data enumerations showed data generated by specific applications, systems, and simulators.  DIS EBV enumerations [3] define Application Specific as an application specific to a simulator.  Many DIS EBV [3] encoding scheme enumerations are defined for specific simulators.  Therefore, reclassifying Link 16 as Application Specific would not be consistent with the other Application Specific enumerations, because there are many applications, systems, and simulations that generate Link 16 messages.  There was some disagreement of how these fields were enumerated, however, the category matches how DIS defines applications specific to simulations.  In addition, by changing the field from Raw Binary Data to Application Specific Data, the Signal PDU structure would require a change as well.  The DIS standard states that for Application Specific Data, the data length field would require an additional 32 bits to define the user protocol identification number for the Application Specific Data enumeration.  A motion was made not to change this field, and a second to that motion was made.  The motion was approved not to change the DIS Signal PDU Encoding Scheme.  Additional data links that are to be standardized will follow the same encoding scheme.3.	Ballot ProcessProducts developed by SISO Study Groups and Product Development Groups are either balloted or unballoted and either standards or guidance documents.  The Link 16 PDG decided that it would be best if a standard was developed and balloted, and also provide some guidance on implementation.  The SISO Ballot process [4] defines a six-step process for developing SISO products.  3.1	Step 1:  Activity ApprovalThe TDL SG submitted a Product Nomination (PN) for developing a Link 16 Standard using DIS and HLA at the Fall 2002 SIW.  The SISO SAC approved the PN, and the SISO Executive Committee (EXCOM) recommended and created a Link 16 PDG charter.  The Link 16 PDG officially kicked off at the Spring 2003 SIW, with the following officer election results:PDG Chair:	Adin Burroughs (Through 2003)Joe Sorroche (Since 2003)	PDG Vice Chair:	Joe Sorroche (Through 2003)		Adin Burroughs (Since 2003)PDG Secretary:	Rob Byers	PDG TAD:	Dave McKeeby (Through2004)PDG TAD:	Chris Rouget (Since 2004)The Drafting Group (DG) for this standard was:Editor:  			Rob ByersAssociate Editor:  	Joe SorrocheAssociate Editor: 		Graham ShanksAssociate Editor:	 	Mary ChristopherAssociate Editor: 		Bill HinkleAssociate Editor: 		Adin BurroughsMr. Rob Butterfield, Mr. James Nutaro, and Mr. Neil Barrett also contributed to this standard.	Step 2:  Product DevelopmentStandard development continued at the SISO Fall 2003 SIW, the Spring 2004 SIW, Euro SIW 2004, and the Fall 2004 SIW.  It was during this period that Mr. Adin Burroughs went on leave for personal reasons.  This was a large setback because of his Link 16 expertise, and his enthusiasm for this product was gaining momentum in the SISO community.  Also, his historical knowledge of the TDL SG and Link 16 PDG would be missed.  During this period, several telephone conference calls were held to discuss the standard.  All meeting processes in Ref [4] were followed, and meeting minutes were recorded and distributed by the PDG Secretary, Dr. Rob Byers.  Attendance at the telephone conference calls was less than the SIW PDG meetings; however, there were enough participants for a quorum.  After the Fall 2004 SIW, the Link 16 BOM development was not as far along as the DIS portion, and one suggestion was to omit the HLA section, and proceed with the DIS portion to speed up standard approval.  It was decided to continue BOM development.  Mr. Bill Hinkle, Lockheed Martin Corporation (LMC), was developing the HLA BOM for the F-16 Mission Training Centers (MTCs), and provided valuable inputs on BOM structures and how they should be modified, due to his experience gained from the F-16 MTC Link 16 BOM development.  By the Spring 2005 SIW, the BOM was mostly complete, except for the issue discussed in sections 2.2 and 2.3.  Step 3:  Ballot ProductIn early 2005, the standard went through several edits, and the PDG Drafting Group (DG) prepared a document for formal balloting.  Before the Spring 2005 SIW, the ballot package was reviewed by the PDG DG and submitted to the SAC for approval.  The ballot package included the PN, the Standard, and the ballot announcement.  The package was approved, and six phases of the SISO ballot process commenced.  Phase I: The Ballot AnnouncementThe ballot announcement was posted on the Link 16 Reflector on 29 January 2005, and was open for 30 days.  Only SISO members were eligible to register, but non-members could join SISO when registering.  There were 33 responses recorded when the ballot closed on 28 February 2005.Phase II: Forming the Ballot GroupThe SISO BPDP [4] defines the ballot balance process as follows:  First, all respondents are required to be SISO members and provide specific information, such as SISO member Identification (ID), contact information, and which categories they will represent:  Government, Commercial, or Academia, and Interest categories of User, Developer, or General Interest.  There were 33 responses, 2 duplicates, and 1 not a SISO member, so the total number of accepted responses was 30.Phase III: Balancing the Ballot GroupThe ballot group was balanced according to the SISO BPDP [4].  Each category required at least 10% representation, no greater than 75%, and no organization shall have greater than 25% representation.   No interest category shall exceed 50%.  Mr. Van Lowe reviewed the ballot group and declared the group was balanced.   The Ballot group categories and representations are shown in Table 1.CategoryDeveloper UserGeneralInterestGovernment525Commercial474Academia111Table 1.  Balanced Ballot GroupNote that each category had at least 10% representation, and no one organization exceeded 25% representation.  The largest representation from any organization was 6.7%.  Phase IV: Conducting the BallotOnce the Ballot group was balanced, the circulation package was assembled and sent to the participants.  The circulation package consisted of the product to be balloted, the Product Nomination, and instructions on how to complete the ballot.  No other documents were required or deemed necessary by the PDG [4].  The ballot period was 30 days.   The vote options were:  Accept, Accept with Comment, and Reject. Reject votes required comments as to why the standard should be rejected.  After 30 days, 26 votes were returned, resulting in an 86% response; the minimum required is 75%, resulting in a valid response.  The ballot response results are shown in Table 2.VoteAccept Accept with CommentRejectGovernment630Commercial770Academia021Totals13121Table 2.  Link 16 Ballot Results.Accept or Accept with comment should be at least 75% of the returned ballot votes.  Table 2 shows a 96% acceptance, which meets the BPDP requirements for a successful ballot.  Comments submitted by the ballot participants were required to provide the following categories:  General, Editorial, Minor Technical Change, and Major Technical Change.Phase V: Ballot Comment ResolutionComment resolution began once the ballot was deemed valid and successful.  There were 173 comments received.  Comments were assigned recommendation codes by the editor, and are shown in Table 3.  Once the comment codes were assigned, they were reviewed by the PDG.Phase VI:  Final ResolutionOnce the PDG reviewed all comments, each were assigned a resolution code.  This ballot was determined to be a successful one, so no Re- Circulation Ballot was required.  Details on the comment resolution process assignment and each resolution code can be found in the SISO BPDP [4].  CommentsEditor AssignmentsAccept as is86Accept with change42Accept, change needed9Need More Information0Hold for Resolution9Withdraw1Decline 26Table 3.  Editor Assignments to CommentsThe resolution code assignments are shown in Table 4.CommentsEditorPDGFinalAdopt as proposed738787Adopt with minor change424243Agree with comment, but implementing alternative resolution171717Adopt, Duplicates Comment X*25*25*25Hold, Request more information900Hold under consideration000Decline – Proposed change is inconsistent with general approach161616Decline – Proposed change is out of scope000Decline – Comment is too vague10109Withdraw111*Duplicated in total for Table 3.Table 4.  PDG Comment ResolutionStep 4:  Product ApprovalOnce all comments were categorized and entered into the Link 16 Standard by the PDG Chair and Secretary, a final editorial review was conducted.  The final standard templates for Link 16 using DIS and HLA are in Appendices A and B.  Once completed, the Ballot Package was assembled according to what was required by the BPDP [4]:Link 16 PDG Product NominationBallot ResultsLink 16 Activity SummaryAll Standard VersionsFinal StandardThe ballot package was assembled by the Link 16 PDG Chair and Editor and submitted to the PDG TAD for review.  Once the package is approved, the TAD will submit the package to the SISO SAC.  The SISO SAC must review the package for:Balloting group is balanced.Ballot is valid. Sufficient ballots were returned and had sufficient acceptsProduct is within scope of the PN.All ballot group members were given an opportunity to see all the rejects and associated commentsAll ballot group members were given an opportunity to see all the discarded comments and the reasons they were discarded.All legal issues (e.g., patents, copyrights, intellectual property concerns) have been addressed.No technical or procedural oversights exist.Product is sufficiently mature. A prototype has been tested, if appropriate.Product is useful and timely.If the SAC approves the balloted product, they will submit to the SISO EXCOM for final review and approval.4.	Lessons LearnedThe Link 16 PDG wanted to share the lessons learned from their experience.  They are:PDG officers and editors should get some formal training in Balloted Products Development Process.  Unfortunately, it is not uncommon for PDG officers and editors (not just for the Link 16 standard) to have an ad hoc understanding of the BPDP.   It would be useful to offer a tutorial on the BPDP at each SIW.  We recommend that officers and editors be required to attend at the SIW immediately following the approval of their PDG.The lead editor needs to impose discipline on the process.  Deadlines for section editor contributions need to set and enforced.  This standard went through an interminable cycle of comments and reviews and long delays were tolerated in receiving section updates.  The review process was haphazard and piecemeal.  The process might have been completed considerably earlier if a more disciplined approach to review had been implemented.Editors and reviewers should make their comments before and not during the balloting process.  Members of the PDG also were members of the balloting pool.  These individuals had access to the draft document, and were sufficiently interested to participate in the PDG and review the standard.  Many of them made extensive comments on the balloted product that ought to have been made much earlier.  Because this standard took a very long time to be finalized, some organizations with pressing needs to implement Link 16 in their simulations were compelled to work with the draft protocol.  Although it is useful to implement the draft standard as a means of discovering its shortcomings, there is considerable risk that a working implementation may be changed to accommodate last minute changes to the standard. More involvement from the TAD would have been helpful for items one and two.  The BPDB [4] defines tasks for the TAD, but an addition to section 4.2.4 requiring an election or appointment of a TAD would raise the level of PDG involvement required.The PDG Chair is ultimately responsible for the PDG and produced products.  The PDG Chair should be very familiar with the SISO BPDP, and should take the lead role in enforcement of Action Items and other deadlines.  The DIS to HLA translations, once implemented, were more involved than originally thought.  To rectify this, a DIS to HLA Translation Guide has been written by Mr. Bill Hinkle, which will be referenced in the SISO Link 16 Standard.5.	Current StatusThe ballot package was sent to the Link 16 PDG TAD for review on 10 January 2006.  Once the TAD has reviewed the package and deemed ready for submission, it will be sent to the SISO SAC and EXCOM.  As of 30 March 2006, the ballot package had been reviewed by the TAD and submitted to the SISO SAC.  The SISO SAC had requested more detail concerning one comment.  It was discovered that the incorrect version of the comment spreadsheet was sent to the SAC.  The correct version was sent.  The SAC will meet in April to discuss the standard, and then will vote on acceptance.6.	AcknowledgementsWe thank the DMOC for sponsoring this paper and supporting SISO participation for the Link 16 DIS and HLA standard.  We also thank the SISO SG Officers and members, the SISO Link 16 PDG Officers, Members, ballot members, and their respective sponsors.  Additionally, we extend our thanks to AFAMS and Air Combat Command (ACC) for experimentation support, and Mr. Don Neal, Modeling and Simulation Lead for JEFX 04 for accepting the DIS J experiment and his support.  Also, we thank Northrop Grumman, Lockheed Martin Corporation, Arctic Slope Regional Corporation (ASRC) Communications, and Scientific Research Corporation (SRC).  From DMOC, we thank Chief Engineer Mr. Tom Brown, Technical Advisor Mr. William Elliott, and DMOC’s Commanders that have supported this project throughout the years:  Col John “Boomer” Henry, Col. Ron “Opie” Weigand, and Lt. Col. Gordon “Gordo” Phillips.7.	References [1] Burroughs, Adin, “TADIL J/JTIDS in DIS G.R.I.M, or How I Learned to Transmit TDMA on my DIS”, 20 June 2002.[2]	Burroughs, Adin, Sorroche, Joe, Byers Rob, Barrett, Neil, Butterfield, Rob, Shanks, Graham, “Tactical Digital Information Link – Technical Advice and Lexicon for Enabling Simulation (TADIL TALES)”, September 2002. [3]	SISO Enumeration and Bit Encoded Values for use with Protocols for Distributed Interactive Simulation, 25 March 2005.[4]	SISO Balloted Products Development Process (BPDP), 30 May 2002.[5]	IEEE Std. 1278.1 – 1995, IEEE Standard for Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) – Application Protocols, 21 September 1995.8.	BiographyMR. JOE SORROCHE is a Senior Systems Engineer with Arctic Slope Regional Corporation (ASRC) Communications, and has 17 years professional experience; 10 years experience in the Modeling and Simulation field. He currently works at the DMOC, and has been the Engineering lead for the DMOC for JEFX 06, JEFX 04, Millennium Challenge 02, JEFX 2000, JEFX 99, EFX 98, and many Blue Flag and Virtual Flag exercises. He is the Vice Chair for the SISO Tactical Data Links Study Group, the Link 16 Product Development Group Chair, and the SISO Liaison for the NATO Tactical Data Link Interoperability Testing Syndicate.  Mr. Sorroche is a co-recipient of the Fall 2002 SIWZIE Award for paper 02F-SIW-119 titled “TADIL TALES.”  He has Bachelors and Masters of Science Degrees in Electrical Engineering from New Mexico State University.  He is a member of Tau Beta Pi and Eta Kappa Nu Honor Societies.   DR. ROB BYERS is a senior engineer with Northrop Grumman Information Technology in Orlando, FL. As part of the Combined Air Force (CAF) DMO Operations and Integration (O&I) standards development, he is the lead for the CAF DMO Common Models Standard, Tailored DIS Standard and the Reference FOM Standard.  He has a Bachelor of Science degree from the United States Military Academy, and a Masters Degree and Doctoral Degree in Aerospace Engineering from Texas A&M University.MR. ADIN BURROUGHS has over 10 years of professional experience.  Mr. Burroughs is a Program Manager for Northrop Grumman.  Mr. Burroughs is the Vice Chair for the Signal PDU Product Development Group.  Mr. Burroughs was the primary author and co-recipient of the Fall 2002 SIWZIE Award for paper 02F-SIW-119 titled “TADIL TALES.”  He has a Bachelors Degree in Computer Science from Central Florida State University.Appendix A:  Transmitter PDU for TADIL  JField Size (bits)Transmitter PDU FieldsDescription*96PDU HeaderProtocol Version8 bit enumeration Exercise ID8 bit unsigned integer PDU Type8 bit enumeration Protocol Family8 bit enumeration Timestamp32 bit unsigned integer Length16 bit unsigned integer Padding16 bits unused 48Entity IDSite16 bit unsigned integer Application16 bit unsigned integer Entity16 bit unsigned integer 16Radio ID 16 bit unsigned integerShall contain the ID of the radio transmitting the signal.64Radio Entity TypeEntity Kind8 bit enumeration Domain8 bit enumeration Country 16 bit enumeration Category8 bit enumeration21 - Link 16 terminal IAW Ref. 4 para 4.2.3.7Nomenclature Version8 bit enumerationNomenclature16 bit enumeration8Transmit State 8 bit enumeration 8Input Source 8 bit enumeration 8 - Digital Data Device16Padding 16 bits unused 192Antenna LocationX component64 bit floating point Y component64 bit floating point Z component64 bit floating point 96Relative Antenna Locationx component32 bit floating point y component32 bit floating point z component32 bit floating point 16Antenna Pattern Type 16 bit enumeration 16Antenna Pattern Length 16 bit unsigned integer 64Frequency 64 bit unsigned integerMode 1 = 1131000000 (center frequency). For Mode 2 or 4, set to 96900000032Transmit Frequency Bandwidth 32 bit floating point240000000 unless in Communications mode 2 or 4, then 300000032Power 32 bit floating pointPower in dBm64Modulation TypeSpread Spectrum16 bit Boolean arrayBit 1 set to 1: Frequency Hopping for JTIDS communications mode 1.  All bits set to 0: For JTIDS communications modes 2 or 4Major 16 bit enumeration7 - Carrier Phase Shift Modulation (CPSM)Detail16 bit enumeration0 - OtherSystem16 bit enumeration8 - JTIDS/MIDS16Crypto System 16 bit enumeration0 - Other16Crypto Key ID 16 bit unsigned integer0 - Other8Length of Modulation Parameters 8 bit unsigned integer 8= 8 octets24Padding 24 bits unused 8Modulation Parameter #1Time Slot Allocation Mode8 bit enumerationInteger enumeration 0-48Modulation Parameter #2Transmitting Terminal Primary Mode 8 bit enumerationInteger Enumeration: 1 - NTR 2 - JTIDS Unit Participant8Modulation Parameter #3Transmitting Terminal Secondary Mode 8 bit enumerationInteger Enumeration: 0 - None 1 - Net Position Reference 2 - Primary Navigation Controller 3 - Secondary Navigation Controller8Modulation Parameter #4Synchronization State8 bit enumerationInteger Enumeration: 2 - Coarse Synchronization3 - Fine Synchronization32Modulation Parameter #5Network Synchronization ID 32 bit unsigned integerTSA Level 0-2, set to 0TSA Level 3,4, set to 32 bit random numberAppendix A: SIGNAL PDU for Link 16Field Size (bits)Signal PDU FieldsValid RangeDescription96PDU HeaderProtocol Version8 bit enumeration  Exercise ID8 bit unsigned integer  PDU Type8 bit enumeration  Protocol Family8 bit enumeration  Timestamp32 bit unsigned integer  Length16 bit unsigned integer  Padding16 bits unused  48Entity IDSite16 bit unsigned integer  Application16 bit unsigned integer  Entity16 bit unsigned integer  16Radio ID 16 bit unsigned integer Shall contain the ID of the radio transmitting the signal.16Encoding Scheme 16 bit enumeration Bits 0-13 shall contain the number of J-words not including the JTIDS header. Bits 14-15 shall contain the value 1 to indicate an encoding class raw binary data16TDL Type 16 bit enumeration This field shall be set to 100 for SISO-STD-002 Link 16 32Sample Rate 32 bit integer This field shall be set to 016Data Length 16 bit integer This field shall contain the length of data in bits beginning after the samples field. 16Samples 16 bit integerThis field shall be set to 0160Link 16 Signal PDU FieldsNPG Number16 bit unsigned integer0-511Network Participation Group (NPG) Number. Used to segregate information within a JTIDS/MIDS network.  Creates virtual networks of participants.Net Number8 bit unsigned integer0-127Network Number. Used to create virtual sub-circuits within NPG for stacked nets or between NPGs for multi-net. TSEC CVLL8 bit unsigned integer0-127, 255Transmission Security, an integer identification of the crypto variable used for JTIDS transmission encryption. This variable allows for simulated crypto netting. 255 in this field shall indicate a no statement/wildcard.MSEC CVLL8 bit unsigned integer0-127, 255Message Security, an integer identification of the crypto variable used to encode the JTIDS message. This variable allows for simulated crypto netting. 255 in this field shall indicate a no statement/wildcard.Message Type Identifier8 bit enumerationDetermines whether normal JTIDS header and message, RTT A/B, RTT Reply, JTIDS Voice, LET JTIDS, or VMF follows. See table 5.2.2 for message type identifier enumerationsPadding16 bits0Set to 0Time Slot IDTime Slot NumberBits 0-160-98303Time Slot number; Time Slot 0 represents time slot A-1, time slot 98303 represents C-32767. When the epoch is 112, the last valid time slot is 45151 (end of the day)PaddingBits 17-230Set to 0Epoch NumberBits 24-310-112An epoch is 12.8 minutes long, 112.5 Epochs in a 24 hour day. Part of time slot identificationPerceived Transmit TimeInteger Part32 bit unsigned integer0-4294967295,4294967296NTP timestamp format-- NTP timestamps are represented as a 64-bit unsigned fixed-point number, in seconds relative to 0h on 1 January 1900 UTC. The integer part is in the first 32 bits and the fraction part in the last 32 bits. The precision of this representation is about 200 picoseconds, which should be adequate for even the most exotic requirements. See Reference 13 for detailed format. . All Fs (4294967296) in both fields shall indicate a no statement/wildcard.Fraction Part32 bit unsigned integer0-4294967295,4294967296Message DataArray of 32 bit unsigned integersThe message data, corresponding to the appropriate message type and described in tables 5.2.5 through 5.2.12 belowAppendix B: Link 16 BOMLink 16 Base Object Model Identification TableCategoryInformationNameLink 16 BOMVersionv1.0 Date11/08/2005PurposeLink 16 Base Object Model (BOM)Application DomainC4ISR & C2 platform simulationsSponsorSISOPOC (Title, First, Last)MrGraham CShanksPOC OrganizationBAE Systems Integrated System TechnologiesPOC Telephone+44 1383 828062POC Emailgraham.shanks@baesystems.comLink 16 BOM Interactions in the RPR-FOMRadioSignalApplicationSpecifcRadioSignalDatabaseIndexRadioSignalEncodedAudioRadioSignalRawBinaryRadioSignalTDLBinaryRadioSignalLink16RadioSignalJTIDSMessageRadioSignalRTTABRadioSignalRTTReplyRadioSignalJTIDSVoiceCVSDRadioSignalJTIDSVoiceLPC10RadioSignalJTIDSVoiceLPC12RadioSignalJTIDSLETRadioSignalVMFRadioSignalLink 16 BOM Complex Datatypes in RPR-FOM 1.0Complex DatatypeField NameDatatypeCardinalityModulationStructSINCGARModulation[52]SINCGARSModulationStruct0-1JTIDSTransmitterData[56]JTIDSTransmitterStruct0-1Link 16 BOM Enumerated Values in RPR-FOM 1.0IdentifierEnumeratorRepresentationRFModulationSystemTypeEnum16Other0Generic1HQ2HQII3HQIIA4SINCGARS5CCTT_SINCGARS6JTIDS_MIDS8Link 16 BOM Complex Datatypes in RPR-FOM 2.0Complex DatatypeField NameDatatypeCardinalitySpreadSpectrumStructSpreadSpectrumTypeSpreadSpectrumEnum161PaddingOctet2SINCGARModulation[52]SINCGARSModulationStruct0-1 (SpreadSpectrumType = SINCGARSFrequencyHop)JTIDSTransmitterData[56]JTIDSTransmitterStruct0-1 (SpreadSpectrumType = JTIDS_MIDS_SpectrumType)Link 16 BOM Enumerated Values in RPR-FOM 2.0IdentifierEnumeratorRepresentationRFModulationSystemTypeEnum16Other0Generic1HQ2HQII3HQIIA4SINCGARS5CCTT_SINCGARS6JTIDS_MIDS8SpreadSpectrumEnum16None0SINCGARSFrequencyHop1JTIDS_MIDS_SpectrumType2Link 16 BOM Attribute TableObjectAttributeDatatypeCardinalityUnitsResolutionAccuracyAccuracy  ConditionParentJTIDSTransmitterDataJTIDSTransmitterStruct1N/AN/AN/AN/A	 Link 16 BOM Parameter TableInteractionParameterDatatypeCardinalityUnitsResolutionAccuracyAccuracy ConditionRouting SpaceJTIDSLETradioSignalLETHeaderLETHeaderStruct1N/AN/AN/AN/AN/A TADILJMessageTADILJWordStruct1+N/AN/AN/AN/A JTIDSMessageRadioSignalJTIDSHeaderJTIDSHeaderStruct1N/AN/AN/AN/AN/A TADILJMessageTADILJWordStruct1+N/AN/AN/AN/A JTIDSVoiceCVSDRadioSignalJTIDSHeaderJTIDSHeaderStruct1N/AN/AN/AN/AN/A Dataoctet29+N/AN/Aperfectalways JTIDSVoiceLPC10RadioSignalJTIDSHeaderJTIDSHeaderStruct1N/AN/AN/AN/AN/A Dataoctet29+N/AN/Aperfectalways JTIDSVoiceLPC12RadioSignalJTIDSHeaderJTIDSHeaderStruct1N/AN/AN/AN/AN/A Dataoctet29+N/AN/Aperfectalways Link16RadioSignalNPGNumberunsigned short1N/AN/AperfectalwaysN/A NetNumberoctet1N/AN/Aperfectalways  TSEC_CVLLoctet1N/AN/Aperfectalways  MSEC_CVLLoctet1N/AN/Aperfectalways  TimeSlotID [3]unsigned long1N/AN/Aperfectalways  PerceivedTransmitTime [2]long long1N/AN/Aperfectalways RTTABRadioSignalRTTABRTTABStruct1N/AN/AN/AN/AN/ARTTReplySignalRTTReplyRTTReplyStruct1N/AN/AN/AN/AN/AVMFRadioSignalJTIDSHeaderJTIDSHeaderStruct1N/AN/AN/AN/AN/A TADILJMessageTADILJWordStruct1+N/AN/AN/AN/A Link 16 BOM Enumerated Datatypes TableIdentifierEnumeratorRepresentationJTIDSPrimaryModeEnum8 [1]NTR1 JTIDSUnitParticipant2JTIDSSecondaryModeEnum8 [1]None0 NetPositionReference1 PrimaryNavigationController2 SecondaryNavigationController3JTIDSSynchronizationStateEnum8 [1]CourseSynchronization2 FineSynchronization3TSALevelEnum8 [1]LowFidelityLevel00 LowFidelityLevel11 MediumFidelityLevel22 MediumFidelityLevel33 HighFidelityLevel44Link 16 BOM Complex Datatypes tableComplex DatatypeField NameDatatypeCardinalityUnitsResolutionAccuracyAccuracy ConditionJTIDSHeaderStructDataoctet6N/AN/AperfectalwaysJTIDSTransmitterStructTimeSlotAlocationModeTSALevelEnum81N/AN/AN/AN/A TransmittingTerminalPrimaryModeJTIDSPrimaryModeEnum81N/AN/AN/AN/A TransmittingTerminalSecondaryModeJTIDSSecondaryModeEnum81N/AN/AN/AN/A SynchronizationStateJTIDSSynchronizationStateEnum81N/AN/AN/AN/A NetworkSynchronizationIDunsigned long1N/AN/AperfectalwaysLETHeaderStruct [4]Dataoctet6N/AN/AperfectalwaysRTTABStruct [5]Dataoctet6N/AN/AperfectalwaysRTTReplyStruct [6]Dataoctet6N/AN/AperfectalwaysTADILJWordStruct [7]Dataoctet10N/AN/AperfectalwaysSpreadSpectrumStruct Appendix B Notes TableIDText1This is an 8-bit enumeration2Perceived Transmit Time.  The Perceived Transmit Time (in NTP timestamp format)  indicates the time, in seconds relative to 0h on 1 January 1900 UTC.  It has two component. A 32-bit unsigned integer representing the integer (whole seconds)  portion of the timestamp and 32-bit unsigned integer representing the fraction (fractions of a second) portion of the time stamp. The precision of this representation is about 200 picoseconds, which should be adequate for even the most exotic requirements. See Reference 13 for detailed format. 4294967295 (all F’s in hexadecimal) in each  field shall indicate a no statement/wildcard.3See TimeSlot ID structure in Table 5.2.4 in this document4See LET Message Header structure in Table 5.2.11 in this document5See RTT A/B Message structure in Table 5.2.6 in this document6See RTT Reply Message structure  in Table 5.2.7 in this document7See Link 16 Message Bit Orientation in Table 5.2.3 in this documentA- PAGE 19Copyright ©2005 SISO. All rights reserved.SISO-STD-002-2005A- PAGE 17Copyright © 2005 SISO. All rights reserved.PAGE \# "'Page: '#''"  Comment 146, Mary C.PAGE \# "'Page: '#''"  Comment 153, Mary C.PAGE \# "'Page: '#''"  Comment 152, Mary C.PAGE \# "'Page: '#''"  Comment 67, Chris Rouget