USAF – Sweden Cooperative Distributed Mission Operations ResearchPeter Crane U. S. Air Force Research Laboratory Warfighter Readiness Research Division, 6030 S. Kent Street, Mesa Arizona, 85212 USA1 480 988 6561, ext 287 HYPERLINK "mailto:peter.crane@mesa.afmc.af.mil" peter.crane@mesa.afmc.af.mil Anders BorgvallClaes Waldelöf Swedish Defence Research AgencyAir Combat Simulation CentreGullfossagatan 6, Kista 16490  Stockholm, Sweden46 8555 0318046 8580 85268 HYPERLINK "mailto:anders.borgvall@foi.se" anders.borgvall@foi.se HYPERLINK "mailto:claes.waldelof@saabsystems.se" claes.waldelof@saabsystems.seKeywords:Coalition training, Distributed Interactive Simulation, International cooperative research ABSTRACT: Both Swedish and US Air Forces have well-established laboratories for conducting research on the effectiveness of Distributed Mission Operations (DMO) systems to enhance individual, team, and inter-team combat skills.  The U. S. Air Force Research Laboratory, Warfighter Readiness Research Division in Arizona and the Swedish Defence Research Agency’s Air Combat Simulation Centre near Stockholm have entered into a six-year agreement to collaboratively conduct research that will enhance the technologies, processes, and strategies for training based on Distributed Simulation.  The goal of this program is to improve both nations’ DMO capabilities by sharing expertise in four areas: Measurement and training, Instructional tools, Cognitive modeling for constructive forces, and Coalition mission training research.  For all these efforts, specification of the Mission Essential Competencies (MECs) for Peacekeeping Support Operations (PSO) will create a common frame of reference.  Measurement and training research focuses on developing and validating techniques for assessing quality of mission performance, communications skills, skill decay, and the training capabilities of different types of simulators within a DMO network.  Instructional tools research investigates methods and strategies that enhance the effectiveness of training for local and distributed applications.  Cognitive models research is improving the fidelity and utility of computer-generated entities in DMO exercises such as adversary forces and a virtual wingman.   Coalition Mission Training Research trials for PSO will integrate and evaluate the products of these research efforts.  For these trials, a data link will be established between the laboratories so that US Air Force (USAF) and Swedish Air Force (SwAF) crews can plan, brief, fly, replay, and debrief PSO missions.  Mission scenarios, instructional tools, and performance metrics will be derived from the jointly developed PSO MECs.  Interoperability will be achieved not only through technical developments but also by using an integrated process to establish training objectives, design scenarios, build a syllabus, and generate evaluation metrics.1. DMO ResearchThe US Air Force (USAF) and Swedish Air Forces (SwAF) are developing Distributed Mission Operations (DMO) systems to complement training in aircraft for selected combat tasks.  Research on the effectiveness of DMO conducted at the US Air Force Research Laboratory, Warfighter Training Research Division (AFRL/HEA), and the Swedish Defence Research Agency’s Air Combat Simulation Centre (Flygvapnets Luftstrids Simulerings Center [FLSC]) has demonstrated that DMO training can enhance warfighter individual, team, and inter-team skills for tasks that are infrequently practiced due to resource, security, and safety constraints.  AFRL and FLSC have entered into an agreement to collaboratively conduct research on technologies, strategies, and tools that will improve each nation’s DMO capabilities including coalition training across an international network.  While there are several specific objectives for this cooperative research program, the overall plan is to focus on training for coalition Peacekeeping Support Operations (PSO) based on analysis of the Mission Essential Competencies (MECs) required for PSO.  Our goal is to ensure seamless interoperability not only through technical developments but by an integrated process to develop a complete training program.1.1 DMO research facilities at FLSC and AFRLThe FLSC is a simulation facility that has been in use for over ten years training pilots, primarily in Beyond Visual Range combat, but also on larger scenario, such as Partnership for Peace operations. The FLSC simulator system consists of: - Eight manned Pilot Stations (PS)The Pilot Stations are not intended to simulate a specific aircraft but rather represent a typical fourth- generation fighter aircraft. The models of aircraft dynamics, sensors, and weapons are all generic parameter-driven models that can be easily adapted to emulate any existing or nonexisting realization of the function. However, the cabin itself and the Man Machine Interface (MMI) including HOTAS are similar to the JAS 39 Gripen aircraft (Figure 1).Figure 1. Gripen simulator cockpit at FLSC.Figure 2.  F-16 simulator cockpit at AFRL.Four of the Pilot Stations are equipped with domes with a horizontal field of view of approximately 200(. The remaining Pilot Stations have one to three projector solutions with a horizontal field of view varying from 40° to 120(. The domes, developed at FLSC, will increase the realism in Within Visual Range (WVR) combat, attack and reconnaissance missions, formation flying, air-to-air refueling, etc. - Four Fighter Controller positionsThese stations simulate the latest version of the Swedish STRIC (Air Defence Center) system, and uses a simulated version of the Swedish tactical datalink. - After Action Review facilities including God’s eye view The After Action Review facilities includes functions for record and replay of missions, displaying the head down displays, the God’s Eye View and adding information such as shooting range, sensor coverage, missile tracks, etc.-  Computer-generated targets and threats-  DIS/HLA compatible interface-	Gigabit network that connects the simulator components.The DMO research testbed at AFRL includes four F-16C Block 30 Multi-Task Trainers (Figure 2).  These cockpits were developed by AFRL as high-fidelity simulators in both physical configuration of controls and displays and functional simulation of F-16 handling characteristics and weapons systems. The Multi-Task Trainers are equipped with AFRL’s Mobile Modular Display for Advanced Research and Training (M2DART), which is a full-field of view, rear-projection, dome display system. The M2DARTs provide a 360-degree field-of-regard, out-the-window visual imagery combined with the aircraft’s head-up display.  These virtual simulators are operated through an observation and control console which is also used to control computer-generated (constructive) forces and a mission recording system.  Friendly and adversary constructive entities are generated using the AFRL developed Automated Threat Engagement System (AETS) or the Next Generation Threat System (NGTS).   These systems are supported by a distributed brief/debrief system that provides playback of recorded missions together with voice, video, and interactive whiteboard communications with other sites.  The F-16 testbed is currently being augmented with four Experimental–Deployable Tactics Trainers, which consist of F-16 cockpits with the same software as the Multi-Task Trainers but reduced functionality focusing on combat skills.  The deployable trainers are equipped with three screen out-the-window visual displays.1.2 DMO research programs at FLSC and AFRLIn addition to the training of pilots, the FLSC is also pursuing research programs in different areas such as tactics development [1], tools and methods for evaluating training [2], and service oriented architecture in a net centric warfare environment. The training evaluation tools and methods include systems for evaluation of the performed missions to provide feedback to the simulation facilities. This ensures the continuous development of the simulator and tools for bringing the result from the simulator to the home base of the training wings.  One can then analyze the result of the training week which would provide the possibility of rehearsing the last training before the next training week.The principal focus of research at AFRL has been development and evaluation of technologies and strategies for enhancing warfighter skills using a systematic approach to training based on specification of MECs and their supporting knowledge, competencies, and experiences.  MECs are the “Higher order individual, team, and inter-team competencies that a fully prepared pilot, crew or flight requires for successful mission completion under adverse conditions and in a non-permissive environment” [3].  Defining MECs supports the design of highly focused training programs which provide warfighters with the experiences required to enhance combat skills [4].  One element of the MEC development process is identifying the opportunities warfighters have to gain experience and enhance their skills for each required competency.  These training opportunities include academics, simulators, aircraft training using nearby ranges, and large-force exercises.  Training gaps exist when the available training medium is not adequate to enhance warfighter skill or occurs too infrequently.  DMO serves as one approach to ensuring that all training gaps are filled. MECs also provide a mechanism for evaluating both warfighter performance in the training environment and the effectiveness of the training program [5].2. Cooperative ResearchFLSC and AFRL researchers and engineers are conducting cooperative projects in four areas of mutual interest.  Measurement and Training research focuses on developing and validating techniques for assessing quality of mission performance, communications skills, skill decay, and the training capabilities of different types of simulators within a DMO network.  Pedagogical Methods research is investigating tools and strategies that enhance the effectiveness of training for local and distributed applications. Cognitive models research is being conducted to improve the fidelity and utility of computer-generated entities in DMO exercises such as adversary forces and a virtual wingman.  Finally, Coalition Mission Training Research, which focuses on Peacekeeping Support Operations, is creating a common frame of reference for participants in both nations and provides a laboratory to evaluate the results of research in the other three areas.2.1  Performance measurement and training effectiveness researchWork under this area reflect several ongoing research programs at FLSC and AFRL including analysis of communications, assessment of simulator fidelity, and developing metrics to measure skill decay.  Communication Analysis.  The FLSC/SwAF has extensive experience with data links and the quality of data link operations and uses. AFRL has experience in developing automated systems for evaluating voice-based communications. Working together, a US- developed automated system for speech-to-text conversion and objective scoring of voice communications based on latent semantic analysis will be integrated with a Swedish developed taxonomy for communication analysis.  Sweden’s research on data-based communications will serve as a foundation for AFRL research on incorporating data links into missions previously limited to voice communications.  The goal of Communications Analysis research is to identify the communications parameters that are associated with effective mission performance for both voice-only and voice plus data systems.Fidelity Utility Assessment.  Simulator fidelity is frequently viewed as a scalar quality with systems being characterized as having low to high fidelity to actual aircraft or other combat systems.  FLSC and AFRL researchers view fidelity as one element in a trade space which also includes cost, physical size, and intended applications.  Deployable simulators, for example, have significant size, weight, and power constraints which most likely will limit the visual display system’s field-of-view reducing the pilot’s situation awareness.  Force-cuing systems in the seat or stick could mitigate the effect of reduced field-of-view with minimal impact on footprint.  Independent and collaborative efforts are being conducted to evaluate the relative effectiveness of training as a function of simulator system and subsystem fidelity level.  The goal is to develop metrics and tools which will allow comparisons among alternatives within the trade space to ensure that a given simulator will meet training needs.Skill Decay Metrics.  Different skills decay at different rates with some being robust and others very perishable without consistent practice.  Efforts in this area focus on development of metrics to assess development and decay of knowledge and skills which will serve to define refresher training requirements. When combined with results from Fidelity Utility Assessment, it will be possible to identify perishable skills that can be refreshed using limited-fidelity squadron-based or deployable simulators and which skills require more extensive training.2.2  Research on pedagogical tools and strategiesThe overall objective of this research is to enhance simulator and other ground-based training through incorporation of improved instructional methods, tools, and strategies.  This area will develop and validate a suite of tools for within mission and after-action review (debrief).  It will also develop and evaluate methods for individual and team training and rehearsal. Included in this evaluation will be an examination of alternative approaches for assessment of constructs such as mission planning, decision making quality, team integration and coordination, situational awareness, picture building and rebuilding, and sensor management.  Pedagogical tools and strategies are not limited to simulator-based training.  AFRL uses MEC analyses to identify gaps in training and to recommend methods and media that can fill these gaps.  FLSC has developed an approach to computer-based training called the Virtual Airbase which provides an intermediary step between books-and-paper academics and real-time simulation.  The Virtual Airbase is designed for use at SwAF fighter squadrons to preview skills that will be incorporated in subsequent training events at FLSC and to review previously flown missions.  Examples include tactics and radio communications in accordance with standards for beyond-visual-range air combat. Combining MEC analysis to identify opportunities where additional training will be most useful with Virtual Airbase to provide home station training before and after for DMO experience should add to effectiveness and efficiency.2.3  Cognitive modelingAFRL and FLSC teams are working to improve the fidelity and tactical realism of cognitive models and software agents which provide supporting and adversary forces in simulator training exercises.  This area involves a variety of activities to capture human in-the-loop tactics and doctrine and to apply the data to the development and improvement of computer- generated forces.  It also includes exploration of the practical utility of a virtual wingman concept as a voice-activated mission support agent.  2.4 Coalition training for PSOThe objective of this effort is to install a US–Sweden data link and conduct a program of training effectiveness research exercises on the effectiveness of distributed simulation training to enhance coalition mission skills focusing on PSO.  Networking.  The first step is to investigate alternative architectures for data communications that will provide a persistent, reliable, and cost-effective means of connectivity between the FLSC near Stockholm, Sweden, and AFRL in Mesa, Arizona USA [6].  Engineers will study the advantages and disadvantages of each alternative in terms of cost and performance, select the point-to-point data transmission solution that satisfies research requirements and budget constraints of both Sweden and the US, implement the selected course of action, and conduct studies that measure, monitor, and log the performance characteristics of the chosen network topology under and during all research phases and protocols.  Coalition Training Research.  The second part of this effort, conducting research exercises for coalition PSO, will serve as a laboratory to evaluate the results of the other collaborative projects. Results from Measurement and Training Research, Pedagogical Tools and Strategies, and Cognitive Modeling development will be integrated into training research exercises.  Mission scenarios, simulators with varying capabilities, brief/debrief systems, and constructive forces incorporating enhanced cognitive models will be incorporated into a competency-based training program for coalition PSO.  3. Interoperability through Integrated Tools and ProcessesInteroperability for coalition DMO training is not limited to interactions among simulators.  Although significant time and resources will be devoted to establishing and testing linkages between the facilities AFRL and FLSC, additional effort will be required to establish information technology-based tools to support interactions among system developers and participants and, to develop a common framework for developing and evaluating complete training packages.  These packages will include mission analysis, developing training strategies to meet specific objectives, syllabus and scenario design for simulator-based training events, evaluating warfighter performance within training events, and assessing the effectiveness of training to fulfill objectives.  The central focus of this process will be identifying the MECs and supporting competencies, knowledge, and experiences for successfully conducting coalition PSO [7].   FLSC and AFRL systems developers spend most of the year working over a nine-hour time difference; from March through October, 0800 in Mesa is 1700 in Stockholm.  To mitigate the impact of this time difference, US and Swedish researchers and engineers are making extensive use of an internet-based collaboration platform containing functions for discussions, exchanging ideas and opinions, commenting on specific subjects, sharing of documents, calendars for planning and event bookings, and action item lists to keep track and prioritize actions.  This web-based platform is available from home or office and adds significant capabilities compared to ordinary e-mail.  Real-time interactions for both system developers and  warfighters participating in coalition training research across the Atlantic are supported using video teleconferencing together with electronic, interactive white boards. These white boards allow for interaction between teams working on the same data in separate installations.  When planning a training event, for example, teams use a map as background and write concurrently on the screen at the different installations. At the end of the planning session, both parties have agreed upon on a joint plan eliminating misunderstandings and misinterpretations.    Combined with briefing slides and data replay, the system also provides for distributed mission planning, briefing, replay, and debriefing.PSO MECs provide the central focus for Swedish–US collaborative research and coalition training exercises.  The purpose of MECs is to identify the high-level competencies required for successful mission completion together with lower level supporting competencies, knowledge, and experiences.  Once the MECs have been developed and training gaps identified, cooperative research in the four areas will focus on enhancing warfighter skills and providing experience for these competencies.  Performance measurement and training effectiveness research, for example, will develop methodologies for assessing communications, fidelity utility, and skill decay for a variety of training tasks.  Since coalition Peacekeeping Support is a new mission for both the USAF and SwAF, the validity and utility of these methodologies will be assessed in coalition DMO training exercises.  Benchmark PSO scenarios will be developed and coalition team performance will be assessed based on success in fulfilling objectives for these missions.  Training interventions will be implemented derived from Performance Measurement and Training Effectiveness Research, Pedagogical Tools and Strategies Research, and development of improved constructive entities based on Cognitive Modeling Research.  The effectiveness of these interventions will be assessed based on team performance on a second set of benchmark PSO missions.  FLSC and AFRL have entered into the International Mission Training Research (IMTR) cooperative agreement with the goal of improving both nations’ DMO capabilities including training for coalition operations across an intercontinental link. Interoperability requires compatible systems, databases, and predictable interactions among simulated entities.  In addition, interoperability between research and development teams also requires systems to mitigate the effects of time differences and capabilities for effective real-time interaction.  Finally, the IMTR team is working to enhance interoperability by using an integrated process to establish training objectives, design scenarios, build a syllabus, and generate evaluation metrics which will result in more focused research activities and improved training.4. References[1]   Borgvall, A. (2003), Making knowledge visible. NATO Modeling and Simulation Group (NMSG), 2003-10-08, Antalya, Turkey.[2]   Follin, P. (2006). Virtual airbase, CBT tool for training and evaluation.  Stockholm, Sweden: Swedish Defence Research Agency. [3]	Colegrove, C. M., & Alliger, G. M. (2002).  Mission essential competencies:  Defining combat readiness in a novel way.  Paper presented at: NATO Research & Technology Organization, Studies, Analysis, and Simulation Panel, Conference on Mission Training via Distributed Simulation (SAS38), Brussels, Belgium.[4]	Bennett, Jr., W. & Crane, P.  The deliberate application of principles of learning and training strategies within DMT.  Presented at: NATO Research & Technology Organization, Studies, Analysis, and Simulation Panel, Conference on Mission Training via Distributed Simulation (SAS-38), Brussels, Belgium, April 2002.[5]	Smith, E., McIntyre, H., Gehr, S. E., Schurig, M., Symons, S., Schreiber, B., & Bennett, Jr., W.  “Evaluating the impacts of mission training via distributed simulation on live exercise performance: Results from the UK/UK ‘Red Skies’ study.”  (2005).  In, The Effectiveness of Modeling and Simulation – From Anecdotal to Substantive Evidence. Proceedings NATO Research and Technology Organization Modeling and Simulation Group RTO MP MSG 035.  Neuilly-sur-Seine, France: RTO.[6]	Greschke, D., Zamba, M., Rämö, K., & Waller, B. (2006). Communications and connection technologies in a collaborative environment.  In, Proceedings of EuroSIW - European Simulator Interoperability Workshop.  Stockholm, Sweden, June 2006. Orlando, FL: Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization. [7]	Bennett, Jr., W., Borgvall, J., Jander, H., Gehr, S., Schreiber, B., Alliger, G., & Beard, R. (2006).  Competency-based methods for interoperable training, rehearsal, and evaluation. In, Proceedings of EuroSIW - European Simulator Interoperability Workshop.  Stockholm, Sweden, June 2006. Orlando, FL: Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization.Author BiographiesPETER CRANE is a Research Psychologist at the Air Force Research Laboratory, Warfighter Training Readiness Division in Mesa, AZ.  His major research interest is enhancing effectiveness in distributed simulation systems.  Dr. Crane earned a PhD in Experimental Psychology from Miami University in Ohio.ANDERS BORGVALL is a former Air Force pilot logging more than 3000 hours of fixed-wing flight. Leaving the Air Force he joined the Swedish Defence Research Agency where he currently is head of the Department of Combat Simulation (FLSC). His current interest lies in expanding the FLSC into a simulation center for joint and combined exercises, using developments in technology to achieve a true integrated (NCW) force simulator. Claes Waldelöf is Senior Technical Advisor for training and simulation at Saab Systems. He has a Master of Science degree in Aeronautics Engineering from the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm, Sweden. 