The Application and Results of Using MMOG Technology for Force Protection / Anti-terrorism TrainingJeff StahlRodney LongUS Army RDECOM-STTC12423 Research ParkwayOrlando, FL  23826407-384-3925, 407-384-3938Jeff.stahl@us.army.mil, Rodney.long@us.army.mil MAJ Christopher GroseChief, BCTCFort Riley, KS 66442785-239-1492christopher.grose@us.army.milKeywords:Virtual Simulation, Massively-Multiplayer, Anti-Terrorism, Force-Protection, Asymmetric Warfare ABSTRACT: Recent events throughout the world have shown a clear need for better preparation and cooperation between organizations, agencies and countries during times of crisis.  A recent Force Protection / Anti-Terrorism training exercise held at Fort Riley, KS was conducted to simulate a natural disaster and the potential fall-out that could result.  Massively Multiplayer Online Game (MMOG) technology being developed by the Army was used to augment their training exercise to help stimulate the Operations Center as well as to engage the first responders in potential terrorism threats that they might face.  This paper will discuss the planning and scenario development efforts that were necessary to include the MMOG within the exercise.  The paper will then discuss the execution and results from the simulation and the feedback from the participants.  Finally, the paper will lay out the road ahead for including virtual simulations in Force Protection and Anti-terrorism training in the future.  1. IntroductionOn 28 February 2006, Fort Riley conducted a Natural Disaster Training Exercise in order to exercise and validate procedures in their newly revised Installation Crisis Management Standard Operating Procedures.  A recent tornado at Fort Riley and the ever present danger of extreme severe weather made this exercise very relevant to both the training audience and the role players involved.  While a critical event can define the beginning of a crisis, as we saw in the aftermath of the 2005 hurricane season, it is the actions, reactions, or lack there of over time that truly define the impact of the critical event.  Therefore, the exercise focused on activity not only directly after the event on the installation, but also the potential impact of this event in the surrounding community.  Especially pertinent for the immediate action were communications and coordination both internal to the installation, but also with the community and regional emergency management agencies.  In planning for this Live, Virtual and Constructive training exercise, the installation wanted to go beyond crisis management in the pre- 9/11 mode with no external security threat.  By inserting an external threat the installation made the exercise relevant in today’s environment.  However, in order to reach the objectives and not impact current post operations with too great a distraction the current simulation capability needed augmentation.The United States Army Research, Development and Engineering Command (RDECOM) Simulation and Training Technology Center (STTC) provided a prototype virtual environment to augment the overall training exercise.  The virtual simulation was used as an additional stimulus to constructive simulation, focused on training the Fort Riley Operations Center/Crisis Management Team (FROC/CMT).  The virtual environment also provided a means to push training down to the first responders and individual Soldiers.This paper will discuss the technology challenges and objectives of the training exercise as well as that of the virtual simulation environment.  The paper will address the effort that was required to develop the scenario, train the users on the virtual simulation, execute the vignettes, conduct the hot washes after selected vignettes and gather feedback from the participants.  Finally we will discuss the road ahead for using virtual simulations in future Anti-Terrorism / Force-Protection training exercises.  The term ‘scenario’ refers to the exercise in its entirety.  The term ‘vignette’ identifies a discrete incident that will require decisions to be made and actions to be taken by the training audiences.1.1 Fort Riley Exercise OverviewThe training exercise was designed to be a natural disaster, specifically a tornado that caused widespread destruction across Fort Riley and its neighboring counties.  Objectives include:Stressing all activities to ensure that each agency had events to address during the exercise.Exercising critical communications:Within each activity. Within the Crisis Action Team.With neighboring communities.With regional agencies.Exercising coordination: Between activities.With subordinate military units.With tenant agencies and units.With neighboring communities.Exercise information flow procedures to dependant family members and the community through the Family Readiness Groups, the Red Cross  and the mediaExercise security techniques and procedures for Military Police (MP) and the Special Reaction Team (SRT) on Fort Riley terrain.In the scenario, a tornado hits northeast Kansas causing major off post damage, power outage, disruption of water, inoperative sewage system, damaged hospitals, destroyed grocery stores, rubbled hotels, road networks severed, cell phone towers felled, periodic communication system outages and massive disruption of local government services.  The result is wide-spread looting and unlawful actions by citizens.  Indications are that the majority of the Public in northeast Kansas believe they are about to experience another “Katrina Disaster” in which Federal assistance will be slow in arriving.  In an attempt to survive and motivate quick Federal assistance, the Public forms into large angry crowds at the front gate of Fort Riley, adjacent to the town of Ogden.  As hours pass, the demonstrators become more vocal and physically threatening to the Fort Riley Gate Guards.  Local Police (Cities of Ogden, Junction City, and Lawrence), County Sheriffs, and State Law Enforcement elements do not have any available resources to respond to the demonstrators, who continue to harass the Gate Guards and disrupt traffic flow through the gate. 1.2 Asymmetric Virtual Simulation OverviewThe STTC is in the final year of a 4-year research program to develop a prototype virtual environment to support Asymmetric Warfare training.  Based on a commercial Massively-Multiplayer (MMP) game environment, the STTC and Forterra Systems, Inc. modified the virtual terrain, avatars, models and functionality to support a range of asymmetric operations that include such missions as Search and Cordon, Checkpoint and Presence Patrol.  The Asymmetric Warfare – Virtual Training Technologies (AW-VTT) Program was originally designed to provide a flexible training tool for Soldiers preparing to deploy.  With servers hosted on a .mil network, users distributed from anywhere in the world can log into the environment and participate in vignettes that reflect up-to-the-minute tactics the enemy is using against the United States and Coalition Forces.Figure 2 – AW-VTT CheckpointThe AW-VTT simulation environment is referred to as a “virtual world” and is in fact a model of the Earth.  The architecture is scalable, allowing users to develop terrain for as many parts of the world as needed, or to create multiple copies of important areas so they can be used at the same time.  Before participating in the Fort Riley Training Exercise, five areas on the globe had been modeled: a square km of urban terrain representative of Baghdad, a valley in Afghanistan, a MOUT-style camp set in the Philippines, a suburban California city (for emergency response training) and the New York City harborThe AW-VTT environment is persistent.  This means that when a user leaves the environment and returns later, the state of the environment isn’t reset; instead the world will reflect any changes that have been made by others while they were gone.  While it is possible to ‘reset’ the environment in order to execute a particular vignette, the persistent nature allows for the greatest flexibility for exercises that last for hours, days, months or even indefinitely.1.3 Scenario DevelopmentScenario development was an exciting, challenging and creative endeavor for this training exercise.  The STTC and Fort Riley exercise planners worked diligently to create a scenario that was supported by the unique strengths of the AW-VTT simulation while still supportive of the overall exercise objectives.  The AW-VTT environment was originally designed to support asymmetric operations. The virtual environments were either geo-typical of what an Iraqi neighborhood and city look like or oriented in a geo-specific city.  Functionality was focused on the needs of missions such as Search and Cordon and Checkpoint Operations.  While there was obvious potential that the flexibility of the AW-VTT simulation could support Natural Disaster / Force-Protection / Anti-Terrorism Training, there was still missing functionality that had to be developed or worked around for this exercise to be a success.Our first order of business was to understand the objectives of the overall training exercise and to identify the training audience that would use the virtual simulation.  This actually proved to be a very difficult task as the lead-up time to the exercise was extremely short.  The scenario that Fort Riley was stressing on their folks was a tornado that came through and did significant damage to the base and neighboring counties.  Because our simulation  was developed to support training for Asymmetric Warfare, it took some creativity to generate a number of vignettes that would be applicable to a natural disaster.  However, using events that occurred in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, we were able to  generate a number of vignettes that could occur after a tornado, ranging from large angry crowds seeking humanitarian relief to sniper attacks on first responders.  The vignettes would stress the individuals that would have the mission of protecting the entrance to Fort Riley, amid the chaos following a natural disaster.A challenge we encountered during the planning phase was that we did not have access to any standard procedures or task lists for the SRT.  To overcome this challenge, our team predicted how and when the SRT would react to different stimulus, as well as to what equipment (weapons, radios, etc) would be available to them in the real world.  Another planning challenge was that we didn’t have easy access to the Chief Trainer (the Captain in charge of the SRT) because of the geographic separation and complex exercise planning requirements.  Ultimately, the Chief Trainer was the individual in charge of conducting the training exercises as well as the AAR.  As a result, minor changes to the vignettes and the schedule were being made less than 24 hours before the training was to occur.A secondary training objective for the AW-VTT simulation was to stimulate the FROC / CMT and force them to make decisions based upon what was happening in the virtual world.  To prepare for the designed vignettes, we created 26 Master Scenario Events Lists (MSELs).  Each written MSEL would be hand-carried to the appropriate FROC / CMT staff member, as the scenario progressed.  The MSELs were simulated events that would be reported by: Fort Riley elements (MP Patrols, Gate Guards, Fire Rescue, EMS).Civilian First Responders (EOC)s, Police Departments, Emergency Planners, Fire / Rescue).State Government (Emergency Managers, National Guard, Highway Patrol).Federal Departments / Agencies (Homeland Security, FEMA, FBI, ARNORTH), and TV Stations (Local and CNN).  These MSELs, which included reports of a gun shop being looted and a military vehicle being stolen, provided the context for the future demonstration and terrorism events that would take place later in the day.  It also created a situation that would force the FROC / CMT to consider their current Force Protection Level and to take any corrective action needed to ensure the protection of a particular entrance gate.  In the first vignette, we designed for a virtual “reporter” to provide a live video feed into the FROC / CMT (to simulate what they would have in the real world via CNN or FOX NEWS).  The vignettes proceeded to get increasingly difficult and dangerous as the training audience shifted from the MPs to the SRT.The final aspect of the scenario development was to create a realistic terrain database where the vignettes were to occur.  The selection was made early on to model the Ogden gate entrance (and part of the surrounding town of Ogden).  This entrance is particularly unique because there is a significant distance between the town of Ogden and the guarded gate.  However, the property in between is owned by Fort Riley.    Our vignettes would exploit this buffer zone to force Ft. Riley personnel to respond to events outside of their secure area, but that are still on their federal property.  The development of the terrain database involved getting high quality photographs of the gate and area around it, along with realistic distance measurements between key landmarks.  The biggest issue we encountered was the lack of adequate testing time in the new terrain database to fully correlate the vignettes with the terrain – this will be addressed later in the paper.Figure 3 – Ogden Gate Entrance1.4 Technical ArchitectureThe AW-VTT simulation is designed as a client-server architecture that operates over the internet.  The system was designed to be capable of running over a limited-bandwidth connection of a modem, although that would negate the use of Voice over IP (VoIP).  Each client machine simulates the environment and only receives event updates from the server allowing it to run with a limited amount of bandwidth.  The intent of the AW-VTT program was to allow Soldiers located in Southwest Asia (SWA) to be able to participate with Soldiers in the United States preparing to deploy.  The fact that the system runs over the internet can allow geographically distributed users to interact in real-time in a virtual environment.For this exercise, Information Assurance issues prevented us from running the simulation over a Wide Area Network (WAN).  There were two issues that we are dealing with: firewall and accreditation.  The AW-VTT environment utilizes a number of ports that needs both outgoing and incoming UDP and TCP traffic.  Most Army installations lock down their firewalls to the extent that the software, in its current configuration, will not run.  We have developed an initial alternative configuration, using fewer ports, that has successfully run on an enterprise network. Only limited testing has been completed thus far.  The second issue is accrediting the servers to run on a .mil network and getting administrative access to install the client software on the hardware platforms located at the training facility.  To date we have run preliminary scans and performed a vulnerability assessment, but work continues to ensure Information Security.Due to the above mentioned issues, we developed a “Road Show Cluster” to execute training exercises.  This cluster is a portable server containing 3 machines that run the environment on a Local Area Network (LAN).  There were five separate exercise areas designated for Exercise Control (EXCON), the MPs, the SRT, Tech Control and finally one with a PC to drive the simulated news feed in the FROC.2. ExecutionThe day before the exercise began, the AW-VTT team met with the participants (all except the SRT) to train them on how to use the system.  We led the users through a self-paced tutorial and then allowed them time for free-play in the environment in order to become more comfortable with the controls and functionality.  Subjective analysis showed the team that it took the participants a very short period of time to become comfortable with the system – in fact many became bored because they learned the functionality so well and so quickly.The morning of the exercise (which was to begin at 1100) we met with the SRT to train them on the system.  This training followed the previous day’s approach and they too quickly learned the GUI and became very proficient with the system in a short period of time. While the SRT was being trained on using the system, we had five MPs that would act as role-players in EXCON that were being trained on the vignettes that would be executed throughout the scenario.  There was clearly not enough time to adequately familiarize the role players with the full portfolio of vignettes; much of the later training and preparation was done just before the start of a vignette.One of the most challenging goals of this training exercise from the virtual simulation’s perspective was running a persistent exercise over the course of four hours.  Past training experiments using virtual simulations have been focused on running separate, discrete scenarios that have an unambiguous start and finish.  There is time set aside for mission planning and walk-throughs as well as for a separate After Action Review (AAR) that includes preparation time and technical expertise to replay the vignette in a stealth view.  Because we were trying to stimulate the FROC / CMT, our simulation had the requirement of being persistent; while there were independent simulated incidents that took place, the timing and execution of those events were unplanned and dynamic in the eyes of the training audience.2.1 Exercise ControlTo properly execute the training vignettes, it was necessary to separate the training audience(s) from a group we refer to as ‘EXCON.’  EXCON includes the chief trainer, role players and technical advisors.  All decisions pertinent to the execution of the vignettes are made in this separate room to ensure that the training objectives are met.  For this training exercise, we employed 14 role players each controlling an individual avatar with unique characteristics, motives and speaking parts.  It was imperative that the role players were “quick on their feet” and able to adapt to training audiences’ actions with un-rehearsed reactions. While we could predict how the training audience would react to a particular stimulus, there was really no way of knowing for sure how the vignette would unfold.  The EXCON Director was in charge of giving “cue orders” in the live environment to initiate actions by the role players.  A good example of how important it was for the Director and role players to be able to adapt immediately to an unplanned event was in the first protesting vignette.  The vignette involved a number of demonstrators that were looking for federal assistance because of the effects of the tornado.  We had scripted for the demonstrators to become passive-aggressive and lie down in front of the guard house to block incoming traffic.  The Fort Riley Military Police (MPs) took an unexpected and evasive action to re-route traffic along another available route.  The EXCON director immediately ordered half of the role players to re-establish themselves in front of the other roadway.The EXCON internal communications was all performed within the live environment, but in a discrete enough manner that it couldn’t be heard by the training audience(s).  There was a significant issue with this approach, however.  All role players wear audio headsets so they can audibly participate in the virtual environment.  This made hearing outside instructions much more cumbersome.  The AW-VTT environment has a newly developed radio functionality that allows individuals to communicate on distinct VHF and UHF channels – providing a possible solution to this issue.2.2 Training AudiencesThere were three primary training audiences that were targeted for this exercise: Military Police (MP), Special Reaction Team (SRT) and the Fort Riley Operations Center / Crisis Action Team (FROC).  The AW-VTT virtual simulation played a various roles in how it was used to train the different audiences.At the highest level, the goal was to stimulate the FROC to drive their decision making and to demonstrate that the technology is advanced enough to supplement traditional constructive simulations that serve this purpose.  This group consists of approximately 40 individual directors or commanders from each installation level activity.  Upon notification of a crisis, this team assembles at one location to facilitate communications, coordination and information flow.  The major benefit of using a virtual simulation is in the fact that you can be administering training to the lower level first responders in addition to the Operations Center.  Those first responders are in charge of their normal duties and the decisions they make effect the course of the entire training exercise – vice letting computer-controlled characters/models in a constructive simulation make those decisions.  The other two training audiences were the MPs and the SRT that included live training in their crisis management vehicle as well as training in the virtual environment.  Each element of the training audience reported via real world communications including radios, telephones and e-mail.The biggest challenge we had during this entire training exercise (from planning to execution) was the lack of preparation time and documentation about the SRT and the type of operations they conduct.  Due to the compressed development schedule, there was limited time for us (the scenario developers) to fully coordinate with the MPs and the SRT (the training audience) to have properly planned the training event.  This resulted in making numerous changes to the scenario, vignettes and timelines.  The SRT is a very specialized unit that gets called upon during very dangerous and life-critical situations – comparable to a Special Weapons and Tactics (SWAT) Team.  The first few vignettes that were developed were neither dangerous nor life-critical – they were vignettes that were appropriate for MP units that are called on to provide support to force protection.  The original plan was to use the MP Soldiers as our role players and the SRT for the training audience.  We had to adapt our schedule to include the MP Soldiers as a training audience for the first few vignettes until a time that it would have been realistic to call on the SRT.  The final result was the MP Soldiers were in charge of the gate until the circumstances required the SRT be called in for the final few vignettes.2.3 Scenario ResultsOne of the main objectives of this training exercise was to demonstrate the utility of a virtual simulation to stimulate the decisions that come from the FROC.  During the first two vignettes, the FROC had a live video feed, with a simulated reporter, at the Ogden entry gate to Fort Riley.  We also developed and injected a number of paper Master Scenario Event List (MSEL)s that set the stage for the vignettes that would take place in the afternoon.  As a result of the activity at the Ogden gate and surrounding areas, the FROC / CMT took an unexpected action by closing down the Ogden gate and sending 3 Infantry Platoons to control any issues that may arise.  This essentially forced us to separate our training vignettes from their training exercise because they were developed based on a small number of MPs and the SRT manning the Ogden entrance.A second interesting result from the first vignette was when the Public Affairs Officer saw the reporter and the action that was taking place at the gate, she walked down to EXCON and entered the virtual environment to speak with the reporter to establish their credentials and control the situation.  We were able to bring her into the virtual environment and let her interact with the reporter.  While this was not originally planned in the Training Support Package, the decision was made and confirmed to take this course of action before the start of the exercise (STARTEX).  This demonstrated a very good point – EXCON needs to continuously update their planning, vignettes and overall scenario up to the last moment before STARTEX.The first vignette that included the SRT produced some very interesting results.  Despite the fact that the SRT could communicate with the MP Soldiers in both the virtual environment and in the cube directly next to them in the real environment, there was absolutely no interaction between them.  The vignette involved a stolen M998 approaching the entrance.  The SRT had intelligence that suggested an M998 had been stolen from the base and that the Force Condition level had risen to Charlie, but the MP Soldiers never received this intelligence information from their MP Desk Sergeant.  As a result, the SRT was never informed the vehicle was approaching and it was able to breach the gate and enter the base property.  It was unclear if the SRT had ever worked in conjunction with an MP unit comparable to this vignette, but there was certainly a learning point that was taken from this exercise.The remaining vignettes produced much more predictable results.  In each vignette, the SRT made the correct tactical decisions that the MP Company Commander expected.  After some vignettes, the Chief Trainer (MP Company Commander) conducted short Hot wash Mini-Reviews lasting only 5-10 minutes.  The purpose of these hot washes was to provide immediate feedback on lessons learned that will reinforce the final AAR.  He reviewed only the key highlights of the vignette.  The Hot washes were performed out of the simulation and conducted in the “live” environment within the Battle Simulation Center (BSC).  The Hot washes were kept short so as to not negate the tempo of the exercise because each vignette is related to each other and builds in intensity and complexity. 2.4 Participant FeedbackThe Army Research Institute (ARI) is partnered with the STTC on the AW-VTT project.  ARI’s role is to evaluate the effectiveness of the virtual environment as it relates to usability and training effectiveness.  For this exercise, ARI developed two surveys that were administered to all the participants: a Biographical survey and a User Feedback survey.  The Biographical survey is used to get an understanding of who the user is and their experience levels in such things as simulations, training, games, etc.  The User Feedback survey gathers data regarding the user’s subjective opinion on the simulation.  The data analysis hasn’t yet been completed but initial looks show some very promising feedback.3. Road AheadTo our knowledge, this was the first time that a virtual simulation was used to drive the decisions within an Army installation’s Operations Center.  Future evaluations of the AW-VTT’s training capabilities are currently being planned with organizations such as Fort Riley, the Army National Guard, and the U.S. Marine Corps.3.1 Future Fort Riley Training ExercisesFort Riley is very pleased with the training capability that this software provides and plans to integrate it further into the training strategy both on the installation side and the tactical side.  As missions change throughout the Army, we see this tool as an adaptable training enabler that will be able meet our training goals and objectives.  3.2 Technology ImprovementsThere are two forms of audio communications in the AW-VTT virtual simulation: standard person-to-person communication and radio communication.  When interacting with other avatars in the same area, there is currently only a limited capability for 3D Audio and sound attenuation.  The vignettes that were executed during this training exercise showed a clear need for technology improvements in this area.  In the real world, individuals can control the volume of their voice to communicate with a small limited number of close by individuals or someone that is some distance away.  The current implementation requires avatars to be entirely too close to one another in order to hear what is going on.  This created a problem in executing vignettes that involved large numbers of avatars protesting at a distance.AW-VTT is a persistent, virtual environment that is comprised of real people each controlling a single avatar.  This virtual environment is not like traditional games that have Artificial Intelligence (AI) characters to fill out the rest of the environment.  This lack of ‘bots,’ in some cases, results in a sparse and uncluttered environment; this can be very unrealistic.  We are currently working on creating a more open system to include a Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) interface that would allow AW-VTT to interoperate with other simulations, such as OneSAF.  This would provide the capability to create a more realistic environment full of avatars that don’t necessarily need to be controlled by live people.  We will be able to take advantage of the research being done by the Human Behavioral Modeling community to provide an environment to test and demonstrate new crowd modeling approaches.Functionality improvements will always be an issue for virtual simulations such as AW-VTT.  The scenario executed in this training exercise pointed out several areas that need development and/or improvement.  Some of the top priorities for future functionality will be adding fragmentation grenades, non-lethal weapons, ability to detain other avatars and squad specific weapons such as the M249.  These capabilities are critical to providing an application that can support different types of training.3.3 ConclusionThis training exercise was further evidence that the maturity of virtual simulations is at such a level that it can be a training enabler that can and does enhance training at the small unit level.  Further more, exercises that traditionally use constructive simulations to drive decision making at a higher level can be either augmented or replaced by interactive virtual simulations that engage training audiences down to the individual level.The AW-VTT software allows resource savings at many different levels:The Ogden gate could still be used while the MPs and SRT was trained so there was no inconvenience to anyone during the training.There was no requirement for real resources such as gasoline, bullets, etc.Time, one of the most coveted resources, was not wasted because multiple iterations could be run in very quick succession.While we did not exercise this capability, the ability to pull in resources from geographically distributed locations could have a tremendous impact on costs as we can role play across the internet and do not need to pay travel costs and extra hours for specialized personnel (i.e. language experts).The takeaway from this training exercise was two-fold.  First, we successfully demonstrated the ability for a virtual simulation to drive the events and decision making of an EOC.  Secondly, and most importantly, the users of the virtual simulation were not talking about how cool the game was or what the graphics looked like.  Instead, the users were talking about the decisions they made during the separate vignettes and discussing how they could have performed their job better.  They were comparing and contrasting their performance in the virtual environment to previous training and operational exercises they conducted in the live environment.  The AW-VTT provided them with a relevant training environment in which they were able to practice.Author BiographiesJeffrey Stahl is a Principal Investigator on Asymmetric Training / Virtual Training Technology at the RDECOM-STTC.  Prior to this assignment, he worked on Embedded Training Technology and Advanced Robotics Simulations.  He holds a B.S. in Computer Engineering, a M.S. in Engineering Management and is working on his Ph.D. in Modeling and Simulation at the University of Central Florida.Rodney Long is a Science and Technology Manager at the SFC Paul Ray Smith Simulation and Training Technology Center (STTC) in Orlando, Florida. The STTC is part of the U.S. Army Research, Development and Engineering Command.  Mr. Long is the program lead for the AW-VTT and has a breadth of simulation and training experience that spans more than 18 years in the Department of Defense.  Mr. Long has a Bachelor's Degree in Computer Engineering from the University of South Carolina and Master's degree in Industrial Engineering (Interactive Training Systems) from the University of Central Florida. MAJ Grose is currently the Chief BCTC at Fort Riley Kansas.  MAJ Grose graduated from the United States Military Academy, West Point, and was commissioned in 1994 as an engineer officer.  MAJ Grose has served as a platoon leader in both combat mechanized and construction platoons and commanded a company in the 82nd Engineer Battalion “Blue Babe.”  His other assignments include Battalion Staff in the 6th Transportation Battalion and the 5th Engineer Battalion as well as the USAEUR and USAFE staff at the Warrior Prep Center in Einsiedlerhof Germany.  MAJ Grose also served as an operations officer and project manager for the Central District of the US Army Corps of Engineers Gulf Division.  MAJ Grose received his Masters of Engineering from the University of Florida in 2003.