Applying Overlay Multicast in C2 and Simulation OperationsJ. Mark PullenC4I CenterGeorge Mason UniversityFairfax, VA 22030, USA703-993-1538mpullen@gmu.eduKeywords:overlay multicast, streaming delivery, any-source multicast, source-specific multicast ABSTRACT: The XMSF Overlay Multicast (XOM) project has developed an architecture and implemented a prototype for support of distributed simulations over non-multicast networks. Previous papers have reported on these technical products and their application in small-scale demonstrations. In order for the overlay multicast concept to be adopted in C2 and simulation operations, its utility in practical application needs to be demonstrated. GMU is working with the Actionable Situation Awareness Pull (ASAP) ACTD and also has prepared a concept for support of the Joint Rapid Database Development and Distribution (JRD3) program of JFCOM. While the current XOM system supports the any-source multicast (ASM) model, ASAP and JRD3 also include single-source multicast (SSM).  ASAP involves streaming distribution of data in Web services using an interest management paradigm. JRD3 can benefit from bulk distribution of database information using multicast for efficiency, and also multimedia multicast conferencing for exercise support. This paper describes the technical issues associated with supporting these applications using overlay multicast.1. IntroductionToday’s network-centric military environment is resulting in greatly increased interest in bridging the gap between command and control (C2) systems and simulations [1,2], using Web technologies [3]. As part of this interest, there is a growing recognition that network-centricity and the resulting increases in interoperable systems will bring about significant increases in demand for network capacity. Much of the demand will be for group communications, where several networked computers need to share the same information in real time. For many years the C2 and simulation communities have been aware that great reductions in network traffic resulting from group communications can be achieved by multicasting, a technology wherein traffic is delivered to a group address rather than to each separate computer.This paper describes plans, designs and implementation of multicasting technology used to support two leading-edge network-centric applications: the Actionable Situation Awareness Pull (ASAP) Advanced Concept technology Demonstration (ACTD) [4] and the Joint Rapid Distributed Database Development capability of US JFCOM [5]. The multicasting uses a new approach called Overlay Multicast that overcomes past problems associated with multicasting networks. The applications span a wide range of C2, simulation, and group communications paradigms, showing how the overlay approach can support a wide range of requirements over normal (unicast) networks. 2. Overlay MulticastThe essence of multicasting is that a group communication application is not required to transmit information separately from its source to every other computer in the group. Instead, a supporting process distributes each transmission to all computers associated with the group. For wide-area networks, the multicasting function traditionally has been performed in the network’s routers (packet switches), however overlay multicasting achieves the same result using cooperating relay middleware on the end system hosts (computers). Figure 1 contrasts router-based multicasting with overlay multicasting (also called end-host multicasting). The overlay design was pioneered in academic projects for one-to-many or single-source multicasting (SSM) [6,7]. We have extended the overlay concept to many-to-many or any-source multicasting (ASM), creating an architecture and reference implementation prototype [8-9] and also implementing a form of reliable multicasting uniquely suited to distributed virtual simulation [10-11]. The resulting capability, which we call Cross-network Overlay Multicast (XOM, previously XMSF Overlay Multicast) is compatible with traditional network multicasting [12] and therefore can be implemented using existing computers and operating system multicast implementations. It achieves performance comparable to router multicasting implementations over a wide range of loading [13]. The XOM prototype implementation is available for Linux and Windows platforms as open-source software on the GMU NETLAB website [14]. The architecture document and associated publications also are available there.In preparing the XOM prototype for demonstration in the ASAP ACTD, we took several steps to make it more practical to use:Packaged the executables for simple download/install, with scripts to execute them.Moved the list of XOM relays for a given overlay to a central Web service, secured by https. This avoids the need for the relays, operating at different sites, to be identically configured. It also facilitates central management of the overlay.Created another Web service to maintain the performance statistics reported by the relays in the overlay, and outfitted this repository with a program to produce graphic status reports that are accessible from anywhere on the network via Web browser, under password control. This functions as a simple network status reporting system.3. ASAP ACTD Multicast DesignThe ASAP ACTD implements an integrated battlefield intelligence feed as a Web service. While highly composable and readily adaptable to a variety of processing requirements, ASAP faces the challenge identified in the introduction to this paper, in that the ASAP information feed is best suited to the Global Information Grid (GIG) backbone and potentially exceeds the capacity of tactical networks. In cases where a group of clients distributed around the network require access to ASAP, it will almost certainly be the case that some tactical networks will be unable to support the resulting traffic. To address this problem, we adapted our Web Services Interest Management (WSIM) prototype, as described in [15,16], that is capable of restricting the information delivered to a group of networked clients based on actual interest. This results in reduction pf the volume of traffic associated with Web service protocols, and achieves additional efficiency by delivering the resulting information using overlay multicasting. Figure 2 shows the architecture for WSIM as applied to the ASAP ACTD, including an Open Map graphic display. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Of particular note in Figure 2 is the communication channel from the WSIM client to the server. This can take either of two forms: standard XML/SOAP/HTTP Web transport, or streaming multicast. The multicast uses the XML tagset, compressed using XML Schema Binary Compression (XSBC) as described in [17].  In turn, multicasting can be achieved using the XOM prototype. We demonstrated in [16] that this approach to transmission can reduce network traffic by a factor of thirty, supporting a primary WSIM goal.4. JRD3 Multicast ApplicationsThe JRD3 is intended to integrate the required data, obtained from various authoritative data sources, into the planning, coordination, and preparation activities by structuring the data into a cohesive and consistent data set used to support relevant systems in JFCOM’s Joint National Training Capability (JNTC). We have identified three major applications for multicasting in JRD3:ASM exchange of real-time state data among distributed simulationsASM group communication for collaborative conferencingSSM distribution of environmental dataThe exchange of object state data via ASM is a common approach for training exercises. Use of multicasting for participant and controller conferences (before, during and after the exercises) is less common but it represents a well-understood practice dating back to the inception of Internet Multicast Backbone (Mbone) [18]. Overlay Multicast provides a way to distribute these functions over wide-area networks that do not implement network multicasting.The question of environmental data distribution represents an innovation for military distributed simulations. The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) is nearing completion on an initiative in reliable multicast transport that supports a new family of protocols capable of transferring bulk data over SSM [19]. A variety of special techniques have been developed for this purpose, including use of forward error correction and a scheme that selectively provides repairs for lost transmissions.  Because the XOM prototype is fully compatible with standard IP multicast, these techniques can be applied to distribution of environmental data for the JNTC. The result will be a reduction in data transmission time for exercise setup proportional to the number of network hosts that use the same data files.5. ConclusionsUse of Overlay Multicast in support of distributed group communication for C2 and Simulation is only just starting. Our laboratory tests show it is fully capable of supporting a wide range of applications, from C2 requirements like those of the ASAP ACTD to simulation support systems such as JRD3. The distributed simulation community has much to gain by employing it.6.  AcknowledgementThis work was supported in part by the US Defense Modeling and Simulation Office.7.  ReferencesWinters, L. S., “The Integration of Modeling and Simulation with Joint command and Control on the Global Information Grid,” Proceedings of the IEEE Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, paper 05S-SIW-148, San Diego, CA, April 2005.McGraw, R., C. Lammers, J, Steinman, and D. A. Trevisani, “A DSAP Infrastructure for the Global Information Grid’s Modeling and Simulation community of Interest,” Proceedings of the IEEE Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, paper 05S-SIW-034, San Diego, CA, April 2005.Brutzman, D., M. Zyda, M., J.M. Pullen, and K.L. Morse, “Extensible Modeling and Simulation Framework (XMSF): Challenges for Web-Based Modeling and Simulation”, US Naval Postgraduate School, 2002L3 CommunicationsTitan Group, Actional Situation Awareness Pullen (ASAP) ACTD web site, http://www.titan.com/products-services/abstract.html?docID=457US Joint Forces Command, webpage “Technology focus to strengthen joint training efforts,” http://www.jfcom.mil/newslink/storyarchive/2004/pa060304.htmChu, Yang-hua, S. G. Rao, S. Seshan, and H. Zhang, “A Case for End System Multicast,” Proceedings of the ACM Sigmetrics, June 2000.Wang, Wenjie, David Helder, Sughi Jamin, and Lixia Zhang, “Overlay Optimizations for End-host Multicast,” Proceedings of the ACM NGC 2002, p154-161.Moen, D., J. Pullen, and F. Zhao, "Implementation of Host-based Overlay Multicast to Support of Web Based Services for RT-DVS", Proceedings of the Eighth IEEE Workshop on Distributed Simulation and Real-Time Applications, 2004, pp. 4-11.Moen, Dennis and J.M. Pullen, "A Performance Measurement Approach for the Selectively Reliable Multicast Protocol for Distributed Simulation," Proceedings of the Fifth IEEE Workshop on Distributed Simulation and Real-Time Applications, 2001, pp.30-34.Pullen, J., “Reliable Multicast Network Transport for Distributed Virtual Simulation”, Proceedings of the 1999 IEEE Distributed Interactive Simulation and Real-Time Systems Workshop.Pullen, J., D. Cohen, and F. Zhao, “Selectively Reliable Multicast Protocol,” IETF Experimental RFC 4410, Internet Society, 2006Braudes, R. and S. Zabele, “Requirements for Multicast Protocols”, IETF RFC 1458, Society,1993.Moen, D. and J. Pullen, J., “Performance Evaluation of he XMSF Overlay Multicast Prototype,” Proceedings of the IEEE European Simulation Interoperability Workshop, paper 05E-SIW-054, Toulouse, France, June 2005.George Mason University C4I Center Networking and Simulation Laboratory, webpage “XMSF Overlay Multicast,” http://netlab.gmu.edu/XOM/.Morse, Katherine L., Ryan Brunton, J. Mark Pullen, Priscilla McAndrews, Andreas Tolk, and James Muguira K., “An Architecture for Web-Services Based Interest Management in Real Time Distributed Simulation”, Proceedings of the Eighth IEEE Workshop on Distributed Simulation and Real-Time Applications, 2004Morse, K., , J.M. Pullen, R. Brunton, and D. Drake, “Web Services Interest Management,” Proceedings of the IEEE Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, paper 04F-SIW-037, Orlando, FL, September 2004US Naval Postgraduate School MOVES Institute, XSBC webpage, http://xmsf.sourceforge.net/Macedonia, M. and D. Brutzman, Mbone Provides Audio and Video Across the Internet, IEEE Computer, April 1994, 30-36Internet Engineering Task Force Reliable Multicast Transport Working Group webpage, http://rmt.motlabs.com/Author BiographyJ. MARK PULLEN is Professor of Computer Science at George Mason University, where he serves as Director of the C4I Center and also heads the Center’s Networking and Simulation Laboratory. He holds BSEE and MSEE degrees from West Virginia University, and the Doctor of Science in Computer Science from the George Washington University. He is a licensed Professional Engineer, Fellow of the IEEE, and Fellow of the ACM. Dr. Pullen teaches courses in computer networking and has active research in networking for distributed virtual simulation and networked multimedia tools for distance education. EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure 2. Web Service Interest Management Architecture   Traditional IP Multicast:  Usually One-to-Many     -  Single Sender    -  Core/root-Based Tree  Closed Network    (Single Management Domain)  Insensitive to applicationInternetCGFDEBATreeSourceHCJGFDEBDataSourceTreeRootPrivateNetworkA Cross-Network Overlay Multicast:  Many-to-Many     -  Many senders to same group    -  Source-Based Trees  Open Network    (Independent of  Management Domain)  Responsive to Application    -  End-to-End QoS Considerations    -  Group Management EfficiencyFigure 1.  Multicast Comparisons 