LOI-Network Enabled Capability Pre study (LOI-NEC)(06E-SIW-071)Jan LarssonJan TegnérSaab Systems ABNettovägen 6SE 17588 Järfälla, Sweden+46 8 580 840 00Staffan EricssonSwedish Defence Material Administration (FMV) HYPERLINK "mailto:Jan.larsson@saabsystems.se" Jan.larsson@saabsystems.se,  HYPERLINK "mailto:staffan.ericson@fmv.se" staffan.ericson@fmv.se,  HYPERLINK "mailto:jan.tegner@saabsystems.se" jan.tegner@saabsystems.se  Keywords:Behaviour Model, Simulation, Interaction, Communication, Speech.ABSTRACT: Many armed forces are currently going through a transformation to meet the new demands of the Post-Cold-War era.  Within the six nations behind the LOI Framework Agreement ( France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Sweden and UK) activities are performed aiming at developing various kinds of Network Enabling Capabilities. (NEC)Since most of the nations are in the beginning of the development activities and partly have the same goals, the LOI Group of Research Directors have decided to launch a pre-study aiming at defining a development programme which can complement other national and multinational programmes performed by the six participating nations.One vision of NEC is to be able to quickly and cost-effective develop/integrate and deploy technical systems, supporting superior Situation Awareness, Command & Control, and Engagement capabilities (including training and mission rehearsal) in Coalition operations for the war fighter of tomorrow. The main objective of the LOI-NEC Pre-Study is to propose a programme which can contribute in the gaining of know-how for introducing NEC into the armed forces. It is therefore important that the results from such a program is a complement to various national programs. They should be of mutual concern for both the governments and the industry in the participating nations and should encourage and facilitate industrial co-operation within the six participating nations.The expected result of this pre-study shall be such that it can be used by the six LOI-nations to specify the content of future NEC study programmes. The proposed programme could include building a demonstrator, defining scenarios and perform demonstrations. The scenario for the program could be related to achieving Shared Situation Awareness between the participating forces in a peace-keeping/peace-enforcing environment, where the participating units come from a selected subset of the units submitted to future European forces.The pre-study started in September 2005 and will run for 9 month. It is carried out by an industry team representing several industries from the participating nations. The contract was let by WRC to SAAB who is the Prime-Contractor and Industry Team Leader. The six nations government management group is chaired by Sweden and FMV.1. Background & ObjectivesThe LOI-NEC Pre-study has as an objective to establish a European Industry Cooperation regarding Network Centric Warfare. The project involves a large number of companies from France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Sweden and UK, the six nations co-operating under a Framework Agreement from year 2000. SAAB of Sweden leads this industry group. The pre-study is over a 9 month period. The plan is that the pre-study will be followed by a three year Demonstration Program.  Contracting agency for the pre-study was WRC. Now the contract has been transferred to EDA. Sweden is leading the 6-nations government group, which has the task to monitor the program and approve milestone.1.1  Six Nations LOI Framework AgreementThe LOI-NEC Pre-study is an initiative within LOI Subgroup of Research and Technology. LOI (Letter of Intent) is a Framework Agreement from year 2000 between France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Sweden and UK concerning: “Measures to facilitate the restructuring and operation of the European Defence Industry”.  LOI-FA is lead by an Executive Committee and has 6 sub-committees, one which is dealing with Defence-related Research and Technology. Chairmanship is rotating, currently Germany chairs the LOI Research and Technology Group.1.2 Aim of the LOI-NEC pre-studyThe aim of the pre-study is to define a European demonstration programme for the promotion of Shared Situational Awareness. The programme shall encompass / represent as well as possible the defence industry in the LOI-nations. It shall also address relevant questions in an operational environment of current interest. This leads to requirement on joint operations between forces of different type and nationality and interoperability between these forces. In this study emphasis will not be on solving interoperability problems but rather to highlight existing and possible solutions to show the state-of-the-art regarding NEC. EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure 1.2.1 Aim of LOI-NEC2.  IntroductionThe pre-study started in September –05 and will be finished in May –06. This paper presents some intermediate results and an outline of the demonstrator functionality.2.1 Workflow for programme definitionA workflow has been defined for the program. First a vision for the program is defined in which a number of operational and experimental questions are defined. Scenarios and detailed vignettes are then developed to support demonstrations that will answer the operational and experimental questions. Measures of performance and effectiveness are defined for the scenarios. Further inventories of possible simulation infrastructures are then made to determine which simulation facilities, which simulation models and tools and which simulation architectures that may be used to support the demonstrations. Inventories of live assets are also performed to determine which real systems that may be used to support the demonstrations.Finally functional descriptions of different demonstrators are defined, which then may be realized in demonstrator programmes.Figure 2.1.1 Workflow for programme definition3. Vision and battlespace context definition processThe Vision and scenario definition process contains:Operational questionsExperimental questionsBattlespace context and ScenarioScenario vignettesIt will be important to define a demonstration programme in which relevant questions from all participating nations are handled. For this purpose each nation contributed with a number of operational questions. These questions where discussed and evaluated in a common workshop in order to find similarities and differences. In this process capability gaps were also identified.In the following process the operational questions where categorized into a reduced number of experimental questions and an initial hypothesis formulated.The Operational Questions provided the Battlespace Context from which an overall scenario could be derived. The Experimental Questions enabled specific focus to be applied and formed the basis for the vignette drivers.In an iterative process scenarios and vignettes are formed from battlespace context and vignette drivers. This process ensures that relevant national questions are taken into account during the programme definition.Figure 3.1 Operational Question Derivation Process4. Scenarios and vignettesThe focus of the study is on shared situation awareness. The scenario must thus offer relevant opportunities to evaluate the potential of network enabled capabilities on the availability and display of data and information among the different commands, platforms and personnel involving Strategic, Operational and Tactical levels.With regard to this building purpose, several criteria are deemed important:Operationally-wise,The scenario must take into account plausible crisis situations, or those situations that must be handled with priority,The scenario must illustrate a likely deployment context for a European coalition,  The scenario must cover the scope of international, joint and combined forces,It needs to provide a context that is large enough to involve different levels of command,It must offer the possibility to test the operational use cases identified in the LOI vision guidelines.Technically-wise, As mentioned above, the scenario needs to provide relevant operational opportunities and advantages that would benefit from the sharing situational awareness,If possible, it should offer a set of situations allowing for the evaluation of relevant technical and system issues.The scenario will be a support towards two possible achievements of future LOI-NEC stages, depending on their expected scope:Demonstrate the feasibility of sharing information amongst European forces thus demonstrating the military worth of Shared Situational Awareness but still respecting the nation traditional orders of battle,Show the leverage effect of having a network-enabled European coalition, from the  shared situation awareness prospect, when each individual coalition  actor, whatever its national origin,  can  access and provide information in a timely manner.Project-wise, the scenario also needs to federate the operational inputs provided by each nation. As many actors are involved, and many criteria looked for, it is possible that one unique scenario may not be feasible to cover all the subjects, but rather different scenarios will be required.4.1 ScenarioCountry X’s border area has always been subject to country Y’s territorial claims because of the economical wealth it generates. The existence of an important Y minority fraction in X border area further degraded relations between the two countries regarding this zone. In a surprise move, Y forces invade X border area and rapidly occupy its main port city and vital economic center, Greenport. The rest of the area is then secured, thanks to the support of local fractions of Y ethnic origin. A government is then established, that has control over the newly formed Z republic, and officially ask Y troops to remain in place in order to protect Z against possible enemy intrusions. Z waters are mined to prevent attacks from the sea.X vigorously protests in front of the UNO, and obtains that a Combined Joint Task Force (CJTF) be set up to confront Y troops, restore X sovereignty over the breakaway Z republic, disarm Z militias, and prevent Y from reinforcing its troops. The CJTF is tasked with remaining in place until X can reorganize the defense of the disputed area in an efficient manner. Only in case of grave threats should the CJTF engage any target within Y territory.CJTF is set up by 6 European countries: A, B, C, D, E and F. The strategic operation commander is provided by country A. The CJTF is deployed within X and prepares for major combat operations from Staging Area BEAN. Diplomatic envoys have made the point clear that in case of mass attacks (Iskander, MLRS or strike fighters) on BEAN, RoE would be modified and targets within Y would be designated for retaliatory strikes.Figure 4.1.1 ScenarioIn this scenario a number of vignettes like:Initial deployment ConsolidationReconnaissance in forceMain Forcewill be defined in storyboard detail based on vignette drivers to visualize specific operational questions. In a real demonstration the corresponding hypothesis can then be tested and evaluated.5. Simulation infrastructureIt is required that a demonstration program shall not be relying too much on real assets since real assets are cost-driving. Instead the program shall to largest extent rely on simulators and simulation laboratories.For this purpose simulation infrastructure has been collated by conducting national surveys in all LOI-nations of appropriate facilities and capabilities.The NECP demonstrations will include Command and Control (C2) systems and simulators that falls under export regulations and/or require lots of computers, space etc. Thus, it is likely that the demonstrations will be performed by federating several existing labs in the six participating countries. The first step when setting up the demonstrations will be to create a common network between the participating labs to be able to interact between existing systems using standard interfaces. In the next step web based functionality need to be added to provide a higher degree of interoperability in a network centric approach. The simulators and C2 Systems in the demonstrations need to be able to handle several different interfaces. Figure 5.1 Main interface types of C2 systemsA distributed simulated environment is necessary to provide a common view of all entities and events in the simulated world. C2 systems and simulators will exchange their perceived situation picture, orders etc using live or simulated tactical data links. In a network centric environment the focus is on capabilities instead of systems. Using a service oriented architecture selected capabilities of the participating systems may be registered, so that other users may use the capabilities without a need for tactical data links.Figure 5.2 Simulation layers with possible interfacesWhile simulated environment contains all facit data about the world, the perceived environment is the NEC networks joint knowledge of the current situation. Simulation network will be built on current standards and the aim is to define a simulation framework withReal-time Time management System start & initializationExercise control with individual start/stopGateways to support other simulation standards or FOMsFinal selection of simulators and simulation laboratories will be made based on the agreed vignettes.6. AssetsThe NEC and SSA concepts can be considered relatively new issues. The development of new concepts requires speculative capabilities, but it is also based on the knowledge and expertise derived by culture and experience.Starting from the IEEE STD 610.12, which define an architecture as “the structure of components, their relationships, and the principles and guidelines governing their design and evolution over time” the pre-study define an asset as “a physical component of an architecture of systems which are identified in the context of a scenario”.The components of an architecture, particularly in the military world, can be grouped accordingly to their primary mission. A total of eight generic components are proposed for this study, as shown also in the figure:1.	Command & Control2.	Sensors3.	Weapons4.	Communications5.	Platforms6.	Logistic support7.	Mobility8.	InformationFigure 6.1 Asset components7. Discussion on functional requirements of a demonstratorNetwork Enabled Capability (NEC) encompasses a vision of an agile information capability that enables the Defense Enterprise to:   Make Business and Operational decisions based on Shared Situational AwarenessIncrease the tempo and quality of operational and business decision making by ensuring the right information is made available at the right time at the right place to the right individual/sCollaborate dynamically across system, organizational, geographical and other boundariesCoordinate and Synchronize actions in a dynamic and adaptive way including assessment of performance and results achieved.A Net centric way of working ensures the capacity to deliver Effects Based Operations (EBO).  EBO is regarded as being a critical capability which has the capacity to change the way in which we deal with regions and countries which pose a threat to our own country or our allies. For the military area it changes the way to fight wars.Effects Based Operations (EBO) is based on a comprehensive knowledge about all relevant aspects of the battlefield which is used to generate most effective actions with the least resources leading to the desired overall goal. The ability to deliver EBO is highly dependent upon the delegation of responsibility and the presence of Shared Situational Awareness.  SSA is derived from a number of elements, the most significant of these being the Common Operational Picture (COP) and its specific Operational subsets/supersets – the Common Relevant Operational Pictures (CROP).  The information required to deliver the COP and the CROPs is derived from deep, flexible systems integration, on a scale not yet attempted in the Military Enterprise.  In its most mature state, the COP will be generated from a sophisticated systems integration architecture which will encompass all weapons systems, all sensor systems and all information systems inside the Military Enterprise.  Data and Information will also be integrated from external sources.In order to deliver EBO, having the COP, the CROPs and the SSA is not enough.  The commander must have at his or her disposal a set of Operational Processes which will enable the SSA and COP/CROP to be exploited to the fullest extent. Many of these OPs will be supported by specific tools – e.g. Decision Support tools.  Clearly, personnel will need to be trained on these tools and processes – this is the human factors side of NEC and it is absolutely crucial to its success.The pre-study has, therefore, made the assumption that the LOI NEC demonstrator must be capable of Demonstrating (showing) those new ways of working – not simply showing new technology doing the things which we know how to do today.  NEC is, after all, all about “doing better things and not just about doing things better”.  The demonstrator will show:How a wide range of disparate systems can be integrated in a flexible, changeable, yet robust, manner to enable the generation of the COP and the CROPs and thus facilitate the creation of SSAHow the new ways of working – the new Operational Processes – will be enabled from a technology standpoint by the provision of a rich set of “consumable services” based upon, and derived from, for the most part, the existing legacy suite of effectors, sensors, networks and information systems.  These Services will exist in two discrete sets, as specified in the NATO Functional Area Services (FAS) model - Specific Services and Common ServicesHow these new OPs can be used in an Operational environment by showing their applicability and beneficial effect in specific military scenariosAdditionally, the LOI NEC Demonstrator will explore the nature of a set of “non-Business-specific services” – the Core Services, which will facilitate the creation and interoperation of the Specific and Common Services.8. Acknowledgements The authors want to thank the LOI-NEC Industry partners and the members of the Technical Arrangement Management Group for sharing their expertise and for fruitful discussions during our work with this paper.Author BiographiesDr. JAN LARSSON, received a PhD in Remote Sensing from the Royal Institute of Technology, department of Photogrammetry, 1980. He is an associate of Saab, division Security Solutions in Järfälla, Sweden and currently the project manager of HiTS/ISAC. Research interest includes Geographic Information Systems - GIS, Digital Image Processing and Analysis and Digital Mapping.STAFFAN ERICSSON, Swedish Defence Materiel Administration, graduated from Lund University of Technology in 1973 with a MSc in Engineering Physics.  His present position is with the Department of Future Systems in FMV where he works with various international cooperation programmes in the area of Surveillance and Command and Control.  He has an industrial background as Manager of Data Fusion System Development at Celsius Tech Systems (now Saab Systems). JAN TEGNÉR is Technical Manager at the Training & Simulation department at Saab Systems in Sweden. He currently works with C4ISR to Simulation integration issues including simulation of tactical data links and Network Enabled Capabilities. Previously he has been involved in the development of several C4ISR systems for the Naval and Air Defence domain and simulators for Air Defence systems. During the last years he has mainly been working with R&D in the field of Modelling & Simulation and Network Enabled Capabilities. Jan Tegnér is elected member of SISO Conference Committee and SISO Board of Directors.  EMBED Word.Picture.8  n EMBED Word.Picture.8  g