Space Intelligence Products for OneSAF Objective System (OOS)Kevin Crumlishkevin.crumlish@us.army.milUS Army Space and Missile Defense Future Warfare CenterSam McNullymcnullys@alatecinc.comALATEC, Inc.Keywords: Space, Satellite, OneSAF, IntelligenceABSTRACT: Incorporating space-based intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) representations in OneSAF Objective System (OOS) integrates space into operational space-based intelligence collection planning [1], and is critical for the Army to make effective decisions regarding Battle Command concepts [2].  OOS  is a composable, next generation computer generated forces (CGF) that can represent a full range of operations, systems, and control processes from individual combatant and platform to battalion level, with a variable level of fidelity that supports all modeling and simulation (M&S) domains.  The Intelligence Battlefield Operating System (BOS) representations in OOS generate knowledge and products portraying the enemy and the environmental features for OneSAF Sides and Forces to plan, prepare, execute, and assess operations.  OneSAF development for the Intel BOS primarily focuses on the basic functionalities provided to the maneuver commander by the Direct Support Military Intelligence Companies of various OneSAF Sides and Forces.  Including space-based ISR representations in OneSAF allows the intelligence cycle to create an updated Common Operating Picture (COP) that includes data from "outside" the OneSAF unit of interest play box.  Enemy commanders increasingly have greater access to remote sensing capabilities, thus representations of their utilization of commercial and Red space systems are also important to include when developing knowledge rules and procedures in Battle Command Course of Action (COA) and After Action Report (AAR) tools.  Space and space operations are present in every operational concept in an enabling fashion vice an imposing one.  The space design philosophy for OOS uses this context.  This paper discusses the methodology of implementing a space mobility behavior with low overhead cost with ISR satellite entities in OOS.   ObjectiveThe objective of this project was to enable explicit representations while minimizing operator actions and impact on processing time.  This implementation included explicit modeling of the satellite and sensors with implicit modeling of the intelligence Request for Information (RFI) process to respond to the commander’s Priority Intelligence Requirements (PIR).  Initial Static DataBecause the simulation of combat below the brigade or unit of action rarely involves interaction with terrestrial ground stations, Space Unit Models are used to aggregate Blue, Gray, and Red satellites with their associated ground stations to enable realistic representations of the command and control structures above the simulated unit.  Just like gravity, space is always “there” as far as most military operators are concerned so these space units exist by default in the force structure and single satellites or the units may be deleted like any other OOS traditional military unit or entity. Authoritative satellite position initialization data is stored in the OOS repository in the form of Two Line Element (TLE) Sets.  TLEs are satellite location data sets produced by Cheyenne Mountain Operations Center and updates or alternates are available through internet connections at: http://www.celestrak.com/NORAD/elements/master.asp.  A TLE contains position data for a satellite at a specific date and time or epoch.  We designed the satellite movement algorithms in OOS to use this standard data form as the basis for representing a satellite’s position.  Each satellite also has payload data for sensor and communications parameters.  The satellite ground stations are also stored in the repository and are associated with their respective satellite systems for communications purposes.  Additionally, each Satellite Unit has an entity that serves as an exploitation center and is used to post space intelligence products on command and control networks.Scenario SetupIn order to represent the RFI process that leads to tasking space systems for surveillance, an implicit method is required.  When a user creates a control measure like Target Area of Interest or Named Area of Interest, the Satellite Model is triggered to schedule satellites for collection during the next available over flight and observation of the particular control measure.  During scenario set up, several calculations take place in order to minimize impact at initialization and simulation execution.  These calculations are portions of the Generalized Representation of Space-based Platforms (GRoSP) algorithm and a brief discussion is provided.Satellite Move BehaviorThe GRoSP algorithm, a satellite movement behavior algorithm enables the M&S community to incorporate space-based assets without relying on propagation software used in traditional approaches.  A problem with the traditional approaches is that a typical simulation terrain box may represent less than 0.03% of the earth’s surface, and the computational resources necessary for the continuous propagation might better be used for simulations of processes that impact training or analysis goals rather than propagation of satellites when they cannot possibly influence military operations in the area of interest (AOI).  The initial satellites implemented in OOS include commercial ISR satellite systems in Low Earth Orbit (LEO): Landsat, Indian Remote Sensing (IRS), Quickbird, Ikonos, and the French SPOT systems.  LEO satellites tend to be in orbits between 300 and 2,000 kilometers and the GRoSP algorithm initially computes only one point per orbit, the north-to-south equator crossing point or Longitude of Ascending Node (LAN).  As shown in Figure 1, occasionally the LAN of a satellite indicates that the orbit will carry the satellite over the area of military interest.   SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT We refer to the range of longitudes where this potential exists as the gateway for the satellite, and at most latitudes of military interest, two gateways will exist—one on the ascending portion of the orbit and another on the descending portion.  When a LAN is inside one of the calculated gateways depicted for that satellite/AOI combination, the influence entry and exit points are solved directly using spherical trigonometry.  In other words, a satellite transit (satran) position and time stamp is provided to the simulation.  If a LAN is outside of the gateway, then the satellite’s position is not calculated because it cannot influence the AOI.  For a more detailed discussion of GRoSP see Advanced Simulation Technology Conference (ASTC) paper “Generalized Representation of Space-based Platforms for Various Orbits” [3].GRoSP and Scenario SetupGiven the area surveillance capability of space-based ISR assets, this OOS implementation focuses on imagery based ISR for areas of interest (AOI). OOS implements these areas as a subset of the point array control measures consistent with Military Standard 2525B. All control measures are therefore screened to select the high priority ones that could realistically go through the intelligence collection and synchronization cycles and return space intelligence products.  Corner points are determined around the control measure to create a rectilinear space AOI.  Gateways are calculated for each satellite/AOI and are stored.  The user may add or delete space units and entities.  These entities include theater exploitation systems, which yield more timely space intelligence reports.  The user also establishes the communication network between the space exploitation entities and the combat/C2 entities.  When the scenario is saved the stored calculations are also saved with the Space Unit Models, thus saving clock cycles the next time the scenario is used.InitializationSpace represents an interesting simulation problem in as much as the systems in space are in absolute positions relative to each other and the earth at specific times and dates.  Therefore, the date-time group for the simulated activity is key to establishing the relative positions of the spacecraft on that date and at that time.  OOS causes the user to establish the date and time of the simulation during the initialization process, so the satellites themselves are initialized based on their TLEs and the scenario start date and time.  The satellite TLEs all have different epochs and at initialization they are all synchronized to the start date and time of the scenario.  The Satellite Mobility Model achieves computational efficiency by only moving the satellite during those times when it is in a position to influence the military interest.  Otherwise, the algorithm places the satellite into a dormant state. The Satellite Mobility Model calculates the entry and exit point with time stamps of when the satellite’s sensor/s can view the AOI.  The Satellite Mobility Model registers a timer on an Event Router to activate the satellite from its dormant state.  The OOS Satellite Model also calculates waypoints between the entry/exit points based on the sensor field of view (FOV) and strip collect capabilities.  This route of waypoints is sent to the satellite blackboard for the Satellite Mobility Agent to retrieve.  The OOS blackboard is used as the communication mechanism among agents as shown in Figure 2.   SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 2: Space agents communicate via the blackboard.Agents subscribe to triggers (facts) of interest and the blackboard distributes triggers, when they arrive, to interested agents.  During initialization, a communication delay downlink is calculated for each satellite for an ascending pass and a descending pass over the terrain box and they are stored.  The delay is based on the amount of time it takes for the satellite to fly from the terrain box exit point (middle longitude of the box) to communication range of the first ground station in its network using a 2,500km communication field of regard for the as depicted in Figure 3.   SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT The delay may be zero because a ground station for a particular satellite network may have communication access with a satellite as it passes over the terrain box.  This is a Low Resolution (LR) method that uses a reasonable delay for a satellite’s downlink delay.ExecutionMobility & SensingWhen the satellite is activated from its dormant state, it is “flown” from the entry point through its waypoints to the exit point reusing existing portions of the OOS Fixed Wing Aircraft (FWA) mobility algorithms. The Satellite Sensor Model is activated at each of the waypoints.  OOS sensors use the Army Material Systems Analysis Activity (AMSAA) ACQUIRE algorithm.  The Satellite Sensor Agent requests the target list from the Intel Agent.  The target list is run through ACQUIRE to create a perceived entity list based on the specific sensor’s parameters and the Satellite Sensor Agents registers it on the blackboard.  This implementation uses a Low Resolution (LR) approach with sensing by not incorporating Line of Sight (LOS) calculations.Communication The Satellite Model creates a spot report based on the satellite’s perceived entity lists during the transit over the AOI and sends it to the Satellite Unit Model.  The Satellite Unit Model sends the report to the unit exploitation entity with a delay for exploitation (user defined for in-theater and reachback exploitation assets) and a delay for downlinking the data to a ground station in the network.  The ascending or descending pass communication delay calculated during initialization is used.  The reachback or in theater exploitation system posts the report on the network for the combat/command and control units.New Control MeasuresTo maximize the utility and value of the new space-based ISR functionality in dynamic settings that require long running scenarios, a mechanism must exist to allow controller and commanders to inject new AOIs that require collection from space-based assets. The Space Unit Model registers the fact that new control measures are of interest on the unit blackboard for the Satellite Agent.  As new control measures are created, they are screened to determine applicability to the space-based ISR processes and then added to future collection plans—the same process that occurs with control measures during scenario set up takes place with these new control measures.SummaryAs military operations rely increasingly on space-based capabilities (Sensing, Weather, Communications, and Position/Navigation), both the trainer and the force provider have a need to model different space capabilities.  An underlying theme for this implementation was to provide a computationally efficient, user-friendly capability.  While this implementation provided satellites in LEO, the GRoSP algorithm also provides the capability to represent satellites in Medium Earth Orbit (MEO) and Geosynchronous Orbit (GEO).  LEO provides the capability to model sensing, communications, and weather satellites. MEO provides ability to model position/navigation satellites, and GEO provides ability to model sensing (missile warning), communications, and weather satellites—and in an efficient fashion.  This project was executed in the SMDC OOS Co-development lab in Huntsville, AL.  Integration is planned with OOS v1.1 this fall.  Future projects include incorporating other ISR capabilities like radar and ELINT.References [1] Studies in Battle Command, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, 27 May 2005.[2] OneSAF Overview, OneSAF Objective System Public Website,  HYPERLINK "http://www.onesaf.org" www.onesaf.org, 18 August 2005.[3] Perry Feuerstein, “Generalized Representation of Space-based Platforms for Various Orbits”, Paper, Advanced Simulation Technology Conference (ASTC), Spring 2004.Author BiographiesKEVIN CRUMLISH is an operations research analyst for Space and Missile Defense Future Warfare Center in Huntsville, Alabama.  He leads modeling and simulation development tasks for space representations.  Kevin participated in the Army Space Focus Area Collaborative Team process that developed the Space M&S roadmap leading up to the execution of this project. He is also a former Naval Flight Officer with more than 1,500 hours in S-3B Viking and P-3C Orion aircraft.  He is now a Navy Reserve Component intelligence officer for Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA).SAM MCNULLY, as Vice President of ALATEC Inc., develops modeling, simulation, systems engineering, and systems analysis technologies for government customers. Sam participated in the Army Space Focus Area Collaborative Team process and strategy that developed the Space M&S roadmap leading up to the execution of this project. In addition to teaching continuing education classes in simulation uses and applications at the University of Alabama in Huntsville, Mr. McNully is a founding member and current board member of the Alabama Modeling and Simulation Council (AMSC).Figure 3.  Satellite orbits that cannot influence (sense) an AOI are filtered.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1.  Satellite orbits that cannot influence (sense) an AOI are filtered. .  If in gateway, then entry/exit points are calculated.