Modeling Human IntelligenceMr. Timothy G. DiVecchiaProgram Manager, M&S Research and DevelopmentGeneral Dynamics Advanced Information Systems10560 Arrowhead DriveFairfax, VA 22030Voice (703) 277-1824 HYPERLINK "mailto:timothy.divecchia@gd-ais.com" timothy.divecchia@gd-ais.comKeywords:ISR, Behaviors, M&S, HUMINTABSTRACT:  Human Intelligence (HUMINT) is one of the most highly sought out sources of intelligence by our military commanders.  In simulations, however, the level of threat representation often fails to provide the detailed information, normally captured and forwarded by HUMINT assets.  Under IR&D, General Dynamics continued to evolve a set of HUMINT models they developed for the Army and Joint training.  Some of these models rely on explicit simulated data while others relied on implicit modeling techniques to generate the necessary intelligence products.   This paper will describe the challenges and solutions associated with the following HUMINT models: Long-Range Surveillance Units (LRS), Document Exploitation (DOCEX), Interrogation of Prisoners of War (IPW), Non-combatant Screening (NCS)  and Counter Intelligence Force Protection Sustainment Operations (CFSO).1. IntroductionIntelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR) capabilities provide critical information to today’s tactical and strategic decision makers.  When addressing an asymmetric threat, Human Intelligence (HUMINT) often plays a larger role in the decision process than the steadfast Imagery Intelligence (IMINT) and Signals Intelligence (SIGINT) capabilities.   The challenge with simulating HUMINT is that often the sensors (humans) and the sensor targets (humans/urban infrastructures) are not explicitly represented in the simulations. This paper will discuss recent developments of HUMINT modeling.2. HUMINT ModelingModeling HUMINT is not a new endeavor as many current and legacy ISR simulations provide HUMINT capabilities.  In each instance, however, the models mitigate shortfalls in representation and simulation effects of HUMINT-related entities and data elements. 2.1 RepresentationFor the purpose of this paper we will decompose HUMINT modeling into three major components: Resources, Sources, and Targets.  Depending on the level of representation of each, the HUMINT models will need to use implicit or explicit algorithms.2.1.1 HUMINT Resources Resources include the intelligence staff responsible for performing the collection of intelligence data.  This group includes interrogators, surveillance teams, operatives, recruiters, translators, linguists and others.Often, these types of resources are simulated as a single attribute (i.e. a count of intel staff) on a simulated unit.   2.1.2 HUMINT SourcesSources include prisoners, government/civilian personnel (i.e. non-combatants), and documents. For surveillance and reconnaissance types of HUMINT, the sources are actually the teams observing the specified targets.  Typically, in our large-scale combat models, there is little to no representation of civilian infrastructure (i.e. local police, fire, and even merchants).   This provides some real challenges for the HUMINT modeling when the sources do not even exist in the simulation.2.1.3 HUMINT TargetsTargets include the objects/phenomena identified in the content of the information provided by HUMINT sources to the HUMINT resource.  Luckily in most simulations, this information is often available (i.e. where is the threat force? What is the condition of the road network in a threat environment?). The challenge now is to develop the HUMINT models and algorithms that will provide this information in a plausible manner, consistent with the simulation.  Later we will discuss some examples of HUMINT modeling approaches.  2.2 Simulation Battlespace EffectsEven with modest representations of resources, sources and targets, there is the issue of the “human effects” on those representations.  HUMINT resources are limited and can be overwhelmed by large numbers of sources and large amounts of data. Experience and efficiency levels differ among resources and can result in varying reporting timelines and content.HUMINT resources also experience delays associated with the mere handling of large numbers of prisoners, non-combatants and/or documents. Workflow aspects should be represented in the models to provide plausible timeliness of HUMINT information. HUMINT sources can also be affected by simulation activity.  Low morale from heavy combat can affect cooperation levels of prisoners and non-combatants.  The geo-political biases can also impact the data reliability and accuracy from sources.  The natural environment also can affect resource and source productivity.   Extreme temperatures may enhance or degrade interrogation efforts.   In the event of chemical or biological attacks, the Mission Oriented Protective Posture (MOPP) level gear can cause disruption in HUMINT processing.  3. RAID: A Case StudyThe following section will describe the modeling approach of a set of HUMINT models, developed and enhanced in an ongoing General Dynamic IR&D effort.3.1 BackgroundIn the mid 1990s, the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) was developed to provide a training and mission rehearsal tool for the Joint Warfighter and the individual service commands.   General Dynamics was responsible to develop the next generation tactical intelligence models to replace legacy service simulations such as the Army’s Tactical Simulation (TACSIM). As participants of the JSIMS architecture team, General Dynamics also led the creation of the JSIMS Battlespace Abstract Model for ISR. The BAM provided guidance for all JSIMS intelligence components (tactical and national).Figure 1. Intelligence Modeling ArchitectureWhen the JSIMS program ended in 2002, General Dynamics received government approval to enhance and develop the ISR framework and models for its internal research and development (IR&D).   The IR&D initiative was named the Reconfigurable Asymmetric ISR Development (RAID).This paper will discuss the HUMINT models of RAID.   These models use the same architecture and design used for the Army’s Warfighter’s Simulation Intelligence Module (WIM) and the Joint Tactical Intelligence Module (JTIM) being considered for use at JFCOM. The RAID ISR component uses generic, data-driven models to simulate the following HUMINT capabilities:Long Range Surveillance (LRS)Document Exploitation (DOCEX)Interrogation of Prisoners of War (IPW)Non-Combatant Screening (NCS)Counter Intelligence (CI) Force Protection Sustainment Operations (CFSO)3.2 RAID HUMINT ModelsThe RAID HUMINT models are developed as behaviors, hosted onto platforms that exist in the simulation battlespace (usually provided by air/land/sea simulation federate).  The RAID HUMINT models use the JSIMS federation object model (FOM) to describe the objects and interactions in the simulation battlespace.The following section includes descriptions of the implicit [DOCEX, CFSO] and explicit [LRS, IPW, EPW] HUMINT models represented in RAID.3.2.1 Long Range Surveillance (LRS)LRS is modeled as an Electro-Optical (EO) sensor attached to a human platform.  The human platform is a LRS surveillance team that is explicitly represented in the simulation.  The range and capabilities of the sensor (i.e. the human eye) are parameterized and enhanced with features like binoculars and/or night vision goggles.  The representation in RAID also considers aspects of the natural environment, such as terrain-based line-of-sight, temperature and weather conditions.  Morale and staff expertise are also other factors that affect the LRS model execution. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 2. LRSA critical aspect of the LRS model is the reporting interval.  LRS teams often report on specific timed intervals, unless high-priority observations deem otherwise.   The RAID LRS models allow users to configure the LRS tasking to define the reporting scheme.LRS products include individual or high priority targets and results in a SALUTE or EOBSREP report. LRS can also produce a summary of targets or information gained over time and results in an Intelligence Report (INTREP). 3.2.2 Interrogation of Prisoners of War (IPW)The IPW model simulates the ability to interrogate prisoners and produce reports about the status and activity of their immediate unit and/or parent units. The IPW model relies on several battlespace units/entities to be simulated.  IPW is hosted on a designated ground unit.  Within range of this host must exist enemy prisoner of war (EPW) units AND a unit containing Military Police (MP) that can provide remote cage (i.e. prison) facilities.   SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 3. IPWThe major key to the IPW model is that it already has access to all of the simulation data associated with the immediate unit and parent units of the EPW.   The IPW models simulates the progression of interrogations that may start in a field cage and progress back to a rear echelon cage, if the EPW is identified as a critical source of information.The following key factors determine the success and timeliness of the interrogations.Number of InterrogatorsEfficiency of InterrogatorsNumber of EPWs Cooperation level of EPWsTasking of IPW unitsIf and EPW is identified as having access to the information about its units activity, it may be interrogated again as the EPW unit is sent from one cage to further cages in the rear (presumably at a higher echelon). The more interrogations that occur, the more information is exploited.The amount of information collected by the interrogator from the EPW depends on the following attributes:EPW access to threat informationCooperation of the EPWNumber of InterrogationsThe IPW model typically produces SALUTE reports with information about threat forces, however, like the LRS model, it can produce INTREP reports summarizing the collective interrogation of an entire unit of EPWs.3.2.3 Non-Combatant Screening (NCS)The NCS model simulates screening non-combatants and refugee units to determine if any of them have relevant information of threat forces and activity. The NCS behavior is hosted on a designated ground unit and assigned a specific checkpoint location to operate.  The NCS model relies on the existence of a non-combatant unit in the battlespace that moves through the checkpoint.   SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 4. NCSOne key to the NCS model is that in the FOM, all non-combatant units maintain a list of perceived truth of game state (i.e. units/equipment it has encountered as it moved in the battlespace).  When a NC unit comes within range of a checkpoint, the NCS model checks the specific faction of the unit against the tasking to determine if it should be screened.   Some factions can be more cooperative and/or reliable than others.  The following key factors determine the success and timeliness of the NCS behavior.Number of ScreenersEfficiency of ScreenersSize of non-combatant units Cooperation level of non-combatant unitsTasking of NCS unitsThe amount of information collected by the screener from the non-combatant units depends on the following attributes:Available perceived truthCooperation of the non-combatant unitsAvailable screening timeNCS models generate both SALUTE and INTREP reports depending on its tasking. 3.2.4 Document Exploitation (DOCEX)The DOCEX model simulates the capture and exploitation of documents that provide information of threat status and activity.  While most any simulation entity can capture documents, the translation and interpretation of the contents are presumed to be a function a DOCEX team.  SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 5. DOCEXThere are two parts to the DOCEX model. The first is the DOCEX [team] behavior which is hosted on a designated ground unit.  The second is an event monitor looking for simulation events that would, in the real world, create opportunities for document acquisition. [Documents are not explicitly modeled in the FOM]. The DOCEX event monitor looks for forced withdrawals and/or hasty retreat events of threat forces.  Upon detecting these events, the area where the threat forces withdrew from is monitored.  If friendly units enter or are already in the area, all the simulation information potentially exploited by the DOCEX team is sent to the DOCEX team behavior.  The information is time-tagged and the delivery of the data to the DOCEX teams is determined by its distance to the monitoring area.  If another threat unit enters the area first, then the assumption is that any documents would be reclaimed and therefore no DOCEX exploitation occurs.The DOCEX algorithm now determines what type of implicit document was discovered, if any. Currently there are four categories of documents identified by domain: Communication, Logistics, Disposition, and Technical Documents.  Each document has the potential to disclose some, but not all, information about the threat unit.  The DOCEX models use a user-defined table that identifies the possible types of documents by unit types.   Another table delineates the potential unit attributes available per document type.If the determination was made that a document was available, and was captured, the DOCEX behavior then prepares to exploit the document based on the following factors:Size of DOCEX TeamEfficiency of DOCEX team membersNumber of simulated documentsType of Documents Faction of threat (language)The DOCEX models generate SALUTE with the information about the threat force.3.2.5 Counter Intelligence Force protection Sustainment Operations (CFSO)The CFSO model simulates the ability of a CFSO team to monitor threat activity in a specified area.  The CFSO model simulates interviews with government/civilian officials and reports from local recruits within the specified area.   SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 6. CFSOSimilar to the DOCEX approach, there are two components to the CFSO model. The CFSO team behavior is hosted on a ground unit, in proximity the area of operation (AO) to be monitored.  The second component is a monitor that tracks threat movement and activity as they enter the AO and until they exit the AO or when the CFSO mission is over.The CFSO behavior begins an cyclic process of querying implicit sources and coordinating intelligence information for periodic reports.  The interview cycle is dependent on the following factors:Size of CFSO teamGeographic size of AOPopulation density of AOAO Infrastructure [Rural/Urban] There is an initial delay associated with recruiting the initial set of sources in the AOI.  After the initial delay the number and effectiveness of sources gradually increases over time (based on a user-defined parameter).   This helps model the CFSO team’s gradual awareness of enemy in the area of interest (acquired through sources). If it is determined that information is disclosed, then a random threat is selected from the AO threat list and a random set of attributes is marked as disclosed.  This data, is compiled by the CFSO team and correlated with other source data to provide the actual intelligence report generated by the CFSO team.  Discrepancies between source information (i.e. differing locations of threat forces) is resolved by the CFSO team behaviors.The CFSO model typically produces an INTREP summary product.  It also has the ability to produce SALUTE reports on high-priority targets identified by the user-defined tasking.4. SummaryAlthough the HUMINT models discussed in this paper are the most recent approaches being used by the Army and considered for use in JFCOM training, it is clear there are still limitations and restrictions.  There is still a great dependence on the representation of humans (friendly, neutral and threat) in the combat simulations.  Even as those representations increase, HUMINT models need to consider more geo-political, ethnic and theological aspects. Author BiographiesTIMOTHY DIVECCHIA is a Senior Systems Architect at General Dynamics Advanced Information Systems.  Mr DiVecchia has spent over 20 years developing ISR simulations for tactical and national systems.  He worked on NWARS and TACSIM, as they supported training exercises with ALSP and HLA.  He was the chief architect for the WARSIM Intelligence Module (WIM) and member of the JSIMS Architecture Group. Mr. DiVecchia authored the intelligence section of the JSIMS Battlespace Abstract Model (BAM) and was a member of the group that defined JSIMS Abstract Model (JAM), currently used as the basis for the OneSAF Objective System (OOS).  Mr. DiVecchia has a Bachelor of Science degree in Computer Science and Mathematics from James Madison University. 