Draft  DOCPROPERTY "OptTrialUse"  \* MERGEFORMAT  DOCPROPERTY "GorRPorSTD"  \* MERGEFORMAT Recommended Practice for  DOCPROPERTY PAR \* MERGEFORMAT Verification, Validation, and Accreditation of a Federation, an Overlay to the High Level Architecture Federation Development and Execution ProcessPrepared by the  DOCPROPERTY "WorkingGroup"  \* MERGEFORMAT VV&A Product Development Group of the  DOCPROPERTY "Committee"  \* MERGEFORMAT SISO Standards Activity CommitteeThis document is an unapproved draft of a proposed standard. As such, this document is subject to change. USE AT YOUR OWN RISK! Because this is an unapproved draft, this document must not be utilized for any conformance/compliance purposes.Abstract: This recommended practice defines the processes and procedures that should be followed to implement Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) for federations being developed using the High Level Architecture (HLA) Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP). This recommended practice is not intended to replace existing VV&A policies, procedures and guidance, but rather is intended to focus on the unique aspects of VV&A of federations. It is a higher-level framework into which such practices can be integrated and tailored for specific uses. The VV&A overlay provides implementation-level guidance to VV&A practitioners.Keywords: federate, federation, Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP), High Level Architecture (HLA), Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A)Introduction(This introduction is not part of the Draft  DOCPROPERTY "OptTrialUse"  \* MERGEFORMAT  DOCPROPERTY "GorRPorSTD"  \* MERGEFORMAT Recommended Practice for  DOCPROPERTY "PAR"  \* MERGEFORMAT Verification, Validation, and Accreditation of a Federation, an overlay to the High Level Architecture Federation Development and Execution Process.)The High Level Architecture (HLA) facilitates interoperability among simulations and promotes reuse of simulations and their components. The HLA is composed of three major components and has an accompanying Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) model:HLA Framework and Rules: A set of rules that describe the general principles defining the HLA.HLA Federate Interface Specification: A description of the interface between simulations (federates) and the HLA runtime infrastructure.HLA Object Model Template Specification: A specification for documenting HLA object models.HLA Federation Development and Execution Process: A description of the process for constructing and executing HLA federations.The HLA FEDEP is a recommended practice that describes a generalized process for building and executing HLA federations. It does not replace the existing management and development methodologies of HLA user organizations, but rather provides a high-level framework into which other systems engineering practices can be easily integrated. The FEDEP defines a methodology that can and should be tailored to meet the needs of user applications.This recommended practice provides guidelines for verifying, validating, and accrediting a federation. Its purpose is to provide a more detailed view of the VV&A processes implied by the FEDEP.This recommended practice defines the processes and procedures that should be followed to implement VV&A for federations being developed using the FEDEP. It is not intended to replace existing VV&A policies, procedures, and guidance, but rather is intended to focus on the unique aspects of VV&A of federations.This recommended practice provides implementation-level guidance to VV&A practitioners by interpreting and customizing the more generalized FEDEP activity descriptions. It focuses upon the VV&A processes that apply to federations and not the VV&A processes associated with individual federates, but does incorporate the use of the information produced by those processes. Furthermore, the recommended practice does not describe the individual verification or validation techniques that could be employed to execute the VV&A processes for federations.This recommended practice has been designed to apply across a wide range of functional applications. Currently, these processes represent the best practices available to the VV&A community. Just like the FEDEP, this recommended practice is not intended to be prescriptive for all FEDEP users. Rather, it is a tailorable process and is offered as guidance to all participants in FEDEP activities. Users and developers of other synthetic simulation environments that are not based on HLA can also benefit from the guidance provided in this recommended practice, as the VV&A activities can be tailored as necessary to support nearly any type of distributed simulation application.This document is an unapproved draft of a proposed standard. As such, this document is subject to change. USE AT YOUR OWN RISK! Because this is an unapproved draft, this document must not be utilized for any conformance/compliance purposes.ParticipantsAt the time this draft  DOCPROPERTY "OptTrialUse"  \* MERGEFORMAT  \*Lower DOCPROPERTY "GorRPorSTD"  \* MERGEFORMAT \*Lowerrecommended practice was completed, the  DOCPROPERTY "WorkingGroup"  \* MERGEFORMAT VV&A PDG had the following membership: DOCPROPERTY "WkGrpChair"  \* MERGEFORMAT Simone Youngblood, Chair DOCPROPERTY "WkGrpViceChair"  \* MERGEFORMAT Susan Solick, Vice-chairScott Harmon, EditorAbby YoderBill CampbellBill ZimmermanBob LewisBob LutzBob SenkoBob StrausserBrian HallChris RougetCindy SullivanCraig RivetCurzio BatiniCynthia BallardDaniel GirardotDaniel VerretDave HoffmanDavid BroylesDavid GrossDennis BerginDianne RindtDirk BradeDoug ClarkDoug FosterEdward GordonEshan RajaballyFranklin LueFredrik JonssonGeoff SauerbornGraham ShanksGrayden FigartGreg QuedenfeldHakam SarasanHakan LagerstromHanae Kawabata-HaraIngo CeglaIsao AoyamaJae Jun HwangJake BorahJames McCallJean GraffagniniJean-Baptiste GuilleritJean-Louis IgarzaJeff HernandexJennifer ChewJennifer ParkJerry FeinbergJiang WuJoanne AthertonJohn HancockKeith FordKlaas Jan de KrakerLinda OlsonMarcy StutzmanMark BiwerMark DumbleMasahiko TanimotoMathew BrownMichael BachmannMichael LeiteMichael McGarityMichael MontgomeryMichael SimpsonMike LightnerMike MetzMike SimpsonMikel PettyOray Kunan,Pat BurgessPenny WangPernilla SvanPeter RossPhil MerrettPierre BoucRene JacquartRichard BernsteinRichard DobsonRobert SwiftRosemarie KeenerRoy ScrudderSarah TrbovichScott HarmonSharon HardySiegfried PohlSimone YoungbloodStephen JonesSteve DixSusan SolickTony MasysVan LoweVirginia DobeyWalter MillerWilliam OatesCONTENTS TOC \t "Heading 1,1,Heading 2,2,IEEEStds Level 1 Header,1,IEEEStds Level 2 Header,2" \* MERGEFORMAT 1. Overview	 PAGEREF _Toc142299260 \h 11.1 Scope	 PAGEREF _Toc142299261 \h 11.2 Purpose	 PAGEREF _Toc142299262 \h 11.3 Conventions	 PAGEREF _Toc142299263 \h 22. References	 PAGEREF _Toc142299264 \h 33. Definitions, acronyms, and abbreviations	 PAGEREF _Toc142299265 \h 43.1 Definitions	 PAGEREF _Toc142299266 \h 43.2 Acronyms and abbreviations	 PAGEREF _Toc142299267 \h 64. Federation VV&A roles and responsibilities	 PAGEREF _Toc142299268 \h 65. Overlay assumptions and tailoring	 PAGEREF _Toc142299269 \h 105.1 Assumptions	 PAGEREF _Toc142299270 \h 105.2 Tailoring	 PAGEREF _Toc142299271 \h 106. VV&A overlay model: top-level view	 PAGEREF _Toc142299272 \h 117. VV&A overlay model: detailed view	 PAGEREF _Toc142299273 \h 127.1 Phase 1—Verify federation objectives	 PAGEREF _Toc142299274 \h 147.2 Phase 2—Verify and validate federation conceptual model	 PAGEREF _Toc142299275 \h 247.3 Phase 3—Verify federation design	 PAGEREF _Toc142299276 \h 327.4 Phase 4—Verify federation development products	 PAGEREF _Toc142299277 \h 377.5 Phase 5—Validate and accept federation	 PAGEREF _Toc142299278 \h 477.6 Phase 6—Verify and validate federation output	 PAGEREF _Toc142299279 \h 557.7 Phase 7—Consolidate federation VV&A products	 PAGEREF _Toc142299280 \h 588. Conclusion	 PAGEREF _Toc142299281 \h 61Annex A (informative) Bibliography	 PAGEREF _Toc142299282 \h 62Draft  DOCPROPERTY "OptTrialUse"  \* MERGEFORMAT  DOCPROPERTY "GorRPorSTD"  \* MERGEFORMAT Recommended Practice for  DOCPROPERTY "PAR"  \* MERGEFORMAT Verification, Validation, and Accreditation of a Federation, an Overlay to the High Level Architecture Federation Development and Execution ProcessOverviewScopeThis recommended practice defines the processes and procedures that should be followed to implement Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) for federations being developed using the High Level Architecture (HLA) Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP). This recommended practice is not intended to replace existing VV&A policies, procedures, and guidance, but rather is intended to focus on the unique aspects of the VV&A of federations. It provides a higher-level framework into which such practices can be integrated and tailored for specific uses. The VV&A overlay provides implementation-level guidance to VV&A practitioners; however, it does not describe the individual techniques that might be employed to execute the VV&A processes for federations.This VV&A overlay focuses upon the VV&A processes that apply to federations and not the VV&A processes associated with individual simulations (federates), but does consider using the information produced by those processes.Users, developers, and VV&A personnel working with simulations and simulation compositions not based upon the HLA and the FEDEP can also benefit from the guidance in this document since the activities that this overlay describes can be tailored to support any type of distributed simulation application.PurposeThe VV&A overlay has been designed to apply across a wide range of functional applications. The purpose of this overlay is to provide a more detailed view of the VV&A processes implied by the FEDEP. Currently, these processes represent the best practices available to the VV&A community. The VV&A overlay is a tailorable process and is offered as guidance to all participants in FEDEP activities.This overlay identifies and describes the recommended VV&A processes that should be followed to assure the acceptability and utility of federations for particular intended uses. The overlay also identifies and describes the information feeding and resulting from those processes as well as the relationships between the FEDEP and the VV&A processes and their respective information products. In addition, this overlay defines those terms uniquely needed to characterize the FEDEP VV&A overlay. This overlay takes special care to use and build upon existing standards, standard terms and their definitions whenever possible.ConventionsThis section describes the conventions adopted for presenting the overlay material. The overlay employs three types of conventions: capitalization, special words, and graphic symbols. These conventions are used throughout the overlay as much as possible.The overlay uses capitalization to identify the key participants in the VV&A processes. The overlay distinguishes between the Federation Development Team and the VV&A Team, and capitalizes the references to these teams. The VV&A Team may participate as part of the Federation Development Team. However, this participation does not imply that the VV&A Team is not organizationally independent of the Federation Development Team when that form of independence is needed or desired.The titles of the primary information produced or needed by these teams are also capitalized (e.g., Federation Objectives, Federation Acceptability Criteria, and Federation Referent). This information includes that produced by both the Federation Development Team (e.g., Federation Objectives and Federation Conceptual Model) and the VV&A Team (e.g., Federation Acceptability Criteria and Federation Referent). Any modifiers describing those information items are not capitalized (e.g., initial Federation V&V Plan, revised Federation V&V Plan, validated Federation Conceptual Model) as part of the title. These capitalization conventions emphasize the content of the information producedThe overlay uses a few words in very specific ways. It divides the VV&A processes applied to federations into phases, activities, and tasks. Phases correspond to the seven top-level FEDEP steps. Each phase contains several activities and each activity includes a set of tasks that the VV&A Team executes to accomplish the activity.The overlay also distinguishes between the three types of VV&A Team participation in the FEDEP: supporting, contributing to, and responsible for performing. The overlay consistently begins both activity titles and task descriptions with the verbs corresponding to these types and uses this convention throughout the document. This distinction occurs because of the many different players in the FEDEP and the variety of ways in which various responsibilities may be assigned to these players. All activity titles and task descriptions that begin with the verb “support” represent those activities or tasks that the FEDEP explicitly identifies and that the VV&A Team can support in some way. Activities with “support” titles are generally led or performed by a member of the Federation Development Team but require the involvement of the VV&A Team. A “support” activity may contain tasks that the FEDEP does not explicitly identify. The VV&A Team performs these tasks and assumes the responsibility for satisfactorily completing them. The activity titles and task descriptions that begin “contribute to” represent verification activities and tasks and need to be accomplished to ensure the success of the VV&A effort. As a result, the VV&A Team may need to be involved in performing these activities and tasks but will generally not take primary responsibility for their completion. However, this does not imply that the VV&A Team does not perform verification activities. On the contrary, the VV&A Team may need to perform verification where they need the information to supplement that received from the verification that other members of the Federation Development Team have performed. In some cases, the federation VV&A Team may need to assume responsibility for performing the “contribute to” activities and tasks when that responsibility has been assigned to no other member of the Federation Development Team. This may be needed so that the VV&A Team can perform the duties for which they do have explicit responsibility.Those activity titles and task descriptions that begin with some other verb (e.g., plan, validate, perform, prepare) represent the activities and tasks for which the VV&A Team has primary responsibility and will perform. These activities and tasks are essential to creating a valid federation. Consistent with these conventions, these VV&A-specific tasks do not begin with either the “support” or “contribute to” verbs.Each phase described in this overlay has activity diagram associated with it that shows the primary relationships between the VV&A activities in the phase and the activities in the corresponding FEDEP step. These diagrams use particular symbols to identify the types of VV&A activities and their interactions. The Table 1 below describes the meanings of these symbols.— Symbol conventions used in the activity diagramsSymbolMeaningA FEDEP activityAn activity that directly supports a corresponding FEDEP activityAn activity to which the VV&A Team contributes and may perform if neededAn activity that the VV&A Team uniquely performs, leads and takes responsibility for its satisfactory completionData sets needed to support a FEDEP executionA primary information flow from one activity to another or from one VV&A phase to anotherThese activity diagrams label each VV&A activity with a number designation (X.Y) to show the traceability between the phase (X) with which the activity is associated and the activity (Y). The activity numbers in these diagrams are only identifiers and do not imply any ordering of activity execution.These activity diagrams present only abstractions of the details provided in the activity discussions. These diagrams are intended only as illustrations to clarify the key elements of the phases they described. The activity diagrams show only the primary information exchanged and do not include all of the information involved in the activity interactions. The information illustrated in these diagrams either identifies what is important to the VV&A effort or emphasizes the value added by the VV&A activities. The activity discussions provide more extensive lists of the information inputs and outputs. The abstraction inherent to these diagrams is not intended to imply that these activities do not draw upon information prepared in the preceding phases. The conventions for these diagrams are informal, do not adhere to the specifications of formal diagramming conventions and are provided only for illustrative purposes.ReferencesThe three specifications that compose the HLA, together with the FEDEP, provide the technical foundation for designing and developing all HLA federations. These specifications are described in the following documents:HLA IEEE 1516 versionIEEE Std 1516™-2000, IEEE Standard for Modeling and Simulation (M&S) High Level Architecture(HLA)—Framework and Rules.IEEE Std 1516.1™-2000, IEEE Standard for Modeling and Simulation (M&S) High Level Architecture(HLA)—Federate Interface Specification.IEEE Std 1516.2™-2000, IEEE Standard for Modeling and Simulation (M&S) High Level Architecture(HLA)—Object Model Template (OMT) Specification.IEEE Std 1516.3™-2003 IEEE Recommended Practice For High Level Architecture (HLA) Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP)Definitions, acronyms, and abbreviationsThe following terms and definitions apply to this recommended practice. The Authoritative Dictionary of IEEE Standards, Seventh Edition, should be referenced for terms not defined in this clause.Definitions STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Acceptability Criteria: The criteria that the federation needs to meet to be acceptable for its intended use. STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Acceptance: The decision to use the results produced by a federation for an intended use. STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Accreditation: The official certification that a model or simulation is acceptable for use for a specific purpose (see DoD 5000.59-M [B1]). STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Activity: A set of tasks that consumes time and resources and whose performance is necessary for the execution of the federation development and execution process. STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Credibility: The belief that a federation can serve an intended use. STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Error Characteristics: Those characteristics that describe the nature of the errors in a simulation’s output that include, for each output variable that can assume metric values, the minimum and maximum error bounds as measured from the values established by the referent under the same conditions together with the probability that all errors of the output values for that variable will fall within those error bounds. STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Federate: An application that may be or is currently coupled with other software applications under a Federation Object Model Document Data/Federation Execution Data and a runtime infrastructure (e.g., federation managers, data collectors, real world (live) systems (e.g., C4I systems, instrumented ranges, sensors), simulations, passive viewers, and other utilities) (see IEEE 1516.3TM-2003 [B2]). STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Federation: A named set of federate applications and a common Federation Object Model (FOM) that are used as a whole to achieve some specific objective (see IEEE 1516.3TM-2003 [B2]). STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Federation Conceptual Model: An abstraction of the real world that serves as a frame of reference for federation development by documenting simulation-neutral views of important entities and their key actions and interactions (see IEEE 1516.3TM-2003 [B2]). STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Federation Object Model: A specification defining the information exchanged at runtime to achieve a given set of federation objectives (see IEEE 1516.3TM-2003 [B2]). STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Federation Objectives: The statement of the problem that is to be addressed by the establishment and execution of a federation (see DoD 5000.59-M [B1]). STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Federation Requirements: A statement that identifies a federation characteristic, constraint, process, or product that is unambiguous and testable and that is necessary for a federation to be acceptable for its intended use. STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT  Federation Scenario: a set of initial conditions and time line of significant events used within a federation execution to achieve federation objectives. STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Fidelity: The description of a model’s or simulation’s representational capabilities (e.g., resolution, error, precision, sensitivity). STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Interoperability: The ability of a model or simulation to provide services to and accept services from other models and simulations and to use the services so exchanged to enable them to operate effectively together (see DoD 5000.59-M [B1]). STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Referent: A codified body of knowledge about a thing being simulated (see Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) Recommended Practices Guide, Build 2.5 [B4]). STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Representational Requirements: That subset of the modeling and simulation requirements that specifically describes the required states or behavior of the things that the simulation represents, including the modeled entities, their properties, and their dependencies (see Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) Recommended Practices Guide, Build 2.5 [B4]). STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Results Sampling Strategy: The approach for collecting the output from a simulation. STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Risk: A measure of the probability and severity of undesired effects often taken as the simple product of probability and consequence (see The Authoritative Dictionary of IEEE Standards Terms, Seventh Edition [B3]). STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Traceability: The degree to which a relationship can be established between two or more products of the development process, especially products having a predecessor-successor or master-subordinate relationship to one another; for example, the degree to which the requirements and design of a given system element match (see The Authoritative Dictionary of IEEE Standards Terms, Seventh Edition [B3]). STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Uncertainty: A quantity or quantities that indicate the degree of doubt associated with the value of a simulated or referent property; for enumerated values, the probability that the actual enumerated value corresponds with the simulated or referent value under the same conditions; for metric values, the error characteristics associated with the simulated or referent value. STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Validation: The process of evaluating a federation throughout the development and execution process to determine how well it satisfies the acceptability criteria within the context of the referent (see IEEE 1278.4TM-1997 [B5]). STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Validity: The property of a federation's representations being complete and correct enough for the intended use. STYLEREF "IEEEStds Level 2 Header"\n \* MERGEFORMAT 3.1. LISTNUM DEFINITION \* MERGEFORMAT Verification: The process of evaluating a federation and its intermediate products to determine whether the products from a given development phase satisfy the conditions imposed at the start of that phase and, ultimately, determining that an implementation of a federation correctly and completely represents the developer's conceptual description and specifications (see IEEE 1278.4TM-1997 [B5]).Acronyms and abbreviationsFEDEP	federation development and execution processFOM	federation object modelHLA	high level architectureIEEE	Institute of Electrical and Electronics EngineersM&S	modeling and simulationSOM	simulation object model (of a federate)V&V	verification and validation; verify and validateVV&A	verification, validation, and accreditationFederation VV&A roles and responsibilitiesThis section introduces the various roles and responsibilities that are required to perform each activity identified in the VV&A Overlay. Collectively, these roles comprise the VV&A Team and that term is used throughout the document. The section also describes the rational used to identify and classify these roles and responsibilities.The roles and responsibilities defined are not intended to map directly to specific people or organizations. There are cases where one individual or organization may have several of the roles. The delegation of these responsibilities depends upon the available resources. The resources required to support each of these roles depends on the User/Sponsor requirements and the complexity of the federates and federations. If these resources are not available, then some prioritization and tailoring of the tasks and their assignment to the roles will be necessary.Table 2 identifies the roles and responsibilities relevant to VV&A for each activity in this overlay. They are intended only as general guidelines. Interpreting Table 2 requires understanding the actions attributed to the roles and the heuristics used to assign the actions to the roles.The following actions are used in Table 2 and in the heuristics used to construct that table. They can apply to either an organization or an individual:Lead (L)	Responsible for the activity including assignment of actions to others and scheduling;Perform (P)	Responsible for performing an activity or task under the direction of the leader of the activity;Assist (AST)	Help a performer or a leader complete an activity or task;Review (R)	Called upon to review the work of others and to make suggestions for improvement where appropriate;Monitor (M)	Will watch the activities being performed or receive the products so that they can be aware of the VV&A status;Approve (AP)	Responsible for approving the VV&A-related products.The following heuristics were used to develop Table 2:Federation related (non VV&A) activities are led or performed by the Federation Manager or Federation Developer;Verification activities may be led or performed by the Federation Developer and assisted by the V&V Agent; or led and performed by the V&V Agent, if needed;Validation activities are led or performed by the V&V Agent;Accreditation activities are led or performed by the Accreditation Agent;For "support" activities, the V&V Agent or the Accreditation Agent generally monitor or assist;For "contribute to" activities, the V&V Agent or the Accreditation Agent may either assist or perform.—Roles and responsibilitiesVV&A Overlay Phases and ActivitiesL = Lead, P = Perform, AST = Assist,R = Review, M = Monitor, AP = ApproveUser / SponsorFederation ManagerFederation DeveloperV&V AgentAccreditation AgentSubject Matter ExpertPhase 1 - Verify Federation Objectives      Activity 1.1Support Identifying User/Sponsor NeedsAST, APL, PASTASTMASTActivity 1.2Plan Accreditation ActivitiesR, APAST ASTL, PASTActivity 1.3Support Developing Federation ObjectivesAST, APL, PASTASTMASTActivity 1.4Contribute to Verifying Federation ObjectivesAPLPASTASTASTActivity 1.5Assemble Federation ReferentAST, APL, PAST, PASTASTASTActivity 1.6Define Federation Acceptability CriteriaAST, APMASTASTL, PASTActivity 1.7Plan V&V ActivitiesRAST, APRL, PASTASTPhase 2 - V&V Federation Conceptual Model      Activity 2.1Support Developing Federation ScenariosAPLPASTASTASTActivity 2.2Contribute to Verifying Federation ScenariosMASTL, PASTMASTActivity 2.3Support Developing Federation Conceptual ModelAST, APML, PASTMASTActivity 2.4Contribute to Verifying Federation Conceptual ModelMLPASTMPActivity 2.5Validate Federation Conceptual ModelAST, APMASTL, PMPActivity 2.6Support Developing Federation RequirementsAST, APL, PASTASTMASTActivity 2.7Contribute to Verifying Federation RequirementsAST, APLPASTASTASTPhase 3 - Verify Federation Design      Activity 3.1Support Selecting FederatesAST, APL, PASTASTASTASTActivity 3.2Support Preparing Federation DesignMLPASTMASTActivity 3.3Contribute to Verifying Federation DesignAPLPASTMASTActivity 3.4Support Preparing Federation Development and Execution PlanAPL, PASTASTASTASTTable 2—Roles and Responsibilities (continued)VV&A Overlay Phases and ActivitiesL = Lead, P = Perform, AST = Assist,R = Review, M = Monitor, AP = ApproveUser / SponsorFederation ManagerFederation DeveloperV&V AgentAccreditation AgentSubject Matter ExpertPhase 4 - Verify Federation Development Products      Activity 4.1Support Developing FOMAPLPASTMASTActivity 4.2Contribute to Verifying FOMAPASTL, PASTMASTActivity 4.3Support Establishing Federation AgreementsAST, APL, PASTASTMASTActivity 4.4Contribute to Verifying Federation AgreementsMLPASTMASTActivity 4.5Support Implementing Federate DesignsMLPASTMASTActivity 4.6Support Implementing Federation InfrastructureMLPASTMMActivity 4.7Contribute to Verifying Federation InfrastructureMLPASTMASTActivity 4.8Verify and Validate Federation Data SetsMMPL, PMASTPhase 5 - Validate and Accept Federation      Activity 5.1Support Planning Federation ExecutionASTL, PASTASTMASTActivity 5.2Support Integrating FederationMLPASTMASTActivity 5.3Contribute to Verifying Integrated FederationMASTL, PASTMASTActivity 5.4Support Testing FederationMLPASTMASTActivity 5.5Validate Integrated Federation ResultsMASTASTL, PMASTActivity 5.6Perform Acceptance AssessmentAPMASTASTL, PASTPhase 6 - Verify and Validate Federation Output      Activity 6.1Support Executing FederationMLPASTMASTActivity 6.2Contribute to Verifying Raw Execution and Derived OutputMLPASTMASTActivity 6.3Validate Federation OutputMASTASTL, PMASTPhase 7 - Consolidate Federation VV&A Products      Activity 7.1Support Analyzing DataMLPASTMASTActivity 7.2Prepare Federation VV&A Products for ReuseMLPMMASTOverlay assumptions and tailoringAssumptionsThe following assumptions were made during development of the VV&A overlay to scope the responsibilities of the VV&A Team. They have been arranged loosely in logical, not priority, order:The Federation Development Team will follow the FEDEP in their development and execution of their federation.The VV&A Team operates functionally as part of the Federation Development Team.Coordination and cooperation between the VV&A Team and the Federation Development Team is essential.The Federation Development Team has primary responsibility for federation verification activities.The VV&A Team has primary responsibility for all federation validation activities.Federate V&V information and use histories can provide valuable information for federation VV&A.The VV&A Team is not responsible for validating or verifying the individual federates although they do rely upon the products of these activities and may require supplemental verification and validation to gain the information they need for federation VV&A.The VV&A Team will have timely access to the information they require.The User/Sponsor will agree that a finite set of observable or measurable acceptability criteria will be used to judge federation acceptability for an intended use.The VV&A processes may be executed iteratively throughout the federation development and execution process.All federations will be subject to an acceptance process that may or may not include accreditation.If needed, accreditation of the federation can occur anywhere from Activity 5.5 through Activity 7.1.The federation VV&A processes described in this overlay can and should be tailored to meet the needs of the individual applications.TailoringThe VV&A activities described in this document, while being generally applicable to most HLA federations, are intended to be tailored to meet the needs of each individual application. Every federation application is unique. The extent to which these VV&A processes can be performed for a given federation application will depend on a number of factors, including the quality of the requirements information and the resources allocated to the VV&A Team. The recommended practices provided in this document should be used as a starting point for developing the specific approach to federation VV&A needed to support the intended use.Below are some perspectives on tailoring the VV&A processes to best fit the circumstances of each individual application.Tailoring is driven by risk and resource constraints (e.g., available information, budget, skills, time).Quantifying and minimizing risk are factors that drive tailoring decisions. Risk associated with federation use (use risk) is a function of the quality of the federation V&V information.The absence of certain information input to the VV&A processes will limit the quality of the content of the VV&A products. Tailoring decisions have an impact upon use risk and the resources required, and this impact should be understood and documented.The VV&A processes should leverage testing and data collection tasks and describe this in the Federation Accreditation Plan and V&V Plan.Any tailoring should adhere to any existing policies, standards or guidelines that may be relevant to the intended use.Tailoring may be done at any time in the federation VV&A processes.VV&A overlay model: top-level viewAs in the FEDEP, one of the design goals identified during the development of this VV&A overlay was to define a highly flexible process. This facilitates tailoring the VV&A activities defined in this overlay as the user needs and resource constraints demand. The actual application of VV&A techniques to support the development of a federation could vary significantly within or across different intended uses. However, the VV&A phases that correspond to the FEDEP steps establish a foundation for applying VV&A within the FEDEP. Figure 1 illustrates each of the FEDEP steps together with the corresponding VV&A overlay phases. The purpose for each of the overlay phases is summarized below:Phase 1: Verify Federation Objectives – The VV&A Team works as part of the Federation Development Team to define a set of Federation Objectives and verify the completeness, consistency, and correctness of those objectives with the User/Sponsor. The VV&A Team also assembles the Federation Referent, defines the Federation Acceptability Criteria, and formulates the initial Federation Accreditation Plan and V&V Plan at this time.Phase 2: V&V Federation Conceptual Model – The VV&A Team supports the Federation Development Team in developing the Federation Scenarios, Federation Conceptual Model, and Federation Requirements. They also contribute to verifying these products and are responsible for validating the Federation Conceptual Model.Phase 3: Verify Federation Design – The VV&A Team supports selecting the federates and preparing the Federation Design. They also contribute to verifying the Federation Design and provide updated an Federation Accreditation Plan and V&V Plan for inclusion into the Federation Development and Execution Plan.Phase 4: Verify Federation Development Products – The VV&A Team supports developing the FOM, establishing the Federation Agreements, and implementing the Federation Infrastructure. They also contribute to verifying the FOM, Federation Agreements, and Federation Infrastructure. They provide any support needed to verify and validate the federate implementations and collect the information from these V&V processes. Finally, they verify and validate the data sets needed for federation execution.Phase 5: Validate and Accept Federation – The VV&A Team supports the Federation Development Team in planning the federation execution, integrating the federation, and testing the federation. They also contribute to verifying the integrated federation. They have primary responsibility for validating the results produced by the integrated federation and developing the federation acceptance/accreditation recommendations from the collected V&V evidence.Phase 6: V&V Federation Output – The VV&A Team supports executing the federation when needed and contributes to verifying the raw execution and derived output produced from these executions. They then validate the federation output when needed.Phase 7: Consolidate Federation VV&A Products – The VV&A Team supports analyzing the federation output when needed and collects and assembles the products from the preceding VV&A activities into a consolidated package to support future reuse.— Top-level view of the VV&A overlay to the FEDEPThe seven phases in this overlay parallel the seven steps in the FEDEP. As in the FEDEP, this overlay decomposes each of the VV&A phases into a set of interrelated lower-level activities and supporting information resources.VV&A overlay model: detailed viewThe VV&A overlay describes a high level framework for the verifying, validating, and accepting HLA federations. The intent of the VV&A overlay is to specify a recommended practice that details the VV&A phases that correspond to, support, and augment the FEDEP steps. Federation stakeholders can leverage this overlay to achieve the specific needs associated with their intended use.Figure 2 provides a detailed view of the VV&A overlay and its interactions with the FEDEP at equivalent levels of abstraction. This view illustrates the flow of VV&A activities, information, and products across the seven process phases identified in Figure 1. Figure 2 depicts the FEDEP steps, the VV&A phases, and the information shared between these steps and phases.— Detailed view of the VV&A overlay to the FEDEPThe following subsections describe the lower-level activities associated with each of the seven major VV&A phases associated with the FEDEP’s seven steps. Figure 3 identifies the individual activities that compose each of these of the VV&A phases. Each activity description includes the information required, the component tasks, and the information produced for that activity. As in the FEDEP, this overlay assumes that once a product has been created, it will be available for all subsequent activities; even though the product may not be identified as an input in the activity description.—Activities associated with each VV&A overlay phaseAlthough many of the activities represented in this overlay diagram appear highly sequential, the intention is not to suggest a strict waterfall approach to VV&A. Rather, this process illustration is simply intended to highlight the major VV&A activities that occur during federation development and execution and approximately when such activities are first initiated relative to other VV&A or FEDEP activities. The activities described in this recommended practice are intended to be tailored to meet the needs of each individual application. The guidance provided in this recommended practice should be used as a starting point for developing the specific approach to VV&A associated with federation development and execution for the intended use.Phase 1—Verify federation objectivesThe purpose of Phase 1 of the VV&A overlay is to define the scope of the VV&A effort and establish a stable foundation for establishing a federation’s validity. This requires the VV&A Team to understand the Federation Objectives, the risk that the User/Sponsor can tolerate in their intended use of the federation’s output, the nature of the Federation Referent, the information needed to define realistic and observable Federation Acceptability Criteria, and the resources required to support the subsequent VV&A activities. This phase should result in a set of verified Federation Objectives and a Federation Referent and Federation Acceptability Criteria that adequately represent those objectives.Figure 4 illustrates the key activities in this phase of the overlay. These activities support the Federation Development Team in identifying, clearly describing, and documenting the problem that the federation addresses. Understanding what the User/Sponsor really needs the federation to accomplish is essential to the development and VV&A of the federation. A clear, consistent, and complete yet concise User/Sponsor Needs statement will aid the VV&A Team in understanding and assessing the federation objectives, requirements, development plans, and other products resulting from exercising the FEDEP. For example, the User/Sponsor Needs statement should include such information as high level descriptions of the critical systems of interest, initial estimates of fidelity requirements, key scenario events, and output data requirements. These insights are important for early VV&A planning.— Verify federation objectives (Phase 1) activity diagramActivity 1.1—Support identifying user/sponsor needsThis activity assists the Federation Development Team in identifying, clearly describing, and documenting the problem that the federation addresses. Understanding what the User/Sponsor really wants the federation to accomplish is essential to the development and VV&A of the federation. A clear, consistent, and complete yet concise User/Sponsor Needs statement will aid the VV&A Team in understanding and assessing the federation objectives, requirements, development plans, and other products resulting from exercising the FEDEP. For example, the User/Sponsor Needs statement should include such information as high level descriptions of the critical systems of interest, initial estimates of fidelity requirements, key scenario events, and output data requirements. These insights are important for early VV&A planning.The Federation Development Team should ensure that the user’s representational needs (i.e., what the federation needs to represent and how correct those representations need to be) are captured and understood in the course of this activity. In addition, the impact of federation use should be assessed and the User/Sponsor tolerances to risk should be estimated. As part of this assessment, the VV&A Team should identify, quantify using consistent units, and rank the User/Sponsor perceptions of the impact of the federation producing incorrect results The VV&A Team should assemble the information on the impacts and risks of using a federation into the Federation Use Impact Assessment.The process of identifying User/Sponsor Needs will provide insight into how correct the federation needs to be and how much detail the referent needs to provide. This information will help to identify the Federation Referent. The VV&A Team should also assess the credibility of any existing domain descriptions recommended by the User/Sponsor.Finally, as part of the corresponding FEDEP activity the Federation Development Team begins to identify the resources that will be available to support the federation (e.g., personnel, tools, and facilities) as well as any known constraints that may affect how the federation is developed (e.g., required federation participants, due dates, site and federation management requirements, and security requirements). The VV&A Team can supply information to support this task. For example, they might have input to the selection of particular tools or facilities that would benefit both development and V&V activities.Information requiredOverall plans (from the User/Sponsor’s perspective)Existing domain descriptionsInformation on available resourcesUser/Sponsor needs input including program objectivesFunctions (tasks)Support analysis of the program objectives to identify the specific purpose and objective(s) that motivate development and execution of a federationSupport identifying the available resources and known development and execution constraints, as appropriateAssess the User/Sponsor's belief in the credibility of the existing domain descriptionsIdentify, quantify using consistent units, where possible, and rank the User/Sponsor perceptions of the impact of using the federationDetermine the User/Sponsor tolerances for risk of incurring the impacts of the federation producing incorrect results for their intended usesAssemble the information on the impacts and risks of using a federation into the Federation Use Impact AssessmentSupport documentation of the User/Sponsor NeedsInformation producedInput to the detailed User/Sponsor Needs (e.g., analysis results, revision suggestions)Input to the available resources and known development and execution constraintsCredibility of the existing domain descriptionsFederation Use Impact AssessmentActivity 1.2—Plan accreditation activitiesThis activity focuses on planning the federation accreditation activities. The resulting plan identifies the information required to support an acceptance decision and the tasks needed to develop that information. The Federation Accreditation Plan is necessary for planning the V&V activities, guiding the accreditation process, and building the Federation Development and Execution Plan.An acceptance decision (i.e., a decision to use a federation’s results to serve an intended use) precedes federation use. A formal accreditation decision follows when required. The accreditation activities, and the planning for them, support either formal accreditation or informal acceptance.This activity analyzes the User/Sponsor Needs and the Federation Use Impact Assessment, as well as other information, to determine the needed accreditation tasks then organizes those tasks into an executable sequence. For example, the accreditation tasks might include formulating the acceptability criteria, constructing the referent, performing a risk assessment, and developing the federation acceptance/accreditation recommendations. The Federation Accreditation Plan also identifies the information that the V&V activities should produce. Finally, the accreditation tasks are arranged into a schedule and estimates of the resources needed to perform the accreditation are made.This activity assumes that the User/Sponsor understands and has expressed their perspective on what they need for the federation to do, how correct it needs to be, and the process they intend to use to identify and assign resources to the accreditation and V&V processes. It also assumes that the User/Sponsor understands the impact and risk of applying the federation to their intended use.Information requiredUser/Sponsor NeedsOverall plans (from the User/Sponsor’s perspective)Federation Use Impact AssessmentAvailable resources and known development and execution constraintsUser/Sponsor input on the credibility expected of the federation resultsFunctions (tasks)Derive and prioritize the acceptance/accreditation objectives considering the User/Sponsor credibility expectations, overall User/Sponsor’s plans, User/Sponsor Needs, known resource constraints, and Federation Use Impact AssessmentIdentify the specific tasks needed to achieve each acceptance/accreditation objectiveDetermine the information dependencies between each acceptance/accreditation tasks and organize the execution of these tasks based upon those dependenciesIdentify the specific V&V information needed to support the federation’s acceptance/accreditationDetermine the dependencies between the accreditation information needs and organize those needs accordinglyDevise a preliminary schedule within which to execute the acceptance/accreditation tasks in the proper orderEstimate the resources (e.g., time, funding, personnel, tools, federation development products, information) required to perform each V&V taskDocument an initial version of the Federation Accreditation PlanInformation producedInitial Federation Accreditation PlanActivity 1.3—Support developing federation objectivesThis activity supports developing the Federation Objectives. The Federation Objectives serve as a foundation for generating Federation Requirements (i.e., translating high-level User/Sponsor expectations into more concrete, measurable federation goals).This activity requires close collaboration between the federation User/Sponsor and the Federation Development Team, including the VV&A Team, to ensure that the original needs are properly analyzed and correctly interpreted and that the resulting objectives completely capture the nuances of the intended use.The VV&A Team actively participates in the FEDEP tasks ofAnalyzing sponsor needs with an emphasis upon those needs that have implications for the federation’s representations,Assessing federation feasibility and risk with the insight gained from the Federation Use Impact Assessment,Contributing to documenting Federation Objectives,Defining and documenting the initial Federation Development and Execution Plan,Identifying the initial tools to support federation development that also support the VV&A activities, andSupporting the User/Sponsor review of the Federation Objectives and reconciling differences.In addition, the VV&A Team should determine their impact upon the test, configuration management, security, and quality assurance plans and provide input to those plans to reflect those impacts. For example, the V&V activities should collaborate closely with the testing efforts in order to leverage the testing activities for results validation. The VV&A Team should work with the testing team to ensure that the federation testing will generate the data necessary to support V&V activities. Similar cooperation is needed between the VV&A efforts and those for configuration management and quality assurance. Measures to assure the security of the federation and its information can impact the representational capabilities of the federation. The VV&A Team should review the security plans to ensure that the Federation Development Team is aware of any representational impacts of the planned security measures.Information requiredUser/Sponsor NeedsExisting domain descriptionsFederation Use Impact AssessmentInitial Federation Accreditation PlanInitial plans from the other Federation Development Team members (e.g., security, configuration management, testing)Information on the resources available for the federation VV&A activitiesFunctions (tasks)Support analyzing the User/Sponsor Needs and deriving the Federation Objectives from those needs, particularly the representational objectivesSupport assessing the federation feasibility and risk, particularly the risk associated with the federation’s useSupport defining, prioritizing, and documenting the Federation ObjectivesSupport defining and documenting the initial Federation Development and Execution Plan, particularly those aspects involving, affecting or affected by the VV&A activitiesSupport identifying the potential tools to support federation design, development, and execution that also support the VV&A activitiesDetermine and generate input to the test, configuration management, security, and quality assurance planning documentsSupport the User/Sponsor review of the Federation Objectives and reconciling differencesInformation producedInput to the Federation ObjectivesInput to the federation risk assessmentInput to the initial Federation Development and Execution PlanInput to the test, configuration management, security, and quality assurance planning documentsInput to the initial federation design, development, and execution tool selectionActivity 1.4—Contribute to verifying federation objectivesThis activity determines that the Federation Objectives correctly and adequately represent the User/Sponsor Needs and may indicate the need for corrections or additions. An incomplete statement of Federation Objectives impacts the ability to meet the User/Sponsor Needs while overly broad Federation Objectives could unnecessarily tax the available resources.Verifying the completeness and consistency of the Federation Objectives, addressing both their content and form, is essential to ensure that they provide a clear, solid, and unmistakable foundation for further federation development and use. Further, documenting the traceability between the Federation Objectives and the User/Sponsor Needs is essential to diagnosing any problems and making design and development tradeoff decisions.The VV&A Team should approach verifying the Federation Objectives as an integral part of the Federation Development Team. The Federation Development Team members can successfully share the burden of verification in many different ways depending upon the specifics of the organizations involved, the distribution of responsibilities within that team, and the nature of the Federation Objectives.Regardless of who performs specific verification tasks, the tasks in this activity assume that the VV&A Team has complete access to the results from all verification tasks as well as the Federation Objectives and the User/Sponsor Needs and can get clarifications from the User/Sponsor upon request.Information requiredUser/Sponsor NeedsFederation ObjectivesFunctions (tasks)Check the Federation Objectives for internal consistency and completenessVerify the Federation Objectives against the User/Sponsor Needs and provide feedback on the results of that consistency checkContribute to documenting the Federation Objectives verification resultsContribute to documenting the traceability between the Federation Objectives and the User/Sponsor NeedsInformation producedFederation Objectives verification resultsInformation describing the traceability between the Federation Objectives and the User/Sponsor NeedsActivity 1.5—Assemble federation referentThis activity assembles the referent that serves as the basis for assessing the correctness of the federation’s representation. Referent knowledge can come from direct observations of the represented phenomena, validated theory describing the phenomena, validated simulations representing the phenomena, subject matter expert knowledge of the phenomena, and combinations of information from these different sources. In addition, it may come from several independent sources of the same type. The content of the Federation Referent depends upon the intended use of the federation and the contributing federate representations. Further, the Federation Referent need only cover those areas where one needs to judge the representation’s correctness. The Federation Objectives can provide the information needed to tailor the referent’s scope.The tasks in this activity represent the effort required toCollect the information from the different referent sources andCombine that information into a single consistent referent for the entire federation’s representation.Collecting the referent information includes defining the referent’s scope of coverage, identifying credible sources, and acquiring the information from which the referent will be constructed. Information describing the same phenomena may need to be combined into a consistent description. That process involves selecting the combination or fusion techniques, actually exercising those techniques on the contributing information, and estimating the uncertainties associated with the integrated referent.Federation Referents may be assembled from the referents used for the individual federates or some combination of information from federate referents and from external sources, then tailored to suit the scope defined by the Federation Objectives. When collecting referent information, descriptions of the uncertainties associated with that information should be collected at the same time where available. If not available then those uncertainties should be estimated where possible.Above all, the Federation Referent should be credible to the User/Sponsor because they should be confident that the federation has sufficient correctness to serve their intended use. This constraint implies that the User/Sponsor should trust the credibility of the referent information sources, the techniques used to fuse that information into a single referent, and the people applying those fusion techniques. Often the User/Sponsor will have a specific referent source in mind (e.g., existing domain descriptions, training documents, legacy simulations). The VV&A Team needs to recognize these preferences and gain access to these sources to support Federation Referent construction.Information requiredVerified Federation ObjectivesUser/Sponsor NeedsUser/sponsor suggestions for credible referent sourcesFederation Use Impact AssessmentInitial Federation Accreditation PlanExisting domain descriptionsReferents used for past federations with similar objectivesFunctions (tasks)Identify the referent needs from the Federation ObjectivesSelect credible referent information sourcesAcquire referent information from the selected sourcesChoose referent information fusion techniques where neededCombine referent information from multiple sources into a coherent referentEstimate the error characteristics of the integrated Federation Referent, where possibleEstimate the uncertainties associated with the errors in the Federation Referent, where possibleDocument the Federation Referent descriptionInformation producedFederation ReferentActivity 1.6—Define federation acceptability criteriaDefining the Federation Acceptability Criteria should clearly and unmistakably outline the scope of the VV&A effort and establish a stable foundation for assessing a federation’s validity. Federation Acceptability Criteria are derived from the Federation Objectives and are measurable criteria that explicitly define the limits of federation validity.The Federation Acceptability Criteria should be necessary and sufficient to assess the federation’s validity and acceptability for the intended use. They should be chosen so that passing all of them implies fitness for the intended use and failing any one of them requires the placing of limitations on the original intended use. While a general set of Federation Acceptability Criteria addresses a wide range of federation capabilities, those of primary interest to the VV&A team define the representational aspects of the federation, includingOutput data (including visual and audio presentations) that the federation should generate,Input data that the federation needs to accept, the ranges of values of those inputs over which the federation needs to generate valid output and the errors in that input (defined against the referent) that the federation needs to tolerate while still generating valid output,Entities, the properties that represent the state of those entities, and the relationships between those entity properties that the federation needs to represent to generate valid output when provided sufficient input data,Required parameters that can be controlled and varied during federation execution, including man-machine-interaction, andMinimum confidence required that each acceptability criterion has been met.This activity assumes that the User/Sponsor or their representative reviews the Federation Acceptability Criteria for completeness and correctness. The VV&A Team will likely define the Federation Acceptability Criteria iteratively, beginning with preliminary criteria then refining these as they gain more information through the federation development process. This activity produces an initial set of criteria that later activities will refine and extend.Information requiredVerified Federation ObjectivesFederation ReferentInitial Federation Accreditation PlanUser/Sponsor NeedsFederation Use Impact AssessmentRelevant measures of effectiveness and measures of performance related to the required representational capabilitiesFunctions (tasks)Derive and verify appropriate acceptability criteria from the User/Sponsor Needs, the Federation Objectives, and the Federation ReferentVerify the internal consistency and completeness of the resulting acceptability criteria setVerify the completeness and correctness of the Federation Acceptability Criteria with the User/Sponsor Needs and Federation ObjectivesVerify the consistency of the acceptability criteria with the User/Sponsor’s intentContribute to documenting the traceability between the Federation Acceptability Criteria and the Federation ObjectivesDocument the Federation Acceptability CriteriaInformation producedInitial Federation Acceptability CriteriaInformation describing the traceability between the Federation Acceptability Criteria and the Federation ObjectivesActivity 1.7—Plan V&V activitiesThis activity plans the V&V effort to support the federation acceptance/accreditation recommendations. The Federation Acceptability Criteria scope this plan. Failure to carefully review the information to support this planning will place the successful completion of the V&V process at risk.This activity involves identifying the V&V objectives from the accreditation information needs defined in the Federation Accreditation Plan and the Federation Acceptability Criteria, prioritizing those objectives, placing them in perspective with the User/Sponsor Needs (including the correctness required for the intended use), determining the specific tasks needed to achieve those objectives, and assigning resources to complete those tasks. Examples of these tasks include validating the conceptual model, verifying the Federation Object Model, and validating the federation results.The VV&A Team needs to understand the Federation Objectives, the risk that the User/Sponsor can tolerate in their intended use of the federation’s output, the information that the acceptance/accreditation process needs from the V&V process, and the planned resources available to support the V&V activities. If the VV&A Team believes more resources are required to perform the tasks then they should make the Federation Manager or User/Sponsor aware of that need.This activity will produce an initial V&V plan that can then be refined as the VV&A Team gains information through the federation development process.Information requiredInitial Federation Accreditation PlanInitial Federation Acceptability CriteriaVerified Federation ObjectivesUser/Sponsor NeedsUser/Sponsor input as to the credibility expected of the federation resultsOverall plans (from the User/Sponsor’s perspective)Initial Federation Development and Execution PlanInitial plans from the other Federation Development Team members (e.g., security, configuration management, testing)Federation Use Impact AssessmentAvailable resources and known development and execution constraintsFunctions (tasks)Derive and prioritize V&V objectives from the acceptance/accreditation information needs, known resource constraints, Federation Use Impact Assessment, Federation Accreditation Plan, and other FEDEP planning documentsIdentify the specific tasks needed to achieve each V&V objective based on the most appropriate and cost-effective methods, tools, and techniquesDetermine the information dependencies between each V&V task and organize the execution of these tasks based upon those dependenciesDevise a preliminary schedule within which to execute the V&V tasks in the proper orderEstimate the resources (e.g., time, funding, personnel, tools, federation development products, information) required to perform each V&V taskIdentify candidate V&V toolsDocument the initial Federation V&V Plan based on the results of tasks aboveInformation producedInitial Federation V&V PlanPhase 2—Verify and validate federation conceptual modelThe primary purpose of Phase 2 of the VV&A overlay is to verify and validate the Federation Conceptual Model. The VV&A Team also supports developing and contributes to verifying the Federation Scenarios, Federation Conceptual Model, and Federation Requirements. These activities contribute to ensuring that a federation built to meet the Federation Requirements can fully realize the representational capabilities described in the validated Federation Conceptual Model and enables it to execute the Federation Scenarios.Development and verification of the Federation Scenarios and Federation Conceptual Model may be done in parallel and iteratively. Once this iteration process has produced a stable Federation Conceptual Model, the VV&A Team can validate it.Figure 5 illustrates the key activities in this phase of the VV&A overlay. The subsections that follow describe each of these activities.— V&V federation conceptual model (Phase 2) activity diagramActivity 2.1—Support developing federation scenariosThis activity supports producing a functional specification of the envisioned federation scenario. A Federation Scenario serves as a bounding mechanism on the scope of conceptual modeling activities. At a minimum, the Federation Scenario defines the initial and termination conditions for the federation execution in terms of the federation’s representations.A Federation Scenario should describe the types and numbers of major entities that should be represented in a federation; functional descriptions of their capabilities, behaviors, and relationships over time, and the relevant environmental conditions that influence the simulated entities.The VV&A Team should ensure that the Federation Scenarios adequately meet the verified Federation Objectives and are credible to the User/Sponsor. To do this the VV&A Team should determine whether the proposed scenario development standards, tools, and techniques are suitable to support scenario verification activities. Related tasks for the VV&A Team would be to locate and collect V&V histories of the candidate scenarios, as well as to locate and collect information describing the pedigree of the existing domain descriptions. The VV&A supports the Federation Development Team in vignette definition.This activity assumes that the VV&A Team has adequate access to the information supporting Federation Scenario development (e.g., authoritative data sources) to assess scenario credibility. This activity also assumes iterative interaction between the development of the Federation Scenario and the Federation Conceptual Model.Information requiredVerified Federation ObjectivesExisting scenariosFederation Conceptual ModelExisting domain descriptionsFunctions (tasks)Determine the suitability of the planned scenario development standards, tools, and techniques to support scenario validation activitiesLocate and collect V&V histories of the candidate scenariosEvaluate the appropriateness of the existing scenario resources for achieving the Federation ObjectivesLocate and collect information describing the pedigree of the existing domain descriptionsContribute to validating the Federation Scenarios against the Federation Acceptability Criteria and the Federation Referent, as neededEvaluate the credibility and applicability of the domain descriptions for achieving the Federation ObjectivesSupport defining one or more representative vignettes of federation events that, once executed, will produce the data necessary to achieve Federation ObjectivesInformation producedInput to the Federation ScenariosActivity 2.2—Contribute to verifying federation scenariosThe primary goals for verifying the Federation Scenarios are to demonstrate that they fully cover the verified Federation Objectives and, if required, to indicate the need for any corrective actions. The Federation Scenarios outline the simulation executions and if they do not fully cover the intended use then achieving the Federation Objectives could be endangered.This activity should verify the internal consistency and completeness of the Federation Scenarios ensure that they are clearly, completely, and correctly documented, and make certain that they are traceable back to the Federation Objectives. Like the Federation Objectives, documenting the traceability of the Federation Scenarios links them to User/Sponsor Needs through the Federation Objectives. This traceability contributes to diagnosing any problems and making design and development tradeoff decisions.Also as with the Federation Objectives, the VV&A Team should approach verifying the Federation Scenarios as an integral part of the Federation Development Team and expect to share the burden of verification in one of many different ways depending upon the specifics of the organizations involved, the distribution of responsibilities within that team, and the nature of the Federation Objectives.Regardless of who performs specific verification tasks, this activity assumes that the VV&A Team has complete access to the results from all verification tasks as well as the Federation Scenarios. This activity also assumes that Federation Scenarios and Federation Conceptual Model are developed in concert over several iterations. Verification of the Federation Scenarios may also occur iteratively.Information requiredVerified Federation ObjectivesFederation ScenariosFederation V&V PlanFunctions (tasks)Verify the internal consistency and completeness of the Federation ScenariosVerify the consistency of the Federation Scenarios with the Federation ObjectivesContribute to documenting the Federation Scenarios verification resultsContribute to documenting the traceability between the Federation Scenarios and the Federation ObjectivesInformation producedFederation Scenarios verification resultsInformation describing the traceability between the Federation Scenarios and the Federation ObjectivesActivity 2.3—Support developing federation conceptual modelThis activity supports producing a Federation Conceptual Model. The Federation Conceptual Model is a conceptual representation of the intended problem space based upon the Federation Development Team’s interpretation of the verified Federation Objectives. A Federation Conceptual Model provides an implementation-independent representation that serves as a vehicle for transforming Federation Objectives into functional and behavioral descriptions for system and software designers. The model also provides a crucial traceability link between the Federation Objectives and the Federation Design implementation.The Federation Development Team, with input from the VV&A Team, has the discretion to choose the presentation style most useful for describing the entities and actions that need to be included in the federation in order to achieve all Federation Objectives. A Federation Conceptual Model needs to be carefully evaluated before continuing to the succeeding stages of federation development. At a minimum, the User/Sponsor should review key processes and events to ensure the adequacy of the conceptual representation.The VV&A Team participates as part of the Federation Development Team from the initial specification of the Federation Conceptual Model through its evolution during subsequent federation development steps. They can assist Federation Development Team to determine whether or not existing conceptual models or domain descriptions should be used as the foundation for conceptual model construction based upon the Federation Objectives. The VV&A Team can also contribute to establishing the credibility of the Federation Conceptual Model by locating and collecting information describing the pedigrees of the domain descriptions and by explicitly identifying the underlying assumptions and limitations of the Federation Conceptual Model.Information requiredVerified Federation ObjectivesExisting domain descriptionsFederation ScenariosExisting conceptual modelsFunctions (tasks)Support choosing the technique and format for developing and documenting the Federation Conceptual Model in order to better support V&V activitiesEvaluate the applicability of existing conceptual models to the Federation ObjectivesLocate and collect information describing the pedigree of the authoritative domain descriptions used for conceptual model constructionEvaluate the applicability of the domain descriptions to the Federation ObjectivesContribute to identifying and documenting the assumptions and limitations associated with the Federation Conceptual ModelInformation producedInput to the Federation Conceptual ModelInput to documentation of the assumptions and limitations underlying the Federation Conceptual ModelActivity 2.4—Contribute to verifying federation conceptual modelThis activity verifies the internal consistency, completeness, and correctness of the Federation Conceptual Model and its consistency with the verified Federation Objectives and the Federation Scenarios. This step assures that the representations defined in the Federation Conceptual Model are internally sound and can support the execution of the Federation Scenarios. This creates a firm foundation for conceptual model validation and the derivation of the Federation Requirements.This activity verifies that the Federation Conceptual Model contains the content defined in the FEDEP (e.g., entity state and behavior representations) in the form specified by the Federation Development Team. It also verifies the consistency of any diagrams depicting model structure and behavior, the correctness of the unit transformations in any mathematical expressions, and the Federation Conceptual Model's consistency with the Federation Scenarios. This activity documents the traceability between the Federation Conceptual Model and the Federation Scenarios and between the Federation Conceptual Model and the Federation Objectives.This activity assumes that the Federation Scenarios and the Federation Conceptual Model can be developed in concert over several iterations. Verification of the Federation Conceptual Model may also be iterative.As with the other verification activities, the VV&A Team should approach verifying the Federation Conceptual Model as an integral part of the Federation Development Team. The Federation Development Team members can successfully share the burden of verification in many different ways depending upon the specifics of the organizations involved, the distribution of responsibilities within that team, and the nature of the Federation Conceptual Model.Regardless of who performs specific verification tasks, the tasks in this activity assume that the VV&A Team has complete access to the results from all verification tasks and can get clarifications from the User/Sponsor as needed.Information requiredVerified Federation ObjectivesFederation ScenariosFederation Conceptual ModelFederation V&V PlanFunctions (tasks)Verify the internal consistency and completeness of the Federation Conceptual ModelVerify the consistency of the Federation Conceptual Model with the Federation ScenariosContribute to documenting the Federation Conceptual Model verification resultsContribute to documenting the traceability between the Federation Conceptual Model and the Federation ObjectivesInformation producedFederation Conceptual Model verification resultsInformation describing the traceability between the Federation Conceptual Model and the Federation ObjectivesActivity 2.5—Validate federation conceptual modelThe Federation Conceptual Model provides the first meaningful insight into the federation’s validity. The Federation Conceptual Model defines the representations upon which all subsequent activities build. All succeeding verification activities contribute evidence to the validation of the federation by checking the consistency of the Federation Development Team’s intermediate products (i.e., short of the functioning integrated federation) against the validated conceptual model. None of those intermediate products can be considered valid unless the Federation Conceptual Model is valid.At minimum, the tasks of this activity assess the completeness of the federation’s representations, as defined in the verified Federation Conceptual Model, against the Federation Acceptability Criteria. If the Federation Conceptual Model contains sufficient detail then this activity also assesses its correctness against the Federation Acceptability Criteria. Finally, this activity should result in the User/Sponsor’s approval of the Federation Conceptual Model. This task improves the likely relevance of the resulting federation to the User/Sponsor and contributes to the process of building federation credibility with those users.The extent to which the VV&A Team can perform the recommended conceptual model validation tasks depends strongly upon the information contained in the Federation Objectives, the detail of the Federation Acceptability Criteria, the detail in the Federation Conceptual Model, and the resource limitations of the VV&A Team.This activity assumes that the iteration within the “Perform Conceptual Analysis” step of the FEDEP has stabilized and produced a fairly representative conceptual model. Some federation development efforts may choose to perform iterative validation upon the Federation Conceptual Model while others may choose to wait until the end. An iterative approach may tailor the validation tasks for each iteration except at the end. This activity also assumes that the Federation Conceptual Model has been verified before being validated.Information requiredVerified Federation Conceptual ModelFederation Acceptability CriteriaFederation ReferentFederation V&V PlanFunctions (tasks)Evaluate the completeness of the Federation Conceptual Model against the Federation Acceptability Criteria and Federation Referent and identify areas of incompletenessEstimate the error characteristics of the Federation Conceptual Model, where possibleEvaluate the correctness of the Federation Conceptual Model against the Federation Acceptability Criteria and Federation Referent and identify areas of incorrectness, where possibleDocument the Federation Conceptual Model validation resultsSupport reviewing the contents of the Federation Conceptual Model with the User/Sponsor by reviewing the Federation Conceptual Model contents and the assembled validation evidence with themGet the approval of the User/Sponsor for the validated Federation Conceptual ModelInformation producedFederation Conceptual Model validation results:Within the context of the Federation Referent, identification of the Federation Acceptability Criteria that the Federation Conceptual Modelmeetsdoes not meetCharacterization of the representational errors that exceed the Federation Acceptability Criteria limits, where possibleUser/Sponsor approval of the Federation Conceptual ModelActivity 2.6—Support developing federation requirementsThis activity supports development of the Federation Requirements. The Federation Requirements are based upon the verified Federation Objectives and the validated Federation Conceptual Model. Using the Federation Conceptual Model, the Federation Objectives are transformed into specific set of detailed and testable Federation Requirements that provide the implementation-level information needed to design and develop the federation. The VV&A Team should support the Federation Development Team to ensure that the Federation Requirements are clear, unique, and testable.In the course of developing the Federation Requirements, it may prove necessary to refine the Federation Objectives. If so, the VV&A Team should determine the validity impacts of any modifications, revise the Federation Acceptability Criteria as needed to maintain consistency with the revised Federation Objectives, and gain User/Sponsor concurrence of any such revisions of the Federation Acceptability Criteria.The VV&A Team actively participates, as part of the Federation Development Team, in the development and documentation of all Federation Requirements. They also identify the validity implications of requirements for the execution environment, time management, data distribution management, execution management, federation performance, and security to ensure consistency between the resulting Federation Requirements and the Federation Acceptability Criteria. The VV&A Team should contribute to deriving a set of Federation Test Criteria from the Federation Requirements that efficiently determine whether the federation meets the Federation Acceptability Criteria. They should also develop revisions and extensions to the Federation Acceptability Criteria to maintain consistency with the Federation Requirements and Federation Test Criteria.Information requiredVerified Federation ObjectivesVerified and validated Federation Conceptual ModelVerified Federation ScenariosFederation ReferentInitial Federation Acceptability CriteriaFunctions (tasks)Support defining the Federation Requirements for the representational aspects of the federation (i.e., those related to federation fidelity)Support defining the federation output requirements from the Federation Acceptability CriteriaAnalyze the requirements associated with the execution environment, time management, data distribution management, execution management, federation performance, and security to determine their impact on and consistency with the federation representational requirementsSupport ensuring that the Federation Requirements are clear, unique, and testableContribute to deriving a set of Federation Test Criteria from the Federation Requirements that efficiently determine whether the federation meets the Federation Acceptability CriteriaDevelop revisions and extensions to the Federation Acceptability Criteria to maintain consistency with the Federation Requirements and Federation Test CriteriaSupport documenting all federation requirementsInformation producedInput to the Federation RequirementsInput to the Federation Test CriteriaRevised Federation Acceptability CriteriaActivity 2.7—Contribute to verifying federation requirementsThis activity verifies the internal consistency, completeness, and correctness of the Federation Requirements both internally and against the validated Federation Conceptual Model and verified Federation Scenarios, and indicates the need for any corrective actions that might be necessary. This step ensures that a federation built to meet the Federation Requirements fully realizes the representational capabilities described in the validated Federation Conceptual Model and enables it to execute the Federation Scenarios. Inadequate Federation Requirements can result in a federation that cannot meet the Federation Objectives and unnecessary Federation Requirements needlessly increase the developmental effort.This activity includes ensuring that the Federation Requirements consistently, completely, and correctly capture all technical requirements concerning hardware platforms, operating environments, infrastructure, administration tools, and other components needed to realize a fully functioning federation. This activity also documents the traceability between the Federation Requirements and the Federation Conceptual Model and Federation Scenarios.This activity assumes that the Federation Requirements and Federation Conceptual Model may be developed in concert over several iterations. Thus, verification of the Federation Requirements may also be iterative.As with the other verification activities, the VV&A Team should approach verifying the Federation Requirements as an integral part of the Federation Development Team. Regardless of who verifies the Federation Requirements, the tasks in this activity assume that the VV&A Team has complete access to all verification results.Information requiredVerified Federation ObjectivesFederation RequirementsFederation Test CriteriaFederation Acceptability CriteriaFederation V&V PlanFunctions (tasks)Verify the internal consistency and completeness of the Federation RequirementsVerify the consistency, completeness, and correctness of the Federation Requirements with the Federation Objectives and Federation Acceptability CriteriaVerify the internal consistency and completeness of the Federation Test CriteriaVerify the consistency, completeness, and correctness of the Federation Test Criteria with the Federation RequirementsContribute to documenting the Federation Requirements and Federation Test Criteria verification resultsContribute to documenting the traceability between the Federation Requirements and the Federation Conceptual Model, the Federation Scenarios, and the Federation Acceptability CriteriaContribute to documenting the traceability between the Federation Test Criteria and the Federation RequirementsInformation producedFederation Requirements verification resultsFederation Test Criteria verification resultsInformation describing the traceability between the Federation Requirements and the Federation Objectives and Federation Acceptability CriteriaInformation describing the traceability between the Federation Test Criteria and the Federation RequirementsPhase 3—Verify federation designThe purpose of Phase 3 of the VV&A overlay is to support federation design. The VV&A Team supports all of the activities in Step 3 of the FEDEP. They assist with evaluating the abilities of the candidate federates to meet the Federation Acceptability Criteria, evaluate the effects of the federation design decisions upon federation validity and update the Federation Accreditation Plan and V&V Plan. They also contribute to verifying the Federation Design.Figure 6 illustrates the key activities in this phase of the VV&A overlay. The subsections that follow describe each of these activities.—Verify federation design (Phase 3) activity diagramActivity 3.1—Support selecting federatesIn this activity, the VV&A Team supports the Federation Development Team in determining the suitability of individual simulation systems to become members of the federation being developed.In order to select the most appropriate federates from the available candidates, federate selection criteria need to be defined based upon the validated Federation Conceptual Model, verified Federation Requirements, and the Federation Acceptability Criteria. These criteria should reflect the required entities/objects and events that the federates need to represent to achieve the Federation Objectives. Each candidate federate should be analyzed against these criteria to determine their ability to meet the Federation Acceptability Criteria and the rationale for those selected documented. The VV&A Team should assist the Federation Development Team in defining these federate selection criteria and using them to analyze candidate federates. In addition, if an existing federation is being considered for reuse in part or whole, the VV&A Team should assist in developing and applying similar criteria.For each candidate federate or federation selected, the VV&A Team needs to collect any available V&V and use histories and evaluate them for quality and relevance to the Federation Acceptability Criteria. The quality and utility of this historical information available can vary greatly. The VV&A Team should evaluate the information made available and determine if additional V&V information is needed and recommend those information requirements to the Federation Development Team.This activity assumes that the VV&A Team can readily access the V&V histories of all of the candidate federates as well as to the User/Sponsor to assess federate credibility.Information requiredFederation Acceptability CriteriaVerified Federation ObjectivesVerified Federation RequirementsFederate documentation (including Simulation Object Models (SOMs))List of federate candidatesFederate candidate V&V & use historiesFunctions (tasks)Support defining the criteria for federate selection from the Federation Acceptability CriteriaSupport determining if an existing reusable federation meets or partially meets the Federation RequirementsCollect the available V&V and use histories for each federate candidateEvaluate the quality and relevance of this historical information to the Federation Acceptability CriteriaRecommend additional V&V information requirementsSupport analyzing the ability of each federate candidate to meet the Federation Acceptability CriteriaSupport documenting the rationale for federate selectionInformation producedInput to the criteria for federate selectionInput to candidate federate selection and selection rationaleRecommendations of additional V&V information requirementsActivity 3.2—Support preparing federation designIn this activity, the VV&A Team supports the Federation Development Team in preparing the Federation Design. At this point, the responsibility to represent the entities and actions defined in the validated Federation Conceptual Model and Federation Scenarios has been allocated to candidate federates. Analysis of the selected federates is needed to identify those that can best provide the representational capabilities defined in the Federation Conceptual Model. As this analysis depends on the documentation of each candidate federate’s capabilities, this is when any limitations of that documentation and any impacts those limitations might have on the design of the federation are determined. In addition, an assessment of whether the set of selected federates provides the required representational capabilities should be conducted. Federate modifications or the development of new federates may be required to realize the capabilities needed to meet the verified Federation Objectives.When designing the federation, the Federation Development Team may need to negotiate agreements on assigned responsibilities or make various federation design decisions deemed appropriate based upon investigations conducted. Such negotiations and trades may be required as technical issues such as time management, federation management, infrastructure design, runtime performance, and potential implementation approaches are considered in the design process. It is important that the VV&A Team ensure that these negotiations and design decisions are well documented and analyze them to determine the impact they will have upon the overall validity of the federation’s representations.The VV&A Team participates as part of the Federation Development Team in the federation design effort. In addition, they support the design effort by identifying the limitations of the existing federate candidate capabilities documentation and assessing the impact that those limitations will have on federation design effort.This activity assumes that the VV&A Team can readily access the sources documenting the federate representational capabilities and all of the products from the federation design effort.Information requiredFederation Acceptability CriteriaVerified and validated Federation Conceptual ModelVerified Federation ScenariosVerified Federation RequirementsCandidate federate documentationFederate candidate V&V & use historiesFunctions (tasks)Identify the limitations of the existing federate candidate capabilities documentation and assess the impact that those limitations will have on federation design activitiesSupport analyzing the selected federates and identifying those federates that best provide the representational capabilities defined by the Federation Requirements and Federation Acceptability CriteriaSupport allocating the representational capabilities defined by the Federation Conceptual Model and Federation Scenarios to the selected federates and capture relevant informationDetermine the Federation Acceptability Criteria that each selected federate should support or contribute to supportingDecompose any requirement or acceptability criterion to which multiple federates contribute into requirements or acceptability criteria specific to the federate under considerationContribute to determining if federate modifications or new federates are necessaryInformation producedInput to the Federation DesignSuggestions for federate modifications or new federation developmentLimitations of existing candidate federate documentationAssessment of the impact that inadequate federate documentation will have on federation validity and subsequent validation activitiesAllocation of the Federation Acceptability Criteria to the individual federatesActivity 3.3—Contribute to verifying federation designThis activity verifies the Federation Design, both internally and against the validated Federation Conceptual Model, to establish it as solid foundation for further federation development and, if required, to indicate the need for corrective actions. An inadequate Federation Design may, at best, delay realizing the federation and, at worst, lead to the development of a federation that cannot meet the verified Federation Objectives.Verifying the consistency, completeness, and correctness of the Federation Design internally and against the Federation Conceptual Model is an integral part of the design effort. Design verification should ensure that the Federation Design represents all of the entities, entity attributes, relationships (both static and dynamic), behavioral and transformational aspects of the entities, and interactions between entities described in the Federation Conceptual Model. It should also consider the mapping of those representational features to the federates participating in the federation. Design verification may also analyze the expected frequencies of inter-federate communication to ensure that infrastructure loading conditions do not occur that can distort the federation’s representational capabilities and cause validity problems.As with the other verification activities, the VV&A Team should approach verifying the Federation Design as an integral part of the Federation Development Team and share the responsibilities for design verification as required by the specifics of the organizations involved and the delegations of responsibility within the Federation Development Team. Regardless of who performs the design verification tasks, the tasks in this activity assume that the VV&A Team has complete access to the design verification results. This activity further assumes that any design errors found during verification are reported to the Federation Development Team for timely and affordable correction.Information requiredVerified and validated Federation Conceptual ModelFederation DesignFederate documentationFederation Acceptability CriteriaFederation V&V PlanFunctions (tasks)Verify the mapping of the federate capabilities to the Federation DesignVerify the internal consistency and completeness of the Federation DesignVerify the consistency, completeness, and correctness of the Federation Design with the Federation Conceptual ModelVerify that the Federation Design sufficiently satisfies the federation’s non-representational requirementsContribute to documenting the Federation Design verification resultsContribute to documenting the traceability between the Federation Design and the Federation Conceptual ModelInformation producedFederation Design verification resultsInformation describing the traceability between the Federation Design and the Federation Conceptual ModelActivity 3.4—Support preparing federation development and execution planThis activity supports the Federation Development Team in preparing a coordinated plan to guide the activities for developing, integrating, testing, and executing the federation. This plan includes the plans for federation integration, test, and evaluation, configuration management, security, data collection, management, analysis, quality assurance, accreditation, and V&V as well as supporting tools selection and use. This planning activity will take place in concert with the development of the federation development and testing schedules that identify detailed tasks and milestones. A coordinated Federation Development and Execution Plan is essential to being able to successfully implement a federation that can achieve the Federation Objectives. This integrated planning effort requires close collaboration between all of the members of the Federation Development Team including the VV&A Team.This coordinated set of plans covers areas critical to successful V&V of the federation. Therefore, the VV&A Team should understand and contribute to all aspects of the coordinated plan where the federation’s representations may be impacted. The VV&A Team should also examine the data collection, management, and analysis plans to ensure that their documentation is complete and conforms with other existing plans. In addition, the VV&A Team needs to develop a comprehensive results sampling strategy from the Federation Acceptability Criteria, Federation Conceptual Model, Federation Scenarios, and Federation Test Plan, and ensure that the test and evaluation and data collection plans adequately support this strategy. The VV&A Team should also revise the Federation Accreditation Plan and V&V Plan to reflect any revisions to the Federation Acceptability Criteria and to incorporate the results sampling strategy. Finally, the VV&A Team should determine that the tools they require are part of the tool selection and management plan as well as to ensure that the tools being considered for execution monitoring and control can support the V&V data collection needsInformation requiredInitial Federation Development and Execution PlanInitial Federation Accreditation Plan and V&V PlanFederation Acceptability CriteriaFederation ReferentVerified and validated Federation Conceptual ModelVerified Federation DesignVerified Federation ScenariosFederation Test PlanVerified Federation RequirementsQuality assurance, configuration management, data collection, management, and analysis plansInitial federation design, development, and execution tool selectionFunctions (tasks)Develop the federation results sampling strategy from the Federation Acceptability Criteria, Federation Conceptual Model, Federation Scenarios, and Federation Test PlanUpdate the Federation Accreditation Plan to reflect the revised Federation Acceptability CriteriaUpdate the Federation V&V Plan to reflect the revised Federation Accreditation Plan and Test Plan, supporting tools and test strategies, and the federation results sampling strategyContribute to updating the Federation Test Plan from the revised Federation V&V PlanContribute input to quality assurance, configuration management, data collection, management, and analysis plans as neededRecommend tools and test strategies that could benefit the VV&A efforts and productsDetermine how the selected tools and test strategies impact VV&A activitiesCheck that the tools identified for execution monitoring and control can support the planned federation results sampling strategySupport translating Federation Requirements into the federation execution and management plansInformation producedInput to the Federation Development and Execution PlanInput to the Federation Test Plan revisionsInput to the quality assurance, configuration management, data collection, management, and analysis plans as neededInput to the federation design, development, and execution tool selectionRevised Federation Accreditation Plan and V&V PlanPhase 4—Verify federation development productsThe purpose of this phase in the overlay is to support the federation’s development. This begins by supporting the development of and contributing to verifying the FOM, Federation Agreements, and Federation Infrastructure. The federation VV&A Team also supports verifying and validating the federate implementations when needed and collects the information produced by these efforts. Finally, this phase includes the activities to verify and validate the data sets needed for the federation’s execution.Figure 7 illustrates the key activities in this phase of the VV&A overlay. The subsections that follow describe each of these activities.— Verify federation development products (Phase 4) activity diagramActivity 4.1—Support developing federation object modelThis activity supports the development of the FOM. The FOM defines the characteristics of those data exchanges needed to occur between participating Federates to meet the Federation Objectives. The goal of FOM development is to unambiguously assign the responsibilities for representing the entities, actions, and interactions of the Federation Conceptual Model to the assembled group of federates.No single “best” way to develop a FOM exists. Several different approaches have been used and all have their advantages and disadvantages. The choice of which FOM development approach to use depends upon the circumstances of the individual federation, and the preferences of the Federation Development Team. The VV&A Team supports the Federation Development Team by analyzing the chosen approach to determine the impact of that approach on the planned VV&A processes and the acceptability of the federation for the intended use.The VV&A Team participates as part of the Federation Development Team in the FOM development effort by assisting in the review of existing object models or data dictionaries to identify reusable object models, or object model elements, and by assisting in the selection of a tool or tools to capture and document the FOM. They also ensure that the strategy used to allocate the responsibility to provide parts of the federation representations to individual federates does not adversely impact the federation’s validity. Finally, the VV&A Team should document the assumptions and limitations made during the FOM development process. To accomplish this task the VV&A Team will require access the products generated by the FOM development effort.Information requiredVerified and validated Federation Conceptual ModelVerified Federation DesignExisting Federate SOMsFederation Development and Execution PlanExisting FOM if one exists or is being reused as a starting pointSupporting resources (e.g., object model development tools, object model libraries, dictionaries)FOM development notes/agreements (e.g., conceptual model/scenario to FOM mapping, federate role/responsibility mapping, SOM-to-FOM mapping, etc.)Functions (tasks)Support choosing a FOM development approach and determine the implications of that choice upon subsequent VV&ASupport identifying appropriate object models or object model subsets for reuseSupport reviewing applicable data dictionaries to identify relevant object model elementsAssist in selecting an appropriate tool for capturing and documenting the FOMParticipate in the FOM design to ensure that the representation allocation strategy does not adversely impact the federation’s validityContribute to documenting the limitations and assumptions of the FOMInformation producedContributions to the FOM development effortContributions to documentation of the FOM limitations and assumptionsActivity 4.2—Contribute to verifying federation object modelThis activity verifies the FOM against the verified Federation Design, the validated Federation Conceptual Model, and the abilities of the individual federates to share information, and, if required, indicates the need for corrective actions. Any information exchanges required by the Federation Design or needed to represent the phenomena defined in the Federation Conceptual Model that are not reflected in the FOM suggest missing objects or interactions. An incomplete FOM may limit the federation’s ability to achieve the federation objectives documented in the Federation Objectives Statement. FOM verification also adds an important link in the traceability chain.As with the other verification activities, the VV&A Team should approach verifying the FOM as an integral part of the Federation Development Team and share this responsibility as required by the specifics of the organizations involved and the delegations of responsibility. Regardless of who performs the FOM verification tasks, the tasks in this activity assume that the VV&A Team has complete access to the FOM verification results. This activity assumes that verifying the FOM can be automated to some degree.Information requiredFOMVerified and validated Federation Conceptual ModelVerified Federation DesignVerified Federation ScenariosFederation V&V PlanFunctions (tasks)Verify the internal consistency and completeness of the FOMVerify the consistency, completeness, and correctness of the FOM against the Federation Design, Federation Conceptual Model, and Federation ScenariosContribute to documenting the FOM verification resultsContribute to documenting the traceability between the FOM, the Federation Conceptual Model, and Federation DesignInformation producedFOM verification resultsInformation describing the traceability between the FOM and the Federation Conceptual Model and Federation DesignActivity 4.3—Support establishing federation agreementsThis activity supports the Federation Development Team in establishing the Federation Agreements. Federation Agreements are ad hoc agreements between Federation Development Team members that are necessary to achieve a fully consistent, interoperable, distributed federation. Federation Agreements are made to resolve federation operational design and execution management issues. Potential topics for Federation Agreements include federation operational procedures necessitated by federation selective use of interface standard services, federate use of common databases and algorithms, or federation and federate strategies for data collection. The Federation Development Team is responsible for explicitly considering what additional agreements are required and how those agreements should be documented. As part of this activity, the VV&A Team can make recommendations for agreements that impact the interoperability between the federates' representations.The VV&A Team participates as part of the Federation Development Team to assess how the proposed Federation Agreements could effect the federation’s validity. In this role, they should carefully examine each agreement to determine its impact upon the federation’s representational capabilities and the federation’s ability to meet the Federation Acceptability Criteria. The VV&A Team should ensure that the agreements to support interoperability between the federates’ representations are negotiated and documented. To accomplish this, the VV&A Team will require access to all of the Federation Agreements created during the federation development.In addition, the VV&A Team may need to establish agreements of their own to govern planned VV&A processes.Information requiredVerified FOMVerified Federation ScenariosVerified and validated Federation Conceptual ModelVerified Federation DesignFederation Development and Execution PlanFederation Acceptability CriteriaFederation Development Team informal documentation (e.g., notes and agreements)Functions (tasks)Support the following FEDEP tasks:deciding the behavior of all federation objects and how they should interact during execution (to maintain validity)identifying the necessary software modifications to selected federates to assure federation validitydeciding which databases and algorithms should be common or consistent in order to maintain sufficient interoperabilityidentifying authoritative data sources for federate and federation databases and checking their pedigreesdeciding how time should be managed in the federation in order to maintain validityestablishing synchronization points for the federation and the procedures for federation initiation to assure federation validity during operationdeciding the strategy for how the federation shall be saved and restored in order to maintain sufficiently valid continuitydeciding how data is to be distributed to & collected from across the federationtransforming the functional scenario descriptions to executable scenariosreviewing security agreements and procedures to ensure that these procedures do not adversely impact validity or, at least, to make the development team aware of impacts upon validityEnsure that agreements to support interoperability between the federates’ representations are negotiated and documentedInformation producedInput to the Federation AgreementsInput to the Federation Scenario instancesActivity 4.4—Contribute to verifying federation agreementsThis activity verifies the consistency, completeness, and correctness of the Federation Agreements both internally and against the verified FOM, the verified Federation Design, the validated Federation Conceptual Model, and the verified Federation Scenarios. This verification process demonstrates that all interoperability issues critical for information sharing and compatibility of the selected federates not covered in the FOM are addressed and indicates the need for corrective actions that may be required.Special care should be taken to establish agreements to ensure the consistency of internal federate representations (e.g., coordinate systems, line-of-sight calculations) within the federation but that are not explicitly represented in the FOM, the Federation Design or the verified Federation Requirements. The absence of important Federation Agreements can significantly distort combined federation representations. This activity also documents the traceability between the Federation Agreements and the Federation Design, the Federation Requirements, the Federation Conceptual Model, and the Federation Scenarios.As with the other verification activities, the VV&A Team should approach verifying the Federation Agreements as an integral part of the Federation Development Team and share this responsibility as required by the specifics of the organizations involved and the delegations of responsibility. Regardless of who performs Federation Agreement verification, the tasks in this activity assume that the VV&A Team has complete access to the Federation Agreement verification results. In addition, this activity assumes that the Federation Agreements are clearly and unmistakably documented.Information requiredFederation AgreementsVerified Federation ScenariosVerified and validated Federation Conceptual ModelVerified Federation DesignVerified FOMFederation V&V PlanFunctions (tasks)Verify the internal consistency and completeness of the Federation AgreementsVerify Federation Agreement consistency with the FOM, Federation Design, Federation Conceptual Model, and Federation ScenariosContribute to documenting the Federation Agreements verification resultsContribute to documenting the traceability between the Federation Agreements and the Federation Conceptual Model and Federation DesignInformation producedFederation Agreements verification resultsInformation describing the traceability between the Federation Agreements and the Federation Conceptual Model and Federation DesignActivity 4.5—Support implementing federate designsThis activity supports the V&V activities associated with implementing the designs of the individual federates and modifying existing federates so they can comply with the Federation Conceptual Model, the FOM, and the Federation Agreements. The federation VV&A Team cooperates with the V&V teams supporting the individual federate design, development, and modification efforts to ensure that new or modified federates are verified and validated as needed to support the Federation Objectives. The federation VV&A Team must also ensure that traceability links between the individual federate designs and the Federation Design and Federation Requirements exist.The federation VV&A Team recommends the V&V information requirements to the federate V&V teams. The federation VV&A Team then collects and integrates the results that these V&V activities produce. Information and associated documentation not provided by the federate V&V teams adds to the uncertainty associated with the federation’s validation.This activity assumes that a close cooperative relationship exists between the federation VV&A Team and the members of the V&V teams associated with the individual federates. Under some circumstances, the federation VV&A Team may need to take a more active role in federate verification and validation but the available resources may limit the extent of this level of participation. This may range from simply monitoring to actually performing detailed testing on the individual federate.Information requiredVerified Federation DesignVerified Federation AgreementsVerified and validated Federation Conceptual ModelVerified Federation ScenariosVerified FOMVerified Federation RequirementsFederation Acceptability CriteriaFederate V&V informationFunctions (tasks)Collect and integrate the historical and newly produced V&V information describing each federate’s validated representational capabilitiesRecommend V&V information requirements for new or modified federatesContribute to verifying the mapping of new or modified federate capabilities to the Federation Design, as neededContribute to the other verification activities for each new or modified federate, as neededContribute to validating the federates against the Federation Acceptability Criteria and the Federation Referent, as neededContribute to documenting the traceability between each federate and the Federation Design, Federation Scenarios, Federation Conceptual Model, Federation Agreements, FOM, Federation Requirements, and Federation Acceptability CriteriaInformation producedIntegrated historical and newly produced V&V information for each federateV&V information requirements for new or modified federatesInput supporting federate verification activities, as neededInput supporting federate validation activities, as neededInformation describing the federate traceability, as neededActivity 4.6—Support implementing federation infrastructureIn this activity, the VV&A Team supports the Federation Development Team in implementing, configuring, and initializing the infrastructure necessary to realize the federation and ensure that that infrastructure can support the execution and intercommunication of all of the federates. This involves implementing the network design (e.g., wide-area networks and local-area networks), initializing and configuring the network elements (e.g., routers and bridges), and installing and configuring the supporting software on all computer systems. All of these tasks are necessary to produce a successfully operating federation.A federation’s infrastructure can affect the validity of its representations in numerous ways. Therefore, the VV&A Team should participate as part of the Federation Development Team in implementing those aspects of the federation infrastructure that could affect the federation’s validity. In this role, they should check that the federation’s infrastructure functions sufficiently well to ensure the federation’s validity. Further, the infrastructure (e.g., runtime infrastructure) initialization data may also be able to influence federation’s representational capabilities. As a result, the VV&A Team should assure that this data does not adversely affect federation’s validity. The FEDEP states “... extensive modification to the RTI initialization data are generally unnecessary, and should only be undertaken with sufficient knowledge of their potential impacts on the federation as a whole, minor modifications can improve federation performance in some circumstances.” Thus, the VV&A Team should ensure that any modifications to the infrastructure initialization data do not adversely affect the validity of the federation as a whole.This activity assumes that the VV&A Team can readily access all of the information describing the characteristics of the federation’s infrastructure.Information requiredFederation infrastructure documentation (implementation and configuration management plan; initialization plan, host/platform information tables, network information tables, etc.)Verified Federation AgreementsVerified Federation DesignVerified FOMFederation Development and Execution PlanFederation Acceptability CriteriaFunctions (tasks)Assist in determining that the planned infrastructure design, configuration, and initialization will not adversely affect the ability of the federation to meet the representational requirements defined by the Federation Acceptability CriteriaInformation producedInput to the implemented federation infrastructure designActivity 4.7—Contribute to Verifying Federation InfrastructureThis activity verifies the consistency, completeness, and correctness of the federation infrastructure both internally and against the verified Federation Agreements and verified Federation Design.This verification activity demonstrates that the infrastructure supports the information sharing and exchange among the federates needed to meet the Federation Requirements and suggests the need for any corrective actions. If the federation infrastructure cannot provide the needed quality of service to support the federate interactions then the federation’s validity may be compromised so that it cannot achieve the Federation Objectives.As with the other verification activities, the VV&A Team should approach verifying the federation infrastructure as an integral part of the Federation Development Team and share this responsibility as required by the specifics of the organizations involved and the delegations of responsibility. Regardless of who verifies the federation infrastructure, the tasks in this activity assume that the VV&A Team has complete access to the infrastructure verification results.Information requiredFederation infrastructure documentation (implementation and configuration management plan; initialization plan, host/platform information tables, network information tables, etc.)Federation infrastructure designVerified Federation AgreementsVerified Federation DesignVerified FOMFederation Development and Execution PlanFederation Acceptability CriteriaFunctions (tasks)Participate in verifying that the federation infrastructure design and implementation are consistent with the Federation Design and development plans and will meet the documented infrastructure requirementsContribute to verifying that correct configuration, initialization, and operation of the infrastructure has been achievedContribute to verifying that all federates have properly adhered to the infrastructure requirements and associated configurations and initializationsContribute to verifying that the implemented infrastructure supports the execution and intercommunication of the federatesContribute to documenting the federation infrastructure design resultsContribute to documenting the traceability between federation infrastructure design and the Federation Design, FOM, and the Federation AgreementsObserve infrastructure testing done by the Federation Development TeamDetermine if the infrastructure design, implementation, configuration, and initialization have affected the ability of the federation to meet the Federation Acceptability CriteriaInformation producedFederation infrastructure design verification resultsInformation describing the traceability between federation infrastructure design and the FOM, Federation Design and Federation AgreementsObservations of the federation infrastructure testingDetermination of how the infrastructure design and implementation affect the federation’s representational characteristicsActivity 4.8—Verify and validate federation data setsA federation uses a combination of data sets, each created for a specific purpose. Some data sets are used by individual federates. Two or more federates may share data or common databases while other data sets pertain to the entire federation execution. Finally, data may have been created to fill voids in available databases or to support federation testing. Regardless of whether federates and data sets have been used together in previous federations, some data set verification and validation will be necessary. The amount will depend upon the Federation Objectives, the acceptable risk, and the quality of the history available on each of the federates, and the data sets that they need. Any new data generated for the federation should be validated.Data verification and validation are necessary at the federation level to ensure that the selected data sets have been obtained from appropriate sources, they are sufficiently correct to support the intended use, and the federates can meaningfully use them. This means that the data contained by those data sets have correct units of measure, have values within the federate input limits, are internally consistent, and are measured within the coordinate systems employed within the federates or are converted, as necessary. If a federation data model was constructed as part of Federation Design, it should be compared to the data set characteristics to assure the completeness of those data sets and their consistency with the Federation Design.As with the other verification activities, the VV&A Team should approach verifying the federation data sets as an integral part of the Federation Development Team and share this responsibility as required by the specifics of the organizations involved and the delegations of responsibility. Regardless of who verifies the federation data sets, the tasks in this activity assume that the VV&A Team has complete access to the data set verification results. This activity also assumes that data set validation precedes federation validation. Testing should be conducted during federation construction and assembly to take advantage of ongoing federate compatibility tests.Information requiredFederation Acceptability CriteriaFederation ReferentFederation data sets and their metadata descriptionsFederation data set historiesFederation data set use restrictionsFederation DesignFederate algorithm descriptionsFederation V&V PlanFunctions (tasks)Verify data set sources to ensure the data and database sources are the most appropriate availableVerify that federates are capable of exchanging data and sharing the databases as specified in the Federation DesignVerify that the federate algorithms consistently support transformation and aggregation of the common data setsCompare key source data and metadata to federate input values and specifications to verify values assignedIdentify differences in format or content of the key source data and metadataAssess the impact of any discovered discrepancies upon federation execution and outputContribute to documenting the traceability of inputs through applied transformations to ensure that the data have appropriate values and are handled consistentlyCompare the data sets to the Federation Acceptability Criteria to ensure the data selected are the data desired Ensure that the data needed are available and data voids and deficiencies are identifiedValidate data sets against applicable Federation Acceptability CriteriaConduct sensitivity analyses to assess the impact of data variations on the output resultsAssess the impacts and risks associated with inconsistent, incomplete, or incorrect data sets and make recommendations for reducing those risksDocument the results of data set verification and validationInformation producedFederation data set validation resultsFederation data set verification resultsInformation describing the traceability between the federation data sets, their sources, and their transformations within the federatesData variation sensitivity analysis resultsData set incompleteness and incorrectness risk assessmentPhase 5—Validate and accept federationThe primary purpose of Phase 5 of the VV&A overlay is to validate and accept the federation for its intended use. This phase begins by supporting the execution planning in order to assure that the testing process will provide sufficient results to enable validating the integrated federation. The VV&A team also supports the federation integration activities of the FEDEP as needed and contributes to verifying the integrated federation. Additionally, they support federation testing and use the results from that testing to validate the integrated federation. The results from all of these and all previous V&V activities supply the evidence upon which to base the federation acceptance/accreditation recommendations.Figure 8 illustrates the key activities in this phase of the VV&A overlay. The subsections that follow describe each of these activities.— Validate and accept federation (Phase 5) activity diagramActivity 5.1—Support planning federation executionIn this activity, the VV&A team supports the Federation Development Team in planning of the federation’s execution. This final planning activity involves several tasks that could impact the federation’s representations. For example, the procedures for interrupting and restarting the federation execution could affect the federation’s representation of causality and that could change the validity of the execution’s results. The VV&A Team should work within the Federation Development Team to minimize the impact of any execution planning decisions upon the execution’s validity.This planning activity refines and augments the Federation Development and Execution Plan. The VV&A Team should identify the impacts that these changes could have upon the federation’s validity and suggest modifications that could minimize these impacts where possible. The VV&A Team may also need to refine the Federation Accreditation Plan and V&V Plan to accommodate these changes and to incorporate any additional information gathered. Further, the VV&A Team should participate as part of the Federation Development Team in identifying risks and the actions needed to ameliorate them.The VV&A Team should provide any additional inputs to the Federation Development and Execution Plan and its subordinate test and data collection plans that ensure that the data they need for results validation will be collected under the execution conditions described by the results sampling strategy and design of experiments. The VV&A Team should exploit all of the executions as much as possible to optimize the results collected.This activity assumes that the VV&A Team has access to all of the information supporting the development and modification of the Federation Development and Execution Plan.Information requiredVerified FOMFOM Document Data/Federation Execution DataFederation Scenario instancesVerified Federation AgreementsFederation Development and Execution PlanFederation Accreditation Plan and V&V PlanFunctions (tasks)Support identifying risks and the actions to address themSupport documenting all of the information relevant to the federation executionSupport developing detailed execution plans especially those relevant to collecting data to support federation results validation (e.g., testing and data collection) and those that might affect federation validity (e.g., security)Assess the effects that the special procedures for starting, stopping, and controlling each execution have on the validity of the federation execution and document these effectsRefine the Federation Accreditation Plan and V&V Plan and provide these modifications to the Federation Development and Execution PlanEvaluate the impacts that other modifications to the Federation Development and Execution Plan may have upon federation validity (e.g., security plan) and provide this as feedback to the Federation Development TeamInformation producedInput to federation risk management activitiesInput to federation execution documentationInput to the Federation Execution Environment DescriptionRevised Federation Accreditation Plan and V&V PlanModifications to the Federation Development and Execution Plan due to Federation Accreditation Plan and V&V Plan revisionsEvaluations of the impact of changes to the Federation Development and Execution Plan that could impact federation validityActivity 5.2—Support integrating federationIn this activity, the VV&A Team supports the Federation Development Team in integrating the federation to assure that the integration process results in valid federation representations. This may involve monitoring the federation integration process and observing that the Federation Development and Execution Plan is followed, particularly those parts that could impact the federation’s validity.The Federation Development Team may encounter and resolve problems during integration. The VV&A Team should determine the impacts that these problem resolutions have upon the federation’s representations and their ability to meet the Federation Acceptability Criteria. This will help to avoid workarounds that adversely affect federation validity and will improve the likelihood of producing a valid federation for the users.This activity assumes that the VV&A Team has complete access to all aspects of the federation integration process.Information requiredFederation Development and Execution PlanVerified federation development products:Federation Execution Environment DescriptionVerified and validated Federation Conceptual ModelVerified Federation DesignVerified Federation AgreementsVerified FOMRuntime infrastructure initialization dataVerified and validated federates (existing selected, modified, newly developed federates)Implemented and verified federation infrastructure designVerified and validated supporting data setsFunctions (tasks)Determine the impact of the methods for managing known hardware, interface, and software problems and the “workarounds” to overcome them upon federation validityDetermine the impact of deviations from the Federation Development and Execution Plan, particularly those aspects that could affect federation validityMonitor the conduct of the federation integration processInformation producedAssessment of the impact of hardware, interface, and software problems and their workarounds upon federation validityAssessment of the impact of deviations from the Federation Development and Execution Plan upon federation validityActivity 5.3—Contribute to verifying integrated federationThis activity verifies the consistency, completeness, and correctness of the integrated federation both internally and against the verified Federation Agreements, the verified Federation Design, and the validated Federation Conceptual Model.This verification activity demonstrates that both the federates and the integrated federation function as designed and as needed to meet the Federation Requirements. For example, this activity should verify that all attribute updates and interactions are sent and received from source to destination as designed. In addition, the assertions, pre- and post-conditions as well as behavior constraints described in the Federation Design should be verified. This verification activity should also assess whether the federate hosts can communicate with each other and whether the network capacity and resulting communications latency meets the design specification. Failure to conform to the federate or federation design specifications suggests that the federation cannot meet the Federation Acceptability Criteria. This situation indicates the need for any corrective actions.As with the other verification activities, the VV&A Team should approach verifying the integrated federation as part of the Federation Development Team and share this responsibility as required by the specifics of the organizations involved and the delegations of responsibility.Regardless of who verifies the federation infrastructure, the tasks in this activity assume that the VV&A Team has complete access to the infrastructure verification results. This activity also assumes that tools for monitoring federation traffic are available.Information requiredVerified Federation DesignVerified FOMVerified and validated Federation Conceptual ModelVerified Federation AgreementsIntegrated federationVerified Federation Test CriteriaFederation V&V PlanFunctions (tasks)Contribute to verifying that the federation behaves according to the Federation DesignContribute to verifying that the integrated federation as a whole behaves according to the FOM, Federation Conceptual Model, and Federation AgreementsContribute to verifying that adequate communication exists to support valid federation operationVerify that federation tests adhered to the Federation Test PlanContribute to documenting the integrated federation verification resultsContribute to documenting the traceability between the integrated federation and the Federation Design, FOM, and the Federation AgreementsInformation producedIntegrated federation verification resultsInput on whether the federation tests adhered to the Federation Test PlanInformation describing the traceability between the integrated federation and the FOM, Federation Design, and Federation AgreementsActivity 5.4—Support testing federationIn this activity, the VV&A Team supports the Federation Development Team in testing the federation. All of the phases of this federation testing can supply data that is critical to results validation. Thus, the VV&A Team needs to participate in the testing to understand the actual test conditions in order to correctly interpret the test data for federation validation.The VV&A Team should ensure that testing produces the data as defined in the test and data collection plans and that the test data is stored in an accessible form. They should also determine the impacts that any corrective actions planned by the Federation Development Team have upon the federation’s validity. This information may identify the need to change these corrective action or modify the Federation Scenarios, Federation Objectives or Federation Acceptability Criteria. The VV&A Team should modify the Federation Accreditation Plan and V&V Plan to reflect these changes.This activity assumes that the VV&A Team has access to all of the data produced by the federation testing tasks and that the testing tasks execute the test and data collection plans so as to produce sufficient data for results validation.Information requiredVerified integrated federationFederation Development and Execution PlanVerified Federation AgreementsFederation Execution Environment DescriptionVerified Federation Test CriteriaHLA Federate Interface Specification, Framework and Rules, and Object Model Template SpecificationFunctions (tasks)Support federate-level testingSupport federation-level and interoperability testingObserve federation testing activities and collect data from these activities needed to support federation results validationInformation producedInput to federate and federation testingFederation testing results to support federation results validationData and observations collected during federation testingActivity 5.5—Validate integrated federation resultsResults validation is the pinnacle of the federation validation effort. Results validation assesses by checking the validity of the actual federation output against the Federation Acceptability Criteria. While results validation is only one piece of federation validation evidence, it often has the most credibility with the User/Sponsor.Federation results validation builds upon the federation testing efforts and may require additional federation executions to augment the federation testing results. The results sampling strategy determines the need for these added executions as well as the required content from the tests. This activity should also determine the error characteristics and uncertainties associated with the sampled data and the results from any additional executions. This activity ends by inferring the root causes of any unacceptable results. This unacceptability may come from either federation behavior or the testing instrumentation and conditions. In either case, these causes are fed back to the Federation Development Team for correction. This feedback may result in additional testing which can then supplement the validation results.This activity assumes that those responsible for testing the federation actually perform all executions and collect the results from those executions. This activity also assumes that the VV&A Team also evaluates those results to develop the evidence to support federation acceptance. Further, this activity assumes that a results sampling strategy has been formulated that can provide sufficient results to achieve the desired confidence in the validation evidence, that the test plan has incorporated that strategy, and that the plan has been faithfully executed. It also assumes that the federation results provided as input to results validation come from a correctly executing integrated federation and can be considered as representative of the results that the actual federation User/Sponsor will see.Information requiredFederation Acceptability CriteriaFederation ReferentFederation testing resultsFunctioning integrated federation together with sufficient data to perform the validation executionsFederation V&V PlanFunctions (tasks)Identify executions needed to supplement those performed in integration testing in order to execute the federation results sampling strategy Perform any supplemental federation executions necessaryCollect federation execution results data and correlate them into a integrated picture of federation representational behaviorEstimate the uncertainties associated with the correlated federation results sampleEvaluate the completeness of the federation results against the Federation Acceptability Criteria and Federation Referent and identify areas of incompletenessEstimate the error characteristics of the correlated federation resultsEvaluate the correctness of the correlated federation results against the Federation Acceptability Criteria and Federation Referent and identify areas of incorrectnessEstimate the uncertainties associated with the errors in the federation resultsIdentify any observed interoperability anomalies and infer their probable causesDocument the results of the federation results validation tasksInformation producedFederation results validation results:Within the context of the Federation Referent, identification of the Federation Acceptability Criteria that the federation results meetdo not meetCharacterization of the representational errors in the federation results that exceed the Federation Acceptability Criteria limits Estimates of uncertainties associated with the representational errors in the federation resultsObserved interoperability anomalies and their probable causesActivity 5.6—Perform acceptance assessmentThis activity results in recommendations on the conditions under which the federation results can serve the User/Sponsor Needs. These recommendations guide the User/Sponsor’s acceptance of the integrated federation for their intended uses.In this activity, the VV&A Team collects and aggregates all of the V&V evidence and derives from this evidence the federation acceptance/accreditation recommendations. The aggregation process should draw integrated assessments from disparate V&V results. For example, one piece of evidence may come from a subject matter expert’s opinion while another may come from a statistical comparison test. The means to deal with these differences depend completely upon the characteristics of the evidence and the specific nature of the Federation Acceptability Criteria.The VV&A Team should determine the degree to which the federation’s capabilities meet the Federation Acceptability Criteria. This determination should identify the use conditions under which the federation meets the Federation Acceptability Criteria. It should also identify those criteria that the federation cannot meet under any conditions of use. The Federation Development Team can deal with unmet acceptability criteria in many ways including revising the Federation Scenarios, modifying the federates or their databases, or modifying the Federation Objectives, thus changing the federation's intended use. Some of these solutions may require revisiting parts of the federation development process and its associated VV&A activities.The FEDEP suggests that the federation testing activity should result in an integrated, tested, validated, and if required, accredited federation. This activity only accounts for the VV&A Team’s support for producing an integrated and tested federation. Verification, validation, and acceptance of the integrated federation are all described under separate subsequent activities.The recommendations from the acceptance assessment may lead to an accreditation decision that may be issued at any time following this acceptance assessment.Information requiredDocumentation of the V&V activities and their resultsFederation Acceptability CriteriaFederation V&V PlanFederation Accreditation PlanFederation Impact Use AssessmentFEDEP products, necessary to interpret the conducted V&V-activities, e.g., Federation Objectives, Federation Test Criteria, Federation Development and Execution PlanFederation test resultsFunctions (tasks)Determine that the V&V activities adhered to the constraints of the Federation V&V PlanGather and aggregate the information produced by the V&V activities during the preceding parts of the federation development and execution processEvaluate and merge the V&V resultsEstimate the uncertainties associated with the merged V&V evidenceEstimate the risks associated with using the federation to support the User/Sponsor Needs from the impacts described in the Federation Impact Use Assessment and the uncertainties associated with the merged V&V evidenceDetermine the recommended conditions of federation use in the context of the User/Sponsor NeedsDocument the recommended conditions of federation use and their rationaleInformation producedFederation acceptance/accreditation recommendationsPhase 6—Verify and validate federation outputPhase 6 of the VV&A overlay supports federation execution and monitors and documents the occurrence of any execution problems that may affect federation validity. These problems may be identified through verification of the raw execution and derived output or validation of the derived output.Figure 9 illustrates the key activities in this phase of the VV&A overlay. The subsections that follow describe each of these activities.— V&V federation output (Phase 6) activity diagramActivity 6.1—Support executing federationDuring this activity, the VV&A Team should monitor that the various aspects of federation execution conform to the Federation Development and Execution Plan and that any occurrences of execution problems that effect federation validity are identified and recorded.Federation executions should be monitored to determine how well the Federation Acceptability Criteria are met in order to provide immediate feedback on the execution of the federation. If the VV&A Team has not completely validated the federation by this phase, additional data should be collected to further assess the validity of the federation. If new scenario instances or input data are introduced at this stage, the VV&A Team should assess the significance of those changes and provide feedback on the validity implications. These additions to the federation may require returning to the previous FEDEP and overlay steps.If federation execution problems occur, the VV&A Team should assess the impacts of these problems and their workarounds, if any, upon the validity of the federation’s results. They may need to suggest additional constraints upon federation use to maintain the execution results validity. This activity assumes that some personnel from the VV&A Team continue to be involved in the federation execution and use in the later steps of the FEDEP.Information requiredValidated and accepted integrated federationFederation Development and Execution Plan Verified Federation ScenariosFederation scenario instancesVerified Federation AgreementsFederation Execution Environment DescriptionFederation input dataSupporting databasesFederation Acceptability CriteriaFederation acceptance/accreditation recommendationsFunctions (tasks)Monitor that the federation execution conforms to the Federation Development and Execution Plan, Federation Scenarios, Federation Execution Environment Description, and Federation AgreementsIdentify the occurrence of execution problems that impact the validity of the federation execution resultsInformation producedIdentification of any execution excursions outside the federation acceptance/accreditation recommendationsInputs to the documented execution problemsActivity 6.2—Contribute to verifying raw execution and derived outputThis activity contributes to verifying the raw data collected during the federation execution and the output derived from this data in accordance with the V&V Plan and the Federation Development and Execution Plan. This includes an assessment of any data transformation or pre-processing algorithms or techniques that have been used. In addition, any incomplete, inconsistent, incorrect or erroneous output should be identified and corrective action taken where necessary.During this activity, quality assurance/quality management tasks may be ongoing. If so, the VV&A Team should collect their information and use it to support this activity.This activity assumes that some personnel from the VV&A Team continue to be involved in the federation execution and use in the later steps of the FEDEP and that any verification techniques used conform to the V&V Plan.Information requiredRaw execution outputDerived federation outputFederation Development and Execution PlanFunctions (tasks)Verify that the raw execution output conforms to data collection plan that is part of the Federation Development and Execution PlanVerify, with the users, that the data formats and transformations of the federation output are appropriate and applied within their constraintsIdentify, with the user, missing and erroneous outputContribute to documenting the raw execution output and derived federation output verification resultsInformation producedRaw execution output verification resultsDerived federation output verification resultsInformation on any missing or erroneous outputActivity 6.3—Validate federation outputThis activity validates, against the Federation Acceptability Criteria and the Federation Referent, the completeness and correctness of the derived output data collected during the federation execution prior to its formal analysis. Any areas of incompleteness or incorrectness should be documented and reported to the User/Sponsor and the Federation Development Team together with the uncertainties associated with the derived output errors. This activity builds upon prior federation results validation and provides an additional opportunity to assess the validity of the federation’s output.This activity assumes that some personnel from the VV&A Team continue to be involved in the federation execution and use in the later steps of the FEDEP and that the validation techniques selected for this activity conform to the V&V Plan.Information requiredFederation Development and Execution PlanVerified derived federation outputVerified Federation AgreementsDocumentation of execution problemsFederation Acceptability CriteriaFederation ReferentFederation acceptance/accreditation recommendationsFunctions (tasks)Evaluate the completeness of the derived federation output against the Federation Acceptability Criteria and Federation Referent and identify areas of incompletenessEstimate the error characteristics of the derived federation outputEvaluate the correctness of the derived federation output against the Federation Acceptability Criteria and Federation Referent and identify areas of incorrectnessEstimate the uncertainties associated with the errors in the derived federation outputIdentify any observed representational anomalies and infer their probable causesDocument the results of validating the derived federation outputInformation producedFederation output validation results:Within the context of the Federation Referent, identification of the Federation Acceptability Criteria that the derived federation output meetdoes not meetCharacterization of the representational errors in the derived federation output that exceed the Federation Acceptability Criteria limits Estimates of the uncertainties of the representational errors in the derived federation outputObserved representational anomalies and their probable causesPhase 7—Consolidate federation VV&A productsThis phase of the overlay focuses upon documentation and reuse to improve the productivity and efficiency of future federation VV&A processes. In support of this goal the VV&A Team collects from the preceding VV&A efforts and assembles them into a consolidated package. This package will include the final Federation Accreditation Plan, Federation Referent description, final Federation Acceptability Criteria, final Federation V&V Plan, federation scenario verification results, federation conceptual model V&V results, federation requirements verification results, federation design verification results, FOM verification results, federation agreement verification results, federate V&V results, federation infrastructure verification results, federation data set V&V results, integrated federation V&V results, federation output V&V results, and VV&A lessons learned. This phase also supports the data analysis efforts defined in the FEDEP as needed.Figure 10 illustrates the key activities in this phase of the VV&A overlay. The subsections that follow describe each of these activities.)— Consolidate federation VV&A products (Phase 7) activity diagramActivity 7.1—Support analyzing dataThis activity supports analyzing the federation output. During this activity, the VV&A Team collects, assembles, and documents the V&V evidence from all of the previous activities. They also complete documenting the traceability between the analyzed data and derived output.The VV&A documentation should include the collected evidence and its relation to the Federation Acceptability Criteria. An important aim is to make this documentation easily understood by User/Sponsor and to prepare it in an appropriate format as specified in the V&V Plan. Further, this documentation should describe the conditions of recommended use, rational for those recommendations, possible corrective actions for follow-on federation executions, and the VV&A lessons learned.Information requiredFederation V&V results documentationFederation ReferentFederation Acceptability CriteriaFunctions (tasks)Collect, assemble, and document the verification and validation results from prior activitiesContribute to documenting the traceability between the analyzed data and the derived outputDevelop and document the conditions of recommended use (i.e., accreditation recommendations where needed)Develop recommendations for improving the VV&A activities from the lessons learnedInformation producedIntegrated federation V&V results documentationInformation describing the traceability between the analyzed data and the derived outputFederation acceptance/accreditation recommendationsVV&A lessons learnedRecommendations for VV&A activity improvementsActivity 7.2—Prepare federation VV&A products for reuseThis activity prepares the federation products for reuse to improve the productivity and efficiency of future federation development and execution processes. The VV&A activity focuses upon storing all reusable federation products (including both FEDEP and VV&A products) in an appropriate archive for general reuse within the domain or broader distributed simulation community.The VV&A Team should gather all of the information that could be re-used and store that in an accessible form in an accessible place. This includes archiving the FOM, any modifications to the SOMs of federates, and other federation products that may also be reusable, such as the Federation Scenarios and the Federation Conceptual Model. In fact, capturing the full set of federation products required to reproduce the federation execution may be advantageous in some instances. All VV&A documents including the Federation Acceptability Criteria, Accreditation Plan, V&V Plan, V&V results and acceptance/ accreditation recommendations should be included in the archive. These products contribute to establishing the credibility of the federation as well as the federation’s results. The VV&A Team should consolidate the products from the federation VV&A processes and ensure that these products conform to the relevant re-use exchange criteria, formats, and available standards. They should then integrate the VV&A archive products with those produced by the Federation Development Team and archived according to the federation re-use plan if there is one.The Federation Development Team should determine which federation products have potential for reuse in future applications whereas the VV&A Team should endeavor to capture all products stemming from their VV&A activity.Information requiredProducts of the FEDEP and VV&A processesGuidance for judging the acceptance of products as reusableFunctions (tasks)Consolidate the products produced by the federation VV&A processesEnsure that the VV&A products have been archived according to the federation re-use planEnsure that these products conform to the relevant re-use exchange criteria, formats, and available standardsConfirm that the FEDEP products relevant to future VV&A activities have been archived according to the federation re-use planInformation producedReusable consolidated federation VV&A products packageConclusionThis recommended practice has provided a detailed view of the VV&A overlay to the FEDEP. Currently, this model represents the best practices available to the VV&A community. The VV&A overlay is a tailorable process and is offered as “hands-on” implementation-level guidance to VV&A practitioners.(informative)BibliographyDoD 5000.59-M, DoD Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Glossary, Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, January 1998.IEEE 1516.3TM-2003, High Level Architecture (HLA) Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP), 20 March 2003.IEEE 100TM-2000, The Authoritative Dictionary of IEEE Standards Terms, 7th Edition.Department of Defense Verification, Validation and Accreditation (VV&A) Recommended Practices Guide, Build 2.5, Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, Alexandria, VA, 15 October 2001.IEEE 1278.4TM-1997, IEEE Recommended Practice for Distributed Simulation - Verification, Validation and Accreditation, 9 December 1997 Note that outside of the United States there may not be a formal accreditation process and the terms “acceptance” or “accepted for use” may be used; in this document the term acceptance is the decision to use a simulation for a specific purpose and the term accreditation is the official certification that a model or simulation is acceptable for use for a specific purpose. For the purposes of this document the terms are equivalent. The IEEE products referred to in this clause are trademarks belonging to the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. IEEE publications are available from the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 445 Hoes Lane, P.O. Box 1331, Piscataway, NJ 08855-1331, USA (http://standards.ieee.org/).	DRAFT	August  DOCPROPERTY "YearOfDraft"  \* MERGEFORMAT 2006PAGE  PAGE  iv		This is an unapproved DRAFT of a proposed standard, subject to change.	DRAFT	August  DOCPROPERTY "YearOfDraft"  \* MERGEFORMAT 2006		This is an unapproved DRAFT of a proposed standard, subject to change.IEEE P DOCPROPERTY "Designation"  \* MERGEFORMAT TBD/D DOCPROPERTY "DraftNumber"  \* MERGEFORMAT 0.0,  DOCPROPERTY "MonthOfDraft"  \* MERGEFORMAT March  DOCPROPERTY "YearOfDraft"  \* MERGEFORMAT 2006E P12335.333/D4, February 2222	Copyright © 2222 IEEE. All rights reserved.	This is an unapproved IEEE Standards Draft, subject to change.	DRAFT	August  DOCPROPERTY "YearOfDraft"  \* MERGEFORMAT 2006PAGE  6This is an unapproved DRAFT of a proposed standard, subject to change.	DRAFT	August  DOCPROPERTY "YearOfDraft"  \* MERGEFORMAT 2006	DRAFT	August  DOCPROPERTY "YearOfDraft"  \* MERGEFORMAT 2006