Future Force Warrior Simulation Using IWARS2LT James M. Comstock, Jr., 2LT Christopher D. Freeborg, 2LT Brian J. Martinez, 2LT Cameron P. Turner, 2LT Darcy L. Wilson,Major Thomas A. RippertDepartment of Systems EngineeringUnited States Military AcademyWest Point, NY 10996Keywords:IWARS, HMFS, REDXF, FFWABSTACT:  The purpose of our systems study is to conduct analysis to determine the effectiveness of Future Force Warrior (FFW) equipment and ensure it increases the combat power of a Small Combat Unt(SCU). Further, with this analysis, the team endeavored to produce data on FFW equipment implementation and to provide recommendations from the results.  The team used the Infantry Warrior Simulation program (IWARS) to simulate a MOUT scenario conducted by a squad sized element.1. IntroductionOur client identified several specific needs during our initial meeting.  First, he was interested in receiving data about the effectiveness of FFW equipment in environments other than MOUT scenarios.  Suggestions included looking at the jungle or mountain environment or a scenario involving a FFW equipped small combat unit searching a cave for weapons.  Another interest was to determine how effectively different simulation programs (IWARS, JCATS, OOS, etc.) replicate FFW equipment as well as the programs’ ability to produce applicable data.  Lastly, he was interested in using SUTES (Small Unit Tactical Evaluation Simulation) to depict an SCU using current equipment in battle drills and then compare that to battle drills incorporating FFW equipment.2. PurposeFrom the initial meeting we developed a problem statement that concisely addressed how our project should be directed: “Conduct analysis to determine the effectiveness of FFW equipment and ensure it increases the combat power of a Small Combat Unit.”  After receiving approval from our client we addressed what functions would be required of our system.  3. MethodologyBefore beginning the actual build of the simulation, it was necessary to identify which of the 18 FFW factors we could simulate.  After assessing the capabilities of IWARS even further and the actual capabilities of each factor, we were able to choose 8 factors that we would address in our simulation.  For each factor, we will compare how a SCU performs given “base case” FFW capabilities and “improved case” FFW capabilities, which will determine how best to implement FFW equipment and whether or not they increase the combat effectiveness of the SCU.  These factors are outlined below.3.1 Weapon SightTwo weapon sights are being developed for the Future Force Warrior program, a medium-range thermal sight and a long-range thermal sight which will extend the Soldier’s acquisition capability from 1000m to 1500m at either day or night.  The Base Case for this factor will be that all soldiers have a medium-range thermal weapon sight.  The Improved Case for this factor will be that the Automatic Riflemen and Riflemen have long-range thermal weapon sights while all others are given the medium-range sensor.The weapon sights were developed through the “Data Editor” within IWARS.  A “Medium Weapon Sight” and “Heavy Weapon Sight” were developed with the medium thermal sight given a range of 1000 meters and the heavy thermal sight given a range of 1500 meters.  The factor was tested based on who was given the medium and heavy weapon sensors.3.2 Helmet Mounted Fused Sensor(HMFS)The HMFS merges images from various sensors including Near Infrared and Long-Wave Infrared enhancing the ability of the soldier to understand the combat scene including target detection and enhanced effectiveness while working in limited visibility.  The Base Case is giving the leaders and grenadiers the HMFS and all others given the PVS-14 night vision goggles (NIR).  The Improved Case gives all SCU soldiers the HMFS capabilities. The HMFS was developed by using the thermal mean resolvable temperature (MRT) data provided by the client.  This data was applied to an existing sensor which would affect the abilities of units to identify objects given different illumination and visibility conditions.3.3 Communications DistributionThe JTRS(Joint Tactical Radio System) Cluster 5 small form-fit radio is a digital radio that allows SCU soldiers to receive voice communications within the squad as well as send GPS location and updated health monitor updates to the SCU.  In our simulation, the health monitor updates is not included.  The Base Case is allowing the Squad Leader and Team Leaders to have both JTRS Cluster 5 and the squad network with all other SCU soldiers having only the squad network.  The grenadier will also have JTRS Cluster 5 when used with cooperative engagement scenarios. This was simulated in IWARS by simply allowing the Team Leaders to communicate with each other via radio when needed.  3.4 Reduced Exposure Firing Distribution(REDXF)A camera on the weapon transfers the sight picture to the Soldier’s heads up display.  It allows the soldier to shoot at targets while still remaining covered and/or concealed.  The Base Case gives squad and team leaders the ability as well as grenadiers.  The Improved Case gives all SCU soldiers the reduced-exposure firing capability.This factor was simulated through the manipulation of the crouching posture within the IWARS program.  The scaling factors used to depict the length, width, and height of a soldier while in the crouching posture was reduced from 2, 1, and 0.75 to 0.1.  This will essentially reduce the exposure of the soldier in the crouching soldier significantly simulating the reduced exposure produced by mounting the soldier’s weapon with a camera, allowing them to remain under cover while engaging the enemy.  Whenever the soldier began firing, it was given the command to “crouch,” meaning that the soldier had found cover and was using the camera mounted on his weapon to engage the enemy.  The crouching posture was not used under any other circumstance.  3.5 Cooperative Engagement Fire ControlThis factor allows the grenadier to use another soldier’s target information to engage the enemy, without actually being able to identify the target themselves.  The Base Case does not allow grenadiers to fire cooperative engagements.  The Improved Case does allow grenadiers to fire upon cooperative engagements.However, after using IWARS to develop the mission for the SCU, it became evident that time and technical constraints limited the ability to develop this factor.  This factor was initially developed by using an invisible entity that was 500 meters tall and 0.01 meters wide and long.  The invisible entity could see all areas of the scenario.  Anyone who saw enemy would contact the invisible man and ask for indirect fire from the M203 with M406 munitions.  This communication worked and the invisible man would fire upon the enemy, but the munitions would not explode upon contact.  This factor will be addressed during the next phase of this project.3.6 Individual Soldier Sensor(ISS)A lightweight, short-range, disposable sensor is carried by the SCU for use in local tactical situations as determined by the leader.  The sensor could fill gaps in sensor coverage in local defensive situations, screen buildings which have been cleared in order to free soldiers from observation tasks, or in providing rear or flank security during a tactical move.  The Base Case does not give the SCU the ISS sensors.  The Improved Case gives each soldier two ISS sensors. However, after using IWARS to develop the mission for the SCU, it became evident that time and technical constraints limited the ability to develop this factor.  This factor will be addressed during the next phase of this project.3.7 Interrogation Friend or FoeSimilar to aircraft identification capabilities, this factor would allow soldiers to instantly recognize entities as friendly.  Each friendly SCU soldier must be equipped with transponders that will respond to an interrogation signal.  This capability has been developed in order to reduce fratricide.  The Base Case does not permit active “interrogation.”  The Improved Case would give each soldier the ability to interrogate as well as the transponder that will respond to the interrogation.  The system would only identify between friend and unknown. However, after using IWARS to develop the mission for the SCU, it became evident that time and technical constraints limited the ability to develop this factor.  This factor will be addressed during the next phase of this project.3.8 Night vs. DayThe effectiveness of these factors will be assessed in both night and day scenarios.  In IWARS, the environment controls already included the ability to change the scenario from night to day.  When the mission took place during the day, it had a visibility factor of 1000 giving a 100% illumination.  During the night time, there was a new moon which had a visibility factor of 1E-5.4. Implementation4.1 Factorial DesignChoosing from a list of 18 possible FFW program factors, our team selected 4 factors to evaluate: Weapon Sight, Helmet Mounted Fused Sensor (HMFS), Reduced Exposure Firing (REDXF), and the Night/Day environmental factor. The team based its selection on the particulars of the IWARS program and time available for simulation generation and analysis.  Because of the relatively small number of factors, the team utilized a full factorial design of 16 design points. The Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC) and the FFW program provided modeling data used in the simulation.4.2 Maneuver PlanIn order to test how effective the factors when used during an urban mission, we developed a mission compiled of tasks that will incorporate the factors that were capable of being simulated.  Two blue teams begin west of the village where team one will start movement towards the village and team two will follow a path just north of the first team.  The blue units would all have a basic set of equipment to include Interceptor Body Armor and Night Vision Goggles.  The rifleman would be given a M-4 rifle, the SAW gunner would be given M-249, and the grenadier would be given an M-4 and M-203.  Located North-East of the village is a red team which has not been given any of the FFW factors.  The red units were only given an AK-74 with no body armor, no weapons sights, and no night vision.  A node network allows the teams to move in accordance with  a set of rules, such as moving towards the objective while avoiding the closest enemy.  Given these rules, the teams can essentially choose any path which provides an additional source of reality to the simulation.  Our maneuver of the two teams is indicated as follows.First, the two blue teams begin their movement towards the village.  Their movement is decided based on the lone red unit located South-West of the village.  The blue teams are to maneuver towards the village to points located just west of the village where they will pause and communicate.  The northern team is identified as B Team and the southern team is identified as A Team.  Because our output is based on a completed scenario, all the tested factors are still being tested.  The HMFS factor is tested throughout the entire mission.  Given changing day and night illumination between each run, this factor would have varying effects on the mission.Next, the blue teams pause and the red team begin movement towards the village.  During this pause, the communications distribution capability is tested.  B Team communicates to A Team that they have identified enemy and A Team begins movement towards the village to set-up a hasty ambush while B Team maneuvers north of the village and set up a security position.  If the communications fail, A Team will never set up the ambush because they were never told of the existence of the red team and do not know to set up the ambush.  Instead, they would move to the village where they would either come into surprise contact with the enemy or simply move to a building housing an enemy soldier and conduct a room clearing operation.Subsequently, the blue team will then stack for an ambush awaiting the red team who is following a node network.  The blue B Team will set up north of the village where they await the call for the room clear.  The blue team will then engage the red team using reduced exposure firing distribution and the heavy and medium weapon sights FFW factors.  After the ambush or meeting engagement is complete,  the blue team will maneuver to the building where a red unit is located.  After A Team has effectively stacked outside of the building, they communicate with B Team using the FFW communication distribution factor that they are stacked and ready.  At this point, B Team begins movement towards the building.  If this communication fails, B team will never move to the squad objective (room clearing) and the mission is identified as incomplete.Now, once B Team has joined A Team and is stacked and ready to enter the building.  They will perform a room clear of the entry room and the room with the red unit located inside.  A Team will remain outside stacked.  After both teams are stacked and ready, there is a brief pause followed by the first movement of B Team into the building.  B team will then conduct and complete first room clear.  They then stack to enter the smaller room where a red soldier is located.Lastly, B Team will conduct the room clear using reduced exposure firing distribution.  The mission is not complete until the room clear has been conducted and the red soldier has been eliminated.  The blue team conducts the room clearing given behaviors already established by IWARS software and was only modified to reflect the varying capabilities of FFW factors.  B Team then communicates to A Team that rooms are clear and the mission is considered complete.5. Simulation Results5.1 Initial ResultsAfter conducting the simulation given the factorial design, pure data was produced by IWARS.  The data was put into MINITAB where the data could then be analyzed given its graphical output.  The data was analyzed using hypothesis testing, confidence intervals, and MINITAB to determine which factors were significant.  After analyzing this initial 30-run data, it became evident that further verification and validation may need to occur.Initial results indicated that as you move from the base case scenario where only leaders receive the REDXF capability to the improved case where all of the squad receives the REDXF capability, the number of blue force killed throughout the mission increases.  This seemed counterintuitive given the fact that the REDXF capability reduced the amount of exposure a unit must endure when in contact with the enemy and is supposed to be simulated by reducing the surface area of the blue force unit to a small square of only 0.1 meter x 0.1 meter as the REDXF is in use.  As such, there seemed to be no reason why the number of blue kills should increase.  After reviewing this data, it was determined that the next step should be the verification and validation of our simulation.The following three months after our initial runs and data analysis were dedicated to the verification and validation of the simulation.  As the simulation was validated and the REDXF capability was analyzed, we would change only one aspect of the simulation at a time.  After making an adjustment, we would watch the simulation take place in both the 2D visualizer and the 3D visualizer to gain a better assessment of what was taking place.  After watching the simulation, we would conduct a common sense check of the results, much as we did when determining that the initial 30 run feedback seemed to indicate a problem with our simulation.  After conducting the process, we found some weaknesses in our simulation to include the fact that the units equipped with REDXF were not always able to fire on the enemy.  This was due to the fact that the blue force would not be able to switch back and forth between the restricted point of view while using the REDXF viewer and the normal point of view of the unaided eye.  As we continued to encounter and fix any issues, we eventually became ready to conduct another thirty run analysis using the same factorial design.5.2 Validated IWARS ResultsAfter validating and verifying our simulation, we ran 30 runs of each design point.  We then evaluated our new data using a significance level of .1.5.2.1 Blue KillsIt was found that the two way interaction between using REDXF in the day or night hours and the two way interaction between using HMFS during the day or night hours were significant to the number of blue kills. Additionally, the number of blue kills was also affected significantly by REDXF singularly and whether or not it was day or night.5.2.2 Red KillsIt was found that the two-way interaction between the weapon sight and REDXF is significant, as well as the two-way interaction between HMFS and REDXF.  The HMFS main effect is significant upon the number of Red kills, in addition to its two-way interactions between REDXF and the weapon sight.  5.2.3 Mission CompletionThe two-way interaction between HMFS and REDXF was the only interaction that was significant in mission completion.  Night versus day was the only other factor significant on whether or not the mission was completed.5.2.4 Significant FindingsOne of the most significant findings from our improved simulation was the reduction of the number of blue forces killed when all of the units were given the REDXF capability.  There was a 30% reduction, which is considered very significant as this was for only an 8 person squad indicating that a far larger number of people would survive the mission.  Additionally, this data shows that there is a significant advantage to giving all units the REDXF capability.The other significant finding depicted by the new data indicates a counterintuitive interaction between REDXF and HMFS.  There appears to be a reduction in the number of red kills when all units are given HMFS and REDXF.  We expected to see an increase in red kills when all units were given the HMFS and REDXF capabilities because singularly, these factors increase the number of red kills.  This being the case, the interaction plot shows that there is either some aspect of the interaction between the two factors that reduces the lethality of the unit or there is an issue with the development of the simulation.  As we reviewed the simulation, we discovered that when the SCU was equipped with both HFMS and REDXF they were killing the enemy much faster then before.  This caused the enemy to "Break" and move out of the engagement.  The result was a decrease in the number of red kills but an INCREASE in mission success.6.  MISSION RESPONSE FUNCTIONThe Mission Response Function is a metric used by the FFW Team.  It is designed to allow limited comparisons of different courses of action and data over experiments that would not normally be comparable.  For example, the MRF might allow us to compare results from a Live experiment with results from a simulated experiment.  There are 4 main factors that go into the function:  Blue Kills, Red Kills, Mission Success and Time to Complete Mission.  Each factor is assigned a weight.  Depending on the mission, the weigh may change.  For example, if a certain type of mission might have to be conducted quickly, time to complete the mission would be weighed more important.  For other types of missions, the number of enemy kills might be weighed more important.  In our research, we used the mission response function to allow us to further evaluate different COA.  We used the MRF function to allow us to compare our best courses of action as determined by the simulation results.  In addition, we conducted sensitivity analysis on the range of potential MRF weights to determine if the best alternative was likely to change based upon the different requirements of the mission.We found when we conducted our analysis that unless there were extreme changes in the weights of the four different evaluation measures (for example if mission completion was the only thing that mattered), then our best alternative (DP14) did not change.7.  CONCLUSIONSOver the past year this design team has conduct analysis for the Future Force Warrior program.  Initially, we helped the program review different potential combat simulations.  Based upon this review, we conducted experimental simulation and analysis to help determine which of the factors of interest most supported their needs.  Finally, we compared different alternatives using the simulation results and the programs MRF.  It is clear from our analysis that in an urban environment, the ability for a soldier to fight using reduced fire exposure results in a significant loss of life.  Strong consideration ought to be taken to ensure that all soldiers are provided this piece of equipment.8.  AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES2LT Comstock, Freeborg, Martinez, Turner and Wilson are recent graduates of the United States Military Academy at West Point.  They graduated from the Systems Engineering or Math Departments and are currently going through Officer Basic Training.MAJ Thomas A. Rippert is an Assistant Professor at the United States Military Academy in the Department of Systems Engineering.  He received his Operations Research Master's Degree from the University of Texas.  He currently teaches the Department's Combat Modeling and Simulations course.