experimentation within the nato virtual institute for human behavior representation:  a process to enable multi-national cultural research CONTACT _Con-4079826E1 \c \s \l Sheila B. Banks, Ph.D.Calculated InsightOrlando, FL HYPERLINK "mailto:sbanks@calculated-insight.com" sbanks@calculated-insight.comMartin R. Stytz, Ph.D.Institute for Defense AnalysesAlexandria, VA HYPERLINK "mailto:mstytz@ida.org" mstytz@ida.org,  HYPERLINK "mailto:mstytz@att.net" mstytz@att.netUwe Dompke, Ph.D.NC3AThe Hague, Netherlands HYPERLINK "mailto:uwe.dompke@nc3a.nato.int" uwe.dompke@nc3a.nato.intJanet Sutton, Ph.D.Air Force Research LaboratoryWright-Patterson AFB, OH HYPERLINK "mailto:janet.sutton@afrl.af.mil" janet.sutton@afrl.af.milKeywords:Human behavior modeling, cultural behavior modeling, human behavior representation, virtual institute, virtual testbed, NATO study teamABSTRACT:  One severely limiting issue during the development and experimentation within a distributed modeling and simulation environment is the inability of the project team to identify and collaborate with resources, both human and technical, from outside the United States.  This limitation is especially significant within the human behavior representation area where areas such as cultural effects research and joint command team behavior modeling require the participation of various cultural and national representatives.  To address this limitation, as well as other human behavior representation research issues, NATO Research and Technology Organization initiated a project to develop a NATO virtual institute that enables more effective and more collaborative research into human behavior representation.  This paper describes the first use of the NATO Virtual Institute for Research into Human Behavior Representation: an experiment to allow human behavior research teams to be identified, developed, and tested within a shared cultural modeling testbed for the analysis of cultural human performance parameters and their effects on joint command post teams.The paper is organized in the following manner.  The first section contains an introduction to human behavior modeling within the NATO virtual institute and a discussion of the motivation for the research we report.  Section Two contains background research that informed and guided our research into the both the development and use of the NATO virtual institute and the development and experimentation for cultural human behavior modeling.  Section Three is the main focus of the paper and contains the cultural modeling experimental definition, the processes for multi-national human subject testing comparison and analysis, and the use of the NATO virtual institute to enable the multi-national experimentation.  The testing defined and developed within the NATO VI/HBR prototype is to be conducted in October 2006; as such, this paper will not discuss the testing results and we will leave that discussion to a future paper.  Therefore, the final section of the paper contains a summary, preliminary insights into our experimental work, and suggestions for further use of the virtual institute for multi-nation team development and joint experimentation in human behavior representation.1.	IntroductionOne severely limiting issue during the development and experimentation within a distributed modeling and simulation environment is the inability of the project team to identify and collaborate with resources, both human and technical, from outside the United States.  This limitation is especially significant within the human behavior representation area where areas such as cultural effects research and joint command team behavior modeling require the participation of various cultural and national representatives.  To address this limitation, as well as other human behavior representation research issues, NATO Research and Technology Organization (RTO) initiated a project to develop a multi-national virtual institute that enables more effective and more collaborative research into human behavior representation.  With the shrinking research budgets available within industry, academia, and the military and the accelerating rate of change of technology development, researchers, specifically researchers in the modeling of human behavior representation, find themselves looking to further their research projects using development and experimentation with the maximum of collaboration and the exploitation of prior similar research projects.  In addition, many current research projects must deal with joint and multi-national issues, such as the definition of cultural effects within human behavior modeling, to appropriately represent areas like joint command and control centers, opposing operational forces, and international crowds.  However, this process of collaboration is extremely difficult when several things are not identifiable such as knowledgeable colleagues dealing with similar research areas, multi-nation testing teams with shared resources, and published information on investigations of similar research projects.  Furthermore, to enable research into areas such as cultural parameters within human behavior modeling, multi-national research investigations are required and must be identified and utilized. While in the past activities such as conferences, workshops, and meetings have served the community well in organizing and disseminating information, they no longer are sufficient to allow scientists and decision-makers to remain appraised of relevant scientific developments and so a new approach to managing, conducting, and disseminating research that augments traditional means is indicated.  Clearly a capability is essential for supporting rapid formation of ad hoc, multidisciplinary research teams; accelerating their work by making prior work and related expertise readily available; fostering rapid dissemination of research results; and otherwise aiding in the execution and exploitation of relevant research.  To enable these types of collaborative activities, a capability is necessary to direct human behavior researchers to readily identifiable international researchers and similar research projects.   Because of the academic nature of the activities to be conducted and because the organization would only exist within cyberspace, this capability is termed a virtual institute. The need for a multi-national human behavior research virtual institute is apparent in many areas, most distinctly in the area of multi-national command and control (C2).  Within this environment, military individuals from various nations must work in a complicated coalition to assemble effective teams.  Within these teams, there are several aspects that play significant importance in the formation of effective teams.  In addition, the stress of the complex C2 environment in which the multi-national team is employed puts a greater demand on the team to work as efficiently and effectively as possible.  To enable multiple nations to form the most effective teams as quickly as possible in a joint command team C2 environment, testing is required to show the strengths and weaknesses of joint team ability.  Using these strengths and weaknesses, team members can collaborate and communicate in a more effective manner and the joint command team will perform more efficiently.  This paper describes the first use of the Virtual Institute for Research into Human Behavior Representation (VI/HBR): an experiment to allow human behavior research teams to be identified, developed, and tested within a shared cultural modeling testbed for the analysis of cultural human performance parameters and their effects on joint command post teams.The remaining paper is organized in the following manner.  The next section contains additional background information that guided our research into the both the development and use of the human behavior representation virtual institute and the development and experimentation for cultural human behavior modeling.  Section Three describes the initial use of the VI/HBR prototype and contains the cultural modeling experimental definition and the projected use of the VI/HBR prototype to enable the multi-national experimentation.  The final section of the paper contains a summary, preliminary insights into our experimental work, and suggestions for further use of the virtual institute for multi-nation team development and joint experimentation in human behavior representation.2.	HBR virtual institute BackgroundTwo foundational research areas are direct contributors to our multi-national research group used for the cultural teamwork experimentation.  The first area is the concept and use of the virtual institute prototype.  The second area is enabling the research in cultural teamwork experimentation through the use of a virtual institute concept.  There are also several secondary research areas, such as networking, multi-national processes and organization, and multi-level security, that contributed to this research area, as our work was both multi-national and multi-disciplinary.  However, due to space, this paper will concentrate on the cultural experiment through the use of the virtual institute concept and discuss the other areas of our multi-national research group at a later time.2.1	Virtual Institute for Human Behavior RepresentationThe research and development efforts across the field of human behavior representation (HBR) are extremely varied and incorporate significant bodies of work both in the United States and internationally.  Unfortunately, the cost of performing the necessary multi-national research has been and continues to be costly and highly varied in quality.  In addition, as for any vigorous research field, remaining cognizant of the many human behavior representation development efforts, utilizing prior and on-going research, and establishing cooperative research projects requires tremendous effort.  In light of these conditions, the virtual institute concept was initiated.  The idea to explore the concept of a virtual institute for use by the international human behavior representation community was derived from a Long Term Scientific Study (LTSS) on Human Behavior Representation2 that was commissioned by the NATO Research and Technology Organization (RTO) Studies, Analysis, and Simulation (SAS) panel.  The purpose of the LTSS was to report on the implications of technological developments for military operations over a 10 to 15 year time period and to provide research planners with recommendations for research that address and investigate the implications of projected technological developments.  The recommendations both identify the technology or technologies needed for a specific military task and evaluate the potential for development of the required technologies in the future.  Of particular interest was the highest priority recommendation to establish a RTO exploratory team to investigate the feasibility and utility of assembling a virtual institute for research on human behavior modeling2.  Specifically, if implemented, the virtual institute is to be established for the purpose of progressing research into the modeling of military-related individuals, teams, groups, platforms, and organizations in their performance of military operations and tasks4,5,6,7,9.  The anticipated work of a human behavior representation virtual institute include creating a web-based clearing house of databases, models and model components and developing standards, and requirements to support multi-national research on human behavior modeling.  The approval of this recommendation by RTO established the exploratory team SAS-ET.V.  The objectives of SAS-ET.V were two-fold.  Firstly, the exploratory team was to advise the SAS panel and the RTO on the technical merit and feasibility of establishing a virtual institute for research in human behavior representation.  Secondly, the exploratory team was to advise the SAS panel and the RTO on the feasibility of enabling multi-national research and development in human behavior modeling by using the virtual institute concept.  An additional research consideration SAS tasked to the exploratory team was determination of the potential for current and coming communication and computer technologies to vastly expand the range and scope of international collaboration in research.  The exploratory team was not only required to determine if timely data and research sharing was possible but also to determine if the infrastructure needed for real-time multi-national human behavior experiments would be in place and would be cost effective.  The exploratory team concluded that multi-national collaboration of the type envisaged by the SAS was not only possible but inevitable given economic pressures and the need for improved human behavior models.The work of exploratory team identified a number of requirements for the HBR virtual institute (VI/HBR).  The number of requirements identified to enable multi-national research cooperation for human behavior representation greatly exceeds the space available for this paper; however, some of the more important requirements identified are the following:  1) Develop a virtual institute technology development strategy; 2) Develop virtual institute metrics and success criteria; 3) Develop a virtual institute research plan and strategy; 4) Determine the key steps for developing the virtual institute and the key technologies needed by the virtual institute to conduct initial experiments; 5) Develop a methodology to assess technical benefits of virtual institute-based experiments and tests as compared to conducting equivalent experiments and tests in one location; 6) Develop descriptions of partitions of work between national participants based on capabilities and national interests; 7) Develop guidelines for technology sharing among virtual institute participants; 8) Identify and prioritize experiments and tests that are of common interest to the participating countries; 9) Develop ontologies for human behaviors; 10) Develop and employ a methodology that can be used to organize a human behavior model library for each country and for all countries as well as enable the development of common human behavior models and model components; 11) Develop a virtual institute human behavior model experiment plan; 12) Determine common behaviors and country specific behaviors via experiments; 13) Determine commander behavior modeling techniques; and 14) Develop a sequence of experiments and tests that will demonstrate benefits and desired level of international cooperation for virtual institute human behavior model development.In addition to the requirements listed above, research to date has determined that the HBR virtual institute should provide other capabilities to cooperating research within nations such as serving as a clearing house for research results and providing a library of research results, ongoing academic research, and experiments.  The institute would also insure that HBR studies are coordinated between nations and serve as a testbed host for distributed experiments.  In our view of our NATO research team, a prime function of the virtual institute will be the distribution of human performance models to organizations that need them. The institute will also serve to foster cross-national academic research support for HBR model development and support validation of models. Another important contribution that the institute can make is the development/promulgation of standards or measures for human behavior models, developing extensible standards for describing/defining human behavior models, and determining when the conditions/circumstances where each model applies. Another key issue that the institute should address is the development of composable HBR data models and development of the means for storing data in a standard manner so that it can be reused across experiments.  In addition to these prime issues, there are several secondary issues that the institute should address including support for collaboration and virtual meeting support, support for distance learning, and providing/supporting meetings/open forums at multi-national conferences in order to engage the research and military application communities and make them aware of the institute, its abilities, accomplishments, and community needs. 2.2	Enabling Multi-National Research and ExperimentationGiven the requirements and need established for a virtual institute for research in human behavior representation, the SAS panel established a RTO task group (RTG) to plan, develop a prototype, and utilize this prototype in a multi-national human behavior research area to forward the research in team, group, and organizational modeling.  This RTG, SAS-053, is a multi-national group with participants from Canada, Germany, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, the United States, and the NATO organization NC3A.  The SAS-053 vision is to design and develop a virtual institute for use in progressing the state-of-the-art in human behavior research.  The virtual institute concept was to vitalize the development of cross-national academic research support for model development and support for model data, experimentation, and validation.  Because the concept of the institute is virtual, the institute would be able to support multiple parallel research efforts and assist the efforts and model development in general by providing facilities and access to researchers to support and energize high-bandwidth exchange and comment about data and experimental programs between researchers and the military community during experimentation.  The institute would help researchers to maximize the results of their efforts and the utility and relevance of their research results by giving them ready access to the research results of parallel, ongoing efforts and supporting commentary and collegial interchange about the research in real-time.  The virtual institute would thereby maximize the return on research investment by allowing researchers to incorporate and exploit for their own research other relevant results from any member nation as it is produced.  This exploitation could occur while the work is ongoing and thereby allow researchers to test and validate parallel research results during the course of their own experimentation.  The institute would also allow developers to readily access researchers whose work is relevant to their development and obtain their assistance and guidance in using the results of their research in the development project.  The virtual institute would allow the researchers to accomplish research related activities, such as validation and peer review, in a few days or hours instead of months; thereby accelerating the rate of progress on research, development based on research results, and the transition of research results into the operational community.  In short, a virtual institute could dramatically shorten research and development time and shorten the length of time that lapses between discovery and operational use.The use of the virtual institute in this initial prototype stage can cover a variety of ranges.  On one end, the distribution of human performance data necessary for the development and use of human performance modeling in many areas of military operations, such as mission rehearsal and mission analysis, is a worthwhile virtual institute starting point.  Other ideas for the initial virtual institute prototype included current human performance model validation in a multi-national arena and a large multi-national experiment encompassing many aspects of team, group, and organizational modeling.  SAS-053 decided on an approach to develop the virtual institute prototype by using a baseline project within one of the participating nations and expand that baseline to include multiple nations and multiple teams within nations to develop and build experimental data for use in joint command team operations, a highly stressful and human intensive environment.  This experimental prototype path allowed our multi-national research team to exploit the institute and its capabilities to more thoroughly determine how culture and other societal measures influence joint military operational performance.  This issue is an important research question with practical military implications and applications for the results of the research, but it has not been undertaken to date because of the cause of assembling the requisite international team.  The virtual institute is taking the lead in addressing this important issue since it need not bring all of the researchers to one location for them to perform their work; rather, they will be able to remain in their own labs and develop an international joint experimental plan to address the research issue.3.	NATO SAS-053 Multi-National Experiment Definition and ProcessesSAS-053 collaborated with several multi-national research groups, both within NATO and the HBR research community, to establish the appropriate research experiment to highlight the possible future capabilities of a virtual institute for human behavior representation.  SAS-053 decided that the most promising experiment would be an experiment with a basic plan from one of the participating nations in SAS-053 that might be extended to the multi-national research community.  The multi-national research experiment that serves as the demonstration vehicle for the prototype VI/HBR is an experiment that is an extension of cultural experiments determined to be of most value to HBR researchers.  This multi-national experiment will investigate the impact of culture on teamwork in both national and multi-national venues.  The experimentation involves conceptual model development encompassing the impact of culture on joint military operations, extending experimentation methods to include process and outcome measures, and identifying products for national use to improve leader and team performance in multicultural environments.  This experimentation will occur within an established testbed.  A single experimental design will be executed in all the participating nations to build a baseline of responses from homogenous military teams.  Then, that design will be executed with heterogeneous teams comprised of military officers from various nations participating in the baseline experimentation.The prototype VI/HBR multi-national experiments will be executed using a research testbed built around a commercial off the shelf (COTS) computer game, Neverwinter Nights(.  This game-based testbed10, developed by BBN Technologies and funded by the United States Department of Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO), is designed to satisfy the need for an inexpensive, standardized, research instrument able to explore basic research questions on teamwork skills, situation awareness, decision making, task effectiveness, adaptability, and the impacts of personality and cultural traits on these issues8.  Figure 1 shows a screen shot from the game-based testbed.The developed cultural modeling testbed contains several key features that were important characteristics necessary for human behavior modeling experimentation in the VI/HBR prototype implementation process.  The cultural modeling testbed is multi-player, which is necessary for the incorporation of multi-national testing teams and team/leadership measurements.  The multi-player aspect may be used over both local-area-networks and the Internet; therefore, the testbed is directly applicable for use within a virtual institute encompassing larger networks and a variety of multi-national capabilities.  The testbed contains authoring tools that enable the human behavior modeling researchers and testers to construct scenarios that will reflect the necessary team and leadership variables within the cultural parameters.  The testbed allows the incorporation of computer entity/player control by computational models of human performance outside the scope of the original DMSO developed capability.  The ability to incorporate additional models of human behavior allows for extended modeling and teamwork testing by the nations involved in the virtual institute experiment for their national use outside the currently defined multi-national testing occurring within the scope of SAS-053.   In the testbed, teammates and opponents are playable by either humans or human-behavior models.  In this manner, the testbed can incorporate the team members and testing parameters that are relevant to the VI/HBR prototype.  Finally, the testbed automatically captures experimental data for post-experiment analysis.  These collection mechanisms allow multiple data collection opportunities that may occur during game planning, game execution, or out-of-game surveys.The game-based testbed used for the VI/HBR prototype provides an immersive environment to observe human behaviors and actions.  This testbed also allows the automatic collection and analysis of observation and related data.  Testbed scenarios in this cultural modeling experiment can range from well constrained to much more open and unconstrained, which allows our multi-national experiment team to have extensive control over the behavioral latitude available to participants.  This testbed was first utilized in US national experiments focusing on experimental testing of leader and team adaptability in multi-national coalitions8, which the HBR virtual institute experimentation is using for baseline testing, measurement, and analysis.To finalize the planning for the VI/HBR experiment, SAS-053 established testing procedures for the prototype experiment.  As stated earlier, the VI/HBR experiment will occur within the described, established testbed.  Furthermore, to make certain testing results are comparable across both single nation teams and multi-national teams, the same experimental process is used for both the single nation teams and the multi-national teams.  Therefore, a single experimental design will be executed in all the participating nations to build a baseline of responses from homogenous military teams.  Then, that design will be executed with heterogeneous teams comprised of military officers from various nations participating in the baseline experimentation.  Single nation experiment teams are currently in the planning stages for Canada, the Netherlands, Sweden, and the United States.  The participants on the multi-national team experiment, which is the focus of the VI/HBR prototype experiment, will be from the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, the United States, and NC3A.The HBR virtual institute experiment team collaborated with another NATO RTG, SAS-050, to further its experimental planning.  The VI/HBR experiment team utilized the main research product of SAS-050, which was a conceptual model of Command and Control (C2)1,3.  Within the C2 conceptual model, the portion of primary use to the NATO VI/HBR experiment was the Reference Model that contained over 300 variables1,3.   Within the Reference Model, a selected subset of variables was explored and the possible relationships among them that were felt to be important to the understanding of C2 and the implications of different approaches to C2 were documented by SAS-050.  The NATO VI/HBR experiment team analyzed and applied this conceptual model and taxonomy of C2 variables as a starting point for the variables within the cultural modeling testbed to measure for their effects on teamwork and cultural influences to teamwork and leadership.  With the cultural variables identified and categorized first by SAS-050 and then analyzed and applied by SAS-053, the C2 variables could be used in an experiment to test the relationships between cultural parameters and team related cooperative behavior.  This experimental plan and approach allows the VI/HBR prototype and the testing results to be utilized in two important ways:  (1) the results may be replicated and validated through additional work outside the current multi-national research groups and (2) the experimental process may be used to implement additional national research that will be of comparable use across nations by incorporating the experimental and testing process enabled by the virtual institute prototype.Figure 1. Screenshot illustrating the game-based testbed4.	Summary and Future WorkThis paper discussed the development and use of a virtual institute and the experimentation for cultural human behavior modeling within the virtual institute prototype.  This experimentation process will enable multi-national human subject testing, comparison, and analysis.   The testing defined and discussed in this paper is to be conducted in October 2006.  Therefore, the next step for the SAS-053 team is to utilize the experiments and the human performance data measurements to gain insights into the relationships of human behavior representation cultural parameters to multi-nation team development and joint operations.  Once the HBR virtual institute has progressed through this initial prototype stage, there are many opportunities for multi-national use and cooperation through use of the virtual institute and its approaches and concepts.  Our research group listed several important research topics for use as the virtual institute prototype experiment.  The first step of our multi-national team is to further develop these important research questions into research plans that might be more quickly and more efficiently conducted through the use of the virtual institute.  Examples of these research topics are model validation testing that could be conducted through the multiple use and experimentation of shared international human behavior models, distribution and testing of human performance data necessary for the development and use of human performance modeling in many areas of military operations, and larger multi-national experiments encompassing other aspects relevant to team, group, and organizational modeling.  The use of the virtual institute also will allow the ready identification of knowledgeable colleagues with similar research goals and the establishment of multi-national collaborative teams using shared resources that are difficult, if not almost impossible, to construct without the help of a multi-national avenue like the virtual institute.ReferencesAlberts, D.S. and Hayes, R.E. (2006) Understanding Command and Control.  Washington, DC:  CCRP Publication Series.North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Research and Technology Organization, July 2001 Human Behavior Representation, RTO Technical Report TR-047, AC/323(SAS-017) TP/25.North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Research and Technology Organization, January 2006 Exploring New Command and Control Concepts, RTO Final Technical Report SAS-050.Pew, R. & Mavor, A. (eds.) (1998) Modeling Human and Organizational Behavior: Application to Military Simulations, Washington, DC:  National Academy Press.Ritter, F.E., Nigel R. Shadbolt, N.R., Elliman, D., Young R., Gobet, F., Baxter, G.D.  (1999) Techniques for modelling human performance in synthetic environments: A supplementary review, Technical Report No. 62, ESRC Centre for Research in Development, Instruction and Training, Department of Psychology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.Saavedra, R.; Earley, C.; and VanDyne, L. (1993) “Complex Interdependence in Task-Performing Groups,” Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 78, no. 1, pp. 61-72.Sessa, V.I. and Jackson, S.E. (1995) “Diversity in Decision-Making Teams: All Differences are not Created Equal,” in M.M. Chemers, S. Oskamp, and M.A. Costanzo (eds) Diversity in Organizations, Sage: Newbury Park, CA.Sutton, J.L. and Edelmann, V.  (2005) “Leader and Team Adaptability in Multi-national Coalitions (LTAMC):  An International Research Project,” Proceedings of the 10th International Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium.Virginia Modeling and Simulation Center, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA. (2003) Crowd Modeling in Military Simulations; Requirements Analysis, Survey, and Design Study; Final Report for Contract N00140-97-D-2051, “Composable Reconfigurable Environments For Acquisition, Training, and Experimentation,” Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, Alexandria VA.Warren, R., Sutton, J.L., Diller, D., Ferguson, W., and Leung, A. (2004) “A game-based testbed for culture and personality research,” Proc. on the NATO Modeling and Simulation Group MSG-037 Workshop on Exploiting Commercial Games for Military Use.  The Hague, NL.Author BiographiesSHEILA B. BANKS is the president of Calculated Insight.  Dr. Banks received her Bachelor of Science from the University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL in 1984 and a Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering from North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC in 1986.  Also from North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, she received a Master of Science in Electrical and Computer Engineering in 1987 and her Doctor of Philosophy in Computer Engineering (Artificial Intelligence) from Clemson University, Clemson, SC in 1995.  Her research interests include artificial intelligence, human behavior and cognitive modeling, intelligent computer generated forces, associate and collaborative systems, distributed virtual environments, intelligent human computer interaction, and man-machine interfaces.Martin R. Stytz is a member of the Research Staff at the Institute for Defense Analyses.  He received a Bachelor of Science degree from the U.S. Air Force Academy in 1975, a Master of Arts degree from Central Missouri State University in 1979, a Master of Science degree from the University of Michigan in 1983, and his PhD in Computer Science and Engineering from the University of Michigan in 1989.  He is a member of the ACM, the IEEE, the IEEE Computer Society, Simulation Industry Association of Australia, American Association for Artificial Intelligence, and the Society for Computer Simulation.  His research interests include virtual environments, distributed interactive simulation, distributed systems, modeling and simulation, large-scale system architecture, design, & development, distributed software development, the web, cyberwarfare and modeling, computer graphics, graphical user interfaces, distributed simulation, distributed virtual environments, user-centered decision support, large-scale systems design, cybersensors, human-computer interaction, computer generated actors, intelligent agents, medical virtual environments, information security, software engineering, information visualization, medical virtual environments, and software engineering.