Vehicle Level Human Performance Model for Ground Vehicle Testing and SimulationJennifer MillerPaul BounkerSyed MohammadUS Army Tank-automotive Research, Development, and Engineering CenterAMSRD-TAR-R/MS 2646501 E. Eleven Mile Rd.Warren, MI 48397-5000586-574-5566, 586-574-5297, 586-574-5266millerje@tacom.army.miljennifer.miller2@us.army.mil, paul.bounker@us.army.mil, syed.mohammad@us.army.milKeywords:Human Performance Modeling, VLHPM, Simulation, IMPRINTABSTRACT: The US Army Research, Development, and Engineering Command Tank Automotive Research, Development, and Engineering Center (RDECOM TARDEC) is currently developing a Vehicle Level Human Performance Model (VLHPM) as an advance design tool that can operate alone or in coordination with human research participants.  This model has been used to reduce the number of participants necessary for testing vehicle capabilities, effective survivability measures, and joint operability in the TARDEC-Naval Air Command (NAVAIR) Joint Survivability Experiment and its functionality is being expanded for use in the Modeling Architecture for Technology, Research and EXperimentation (MATREX) program and a joint experiment with the Canadian Army. The VLHPM has benefited RDECOM by providing a portable alternative to human participant use, reducing development of prototypes, manpower costs and the need for training.  This paper discusses the architectural challenges incorporating into the MATREX environment, along with a discussion on what kind of testing is appropriate with this tool.1. IntroductionFuture Combat Systems (FCS) requires the US PArmy to address different approaches to solve many of the acquisition problems caused by such a large and complex program.  One of those approaches is to use Modeling and Simulation (M&S) for much of the development, testing and life-cycle support for FCS.  One such program at the fore front of working M&S issues for FCS is the Modeling Architecture for Technology Research and Experimentation (MATREX).  MATREX provides a persistent, secure distributed simulation environment through Army labs at the Armaments Research, Development and Engineering Center (ARDEC), Army Materiel Systems Analysis Activity (AMSAA), Army Research Lab (ARL), Aviation & Missile, Research, Development and Engineering Center (AMRDEC), Communications and Electronics Research, Development and Engineering Center (CERDEC), Army Research Lab (ARL), Edgewood Chemical & Biological Center (ECBC), Natick Soldier Center (NSC), Simulation & Training Technology Center (STTC), Tank-Automotive Research, Development, Engineering Center (TARDEC) and the Topographical Engineering Center (TEC).  These centers share model technical and functional data through the Distributed Virtual Lab (DVL) network connections at each of the centers.  This capability reduces the time and cost of experimentation.  MATREX is a reusable simulation environment that enables efficient integration of arbitrary multi-resolution models, represents key characteristics of Network Enabled Battle Command (NEBC), supports human-in-the-loop interactivity, and provides the ability to incorporate real hardware.   MATREX provides the Army with a set of Simulation and Modeling for Acquisition, Requirements and Training (SMART) tools that will support a wide variety of analyses of system designs and operational concepts.  The MATREX program is sponsored by the US Army’s Research, Development, and Engineering Command (RDECOM).TARDEC has provided Virtual Dynamics Mobility Service (VDMS), Crew-integration and Automation Testbed (CAT), Embedded Simulation System, Signature Server and Vehicle Level Human Performance Model (VLHPM)  This paper discusses the reasons, approaches, architecture and technical challenges with placing VLHPM into the MATREX  simulation environment.aul B will write.2. BackgroundThe Vehicle Level Human Performance Model (VLHPM) was developed as a stand-in for a human participant in an experiment involving the operation of an FCS vehicle. It was created, and is currently being expanded, by The US Army Research, Development, and Engineering Command Tank Automotive Research, Development, and Engineering Center (RDECOM TARDEC) for use in projects such as a joint experiment with the Naval Air Command, called JSURV, and the MATREX program. 1, 2TARDEC has traditionally uses soldiers as subjects for validation of their warfigherWarfighter machine interface (WMI) for future d human experimental participants for simulation of vehicle systemstesting. This testing methodology requires a number of participants equal to the number of people that would be required to man the vehicles in a relevant tactical scenario focusing on the fight, scout and carrier missions.  Soldiersthat are being used and the participants  typically receive at least a full day of training to become familiar with the WMIequipment. Current WMI is supports the U.S. Army as it  moves from a deployed force to a deployable force, the Army needs smaller and lighter combat vehicles offering increased lethality, survivability, and mobility.  These requirements are further combined with the need to assimilate and distribute more information to, from, and within the vehicle.  To achieve these goals, the Army's future combat vehicles will need highly integrated multi-mission capable crew stations.  The Crew integration and Automation Test Bed (CAT) Advanced Technology Demonstration (ATD) provides risk reduction for FCS in developing the WMI.  Figure 1. CAT Vehicle and Crew Station placementThe goal of the CAT is to demonstrate a multi-mission capable two-man crew station platform concept, which has been integrated into a STRYKER chassis supporting the Army's objective force. This program focuses on an improved soldier machine interface (SMI) design using indirect vision driving and automated decision aids, an advanced electronic architecture design/network topology, and embedded simulation.  By demonstrating these advanced technologies and added capabilities, the CAT ATD will prove out technology readiness to sufficiently transition and integrate hardware and software components into the Future Combat Systems (FCS) demonstrator.Specific technologies and engineering areas include; soldier machine interface design based on the Crewman’s Associate program, indirect vision, speech recognition, 3D audio, cognitive decision and task aids.  The CAT ATD hosts an embedded simulation system (ESS) which allows virtual operation of the crew station as well as simulated training, mission planning and missions rehearsal.  The ESS will allow MATREX FOM compliant models to support Soldier-In-The-Loop experimentation until WMI is available.  The CAT ATD will extend the basic crewstation design to include the fight, scout and carrier military operational specialties.  Most importantly, the CAT SMI supports the command and control of unmanned systems through both semi-autonomous and tele-operation modes as well as simulated direct and indirect fire.  Immediate improvements can be realized by reducing the repair training and maintenance costs associated with a common crew station, reduced operational training time and increased number of common components resulting in a logistics cost savings.  Other benefits are a reduced vehicle crew size allowing for force multiplication and increased soldier survivability by moving the crew deeper into the vehicle’s hull. Evaluations for experimentation require eEach soldier participant uses a Crewstation Automated Testbed, or CAT crewstation, platform to interact with the simulation. The CAT prototype hardware is expensive and soldier availability in war time can be difficult to get.  Therefore TARDEC was tasked with coming up with a complementary system for evaluations requiring more than one manned vehiclethe same size as a real crewstation, so transporting even one CAT is an involved effort. The use of a smaller, automated, more portable system reduces the amount of resources needed to perform experiments and reduces the amount of effort that must be put into training and transport.The goal of the VLHPM system is to replicate any behavior required of a human participant in the given experiment. VLHPM-controlled simulated vehicles can be used alongside manned CAT- WMIcontrolled controlled simulated vehicles in the same experiment. While it cannot currently perform any possible task that could be undertaken by a human, it is currently able to simulate a range of typical behaviors and can substitute for a human operator in a wingman vehicle that would otherwise be played by a participant in a CAT. A VLHPM-controlled vehicle is simulated using two desktop computers, making the system much easier to transport than a CAT. It requires no human interaction to run during simulation. Starting and stopping the VLHPM can be done by the researchers running the experiment with a few mouse clicks, with no need for operator training. These factors make the use of a VLHPM system preferable when the set of required behaviors is within the capabilities of the current system. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 2. MATREX Survivability Zone Coordination Use Case3. MATREX Survivability ApplicationThe RDECOM MATREX program aims to provide a Systems of Systems level modeling and simulation environment for the Army’s future systems.  This involves maintaining a holistic view of the M&S environment at all echelons.  TARDEC already provides the human in the loop capabilities to the MATREX program through the CAT Crew Stations – the underlying Embedded Simulation System provides the soldier with the situational awareness (SA) necessary to participate in force-on-force experiments, and perform activities such as driving, teleoperation, target acquisition, reconnaissance, etc.  However, to demonstrate the scalability of the MATREX environment, it becomes logistically challenging to provide large numbers of HITL stations.  The VLHPM helps alleviate this issue by complementing exiting HITL systems as wingman.  As described earlier, this capability has already been demonstrated in earlier programs, such as the NAVAIR experiments.  The main goal of the MATREX Survivability Thread is to provide an environment suitable for studying Survivability related issues.   For the FY06 effort, the environment is being development to test the effectiveness of Active Protection Systems (APS), in particular, the use of multiple interceptor types when using Active Defense bullet-on-bullet types of countermeasures.   One of the issues arising from using Active countermeasures are the obvious fratricide concerns coupled with other detonations in proximity of dismounted infantry.  The full expanse of the MATREX Survivability Thread is beyond the scope of this publication; however, the involvement of the VLHPM in MATREX is key to this activity and is discussed in the context of the use case depicted in Figure 2.The VLHM is being used to simulate wingman to the CAT and RF vehicles, providing area protection and additional support as necessary.  Due to fratricide being an important concern when using Active Defense systems, one of the proposed use cases is to use multiple vehicles to provide a safe-pocket area where DI are relatively safe from incoming threats and BLUFOR APS.  The involvement of the VLHPM in this activity is to provide the multiple vehicle wingman support, with each vehicle being equipped with an Active Defense suite.  Depending on the formation of the vehicles, a notional “safe zone” is created where area protection is provided by outlying vehicles (CAT or VLHPM) equipped with APS.  Furthermore, as each vehicle now scans a smaller area, the reaction time for each individual APS system is reduced.   As seen in the use case diagram, the perimeter of the area between the vehicles is covered by multiple APS systems, and is therefore relatively safe from OPFOR threats.  Additionally, since the scanning zones of the APS are facing outward from the safe region, the probability of fratricide due to APS fire from BLUFOR is also significantly reduced.The Dismounted Infantry simulation for the MATREX Survivability Thread is being provided by Natick Soldier Systems Center (Natick, MA) through the use of the Infantry Warrior Simulation (IWARS) program.  The APS component is being modeled by the AMRDEC End Game Analysis Functional Area.  Through using the MATREX environment, each of these high fidelity models is able to communicate and link with the CAT ESS and the VLHPM.Syed will write.42. Architectural ImplementationThe Army Research Labs’ (ARL) IMPRINT modeler was chosen as the basis for the VLHPM project. It contains human performance data that was previously collected by ARL. IMPRINT’s ability to interface with other software is limited, however, creating the need for an interface layer that can interpret incoming data and format outgoing data appropriately. The interface layer is written in C++ and it performs those tasks as well as synchronization of simulation time between itself and the IMPRINT model, and the display of information about the simulated vehicle’s current state.The current functionality includes most of the basic tasks that would be performed by an FCS ground vehicle. It can drive in formation, following a lead vehicle. It can scan for other vehicles and discriminate between friendly, hostile, and ambiguous targets, then send a spot report and engage a target, call for fire, or take no action as appropriate to the situation. It can also use any survivability measures that are being simulated on the vehicles. Planned updates to the VLHPM will add new behaviors, including the ability to fire upon a particular threat upon request.4. Architectural ImplementationThe Army Research Labs’ (ARL) IMPRINT (IMproved Performance Research INtegration Tool) modeler was chosen as the basis for the VLHPM project. It contains human performance data that was previously collected by ARL. IMPRINT’s ability to interface with other software is limited, however, creating the need for an interface layer that can interpret incoming data and format outgoing data appropriately. The interface layer is written in C++ and it performs those tasks as well as synchronization of simulation time between itself and the IMPRINT model, and the display of information about the simulated vehicle’s current state.The current functionality includes most of the basic tasks that would be performed by an FCS ground vehicle. It can drive in formation, following a lead vehicle. It can scan for other vehicles and discriminate between friendly, hostile, and ambiguous targets, then send a spot report and engage a target, call for fire, or take no action as appropriate to the situation. It can also use any survivability measures that are being simulated on the vehicles. Planned updates to the VLHPM will add new behaviors, including the ability to fire upon a particular threat upon request.5. Technical ChallengesImplementing the VLHPM presents a number of technical concerns different from those faced in CAT implementation or the use of other human-controlled inputs. In the early stages of experiment planning, precise information about the scenarios and expected vehicle behavior must be gathered. The expected behaviors must be determined well in advance to insure that no tasks are beyond the capabilities of the VLHPM. The most difficult tasks for the VLHPM involve behaviors that come naturally to a human driver and the ability to perform these behaviors is often assumed by the scenario authors. Changes to the scenarios must be communicated to the VLHPM development team and reviewed in case any additional VLHPM development is required as a result of the changes.As noted above, human behavior cannot always be easily implemented. Soldiers manning a CAT are already trained in appropriate tactics, but the VLHPM design team must research these behaviors so that they are correctly implemented. The VLHPM cannot communicate with CAT drivers via radio; an alternate method of sharing information might be required if communication by radio is an assumption of the scenario. The VLHPM cannot interpret visual images; location and identification of objects found in a visual scan is simulated in a manner that does not entirely reflect human perception. The design team attempts to work around these shortcomings in way that is as close to modeling true human behavior as possible.The core Embedded Simulation architecture, known as the ESS, is straightforward in its implementation and the interface layer can easily produce the same output as a CAT.  Interpreting messages from the ESS can be more complicated. IMPRINT places limits on the length of variable names, so it cannot send the names of some variables as they are used in the ESS. The interface layer translates between IMPRINT’s internal names and the conventional names used in the ESS.IMPRINT imposes some limitations upon the VLHPM. It was not designed with large applications such as the VLHPM in mind and is not suited for extensive calculations. Thus, some of the model’s work must be performed by the interface layer. As noted, the interface layer’s defining role is to package data being sent to and from the VLHPM. To give another example, if the ability to perform route planning was added to the VLHPM, those calculations should be done by the interface layer and the interface layer would return the route’s waypoints to the IMPRINT model. This shortcoming has not severely impacted VLHPM development, but it increases the threat of producing a VLHPM that does not accurately reflect human performance. The development team’s goal is to implement all actual behavior in IMPRINT, where the existing ARL data on performance measures helps to insure that the model is realistic, and only delegate support functions and calculations to the interface layer.6. ConclusionThe VLHPM provides a portable alternative to human participant use, reducing manpower costs, training, and need for prototypes. Its ability to model driver behavior is currently limited, but sufficient to be of use in experiments supporting MATREX and other RDECOM projects.7. References[1] 	Paul Bounker, Tim Lee, Randy Washington:  “Interactive Vehicle Level Human Performance Modeling” 2003 Intelligent Vehicle Systems Symposium, June 9-12, 2003.[2]  Paul Bounker, Tim Lee, Jae Song, Randy Washington: “Vehicle Level Human Performance Modeling” 2002 Intelligent Vehicle Systems Symposium, June 3-5, 2002.Author BiographiesJennifer Miller is a Computer Engineer at the US Army’s Tank-automotive RD&E Center and currently supports both the Embedded Simulation (ES) Team and the Crewstation Team. Her interests are in human factors and cognitive psychology as related to behavior modeling. Jennifer holds a B.S.E. in Computer Engineering from Oakland University in Rochester, MI and is currently pursuing a B.A. in Psychology from Oakland University.5. Technical ChallengesJennifer, can write, talk about tradeoff’s with different approaches of ESS, etc. other technical challenges.6. ConclusionJennifer can write.73. References[1] 	Paul Bounker, Tim Lee, Randy WashingtonA. Autho:r Name: “Interactive Vehicle Level Human Performance Modeling”Title of publication” 2003 Intelligent Vehicle Systems Symposium, June 9-12, 2003Journal name, Vol 69, pp. 555-558, July 2001.[2]	  	Paul Bounker, Tim Lee, Jae Song, Randy Washington: “Vehicle Level Human Performance Modeling” 2002 Intelligent Vehicle Systems Symposium, June 3-5, 2002.B. Author Name: “Title of publication” Journal name, Vol 33, pp. 123-129, Dec 2002.Author BiographiesJennifer Miller is a Computer Engineer at the US Army’s Tank-automotive RD&E Center.  Write in your bio here.Paul Bounker is a Senior Project Engineer at the US Army’s Tank-Automotive Research Development & Engineering Center, where he has been employed since 1994.  He is currently the Team Leader of the Embedded Simulation (ES) Team.  His research interests are in distributed simulation, virtual reality and advanced simulation architectures.  Mr. Bounker worked as a Project Engineer at the US Navy’s Naval Aviation Depot in Norfolk, Virginia from 1989-1994.  Mr. Bounker holds a B.S.E degree in Electrical Engineering from Wayne State University in Detroit, Michigan.Syed Mohammad is a Project Engineer at the US Army’s Tank-Automotive Research Development & Engineering Center and currently supports the Embedded Simulation (ES) Team.  His interests are in interoperability and distributed simulation architectures, and management of large scale simulation activities.  He is also interested in human factors and ergonomics issues associated with the control of robotic systems.  Syed holds a B.S.E. in Computer Engineering and an M.S.E. in Industrial and Operations Engineering from the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, and is currently pursuing a Ph.D. in Modeling and Simulation from the University of Central Florida at Orlando.Spell out acronym.Spell out acronym.