So You Want to Develop a Standard?  Tales to Share from the BOM PDG ChroniclesLarry Root,Bob Lutz,Jane Bachman,Jake Borah,Paul Gustavson,Roy Scrudder,Chris TurrellAbstractIsaac Asimov once said that the most exciting phrase to hear in science, the one that heralds new discoveries, is not "Eureka!" (I found it!) but "That's funny..."   The BOM PDG has traveled a road over the last three years that, despite its many hurdles, hills, and forks, achieved equal moments of such discovery.    Most of that discovery is what we learned about each other during the journey.  The interests, interpretations, opinions, and solutions of the group responsible for developing a standard can all vary, even when the goals are the same.  And, even when thoughts differ creating moments of uneasiness, it’s those moments of conflict that somehow result in our greatest work.   There were many times where we shot an arrow into the air and it stuck.   We learned to bind together and ultimately produce what we all sought from the beginning - a Standard - one that we believed could be a great benefit to the community.  So the tales we have to share are ones that not only define our struggles, our conflicts and our resolutions, but highlight the attributes needed of a group to succeed at developing and delivering a standard.  We hope that, through this paper and its presentation, our look back at the BOM PDG journey can offer tidbits of experience that others can use and apply in their journey.IntroductionIn the spring of 2003, the BOM Product Development Group (PDG) began its journey of developing a standard, which was focused on supporting the composability of simulation assets through the use of reusable “piece parts.”  These piece parts were intended on being defined in the context of the HLA Object Model Template (OMT) so that the HLA community and other communities not necessarily bent on using the RTI could begin to leverage and rapidly build interoperable simulation and system components.  The primary result of the BOM PDG effort was the successful standardization of two documents: the Base Object Model (BOM) Template Specification: SISO-STD-003-2006, and, the Guide for Base Object Model (BOM) Use and Implementation: SISO-STD-003.1-2006. The BOM Template Specification defines a BOM as follows:“a piece part of a conceptual model, simulation object model, or federation object model, which can be used as a building block in the development and/or extension of a simulation or federation.”  – BOM Template Specification – March 2006This definition, over the course of three plus years, has subtly evolved.  In fact its original definition can be found in the SISO Reference FOM Study Group Final Report, which describes a BOM as follows:“a simulation component representing a single aspect of federation interplay that can be used as a building block of FOMs and SOMs.” – Reference FOM Study Group Final Report – March 1998Comparison of these two definitions should reveal one clear thing - BOMs have grown to support the ability to capture a piece part of a conceptual model.  Also, it may not be as clear, but inspection of the definition also reveals that a BOM is not solely intent on supporting HLA (i.e. FOMs and SOMs) as identified in the original definition; it is a standard that is intended to be useful for a number of communities.   Much of the subtle changes and progression of the BOM concept since its inception in 1998 have actually occurred over the past three years by the BOM PDG. The single graphic that we have come to use to represent our work is shown below.Behind the scenes you would have found that the BOM PDG worked tremendously hard, debated often, and regularly and religiously met to resolve issues in order to meet our principle objective, which was to provide a standard that could yield maximum benefit to the community.  That is why such changes took place to the original BOM concept.Through discussions with the various members of the BOM PDG group, thoughts and ideas have been gathered to help others who are interested in forging and developing viable standards.  It is our hope, that through our experiences and lessons learned, others can confidently forge ahead, learn to work in a collaborative way, and ultimately develop viable standards that benefit the community.The presentation of our experiences is presented in the form of an interview.  The questions where identified and asked by the members of the BOM PDG, which included the following individuals.PDG Officers:Lawrence M. Root (Chair)Bob Lutz (Vice-Chair)Jane T. Bachman (Secretary)Chris Rouget (SAC TAD)Drafting Group Team:Paul Gustavson (Lead Editor)Jake BorahTram ChaseStephen M. GossBjörn Löfstrand Steven W. ReichenthalRoy ScrudderChris TurrellWhile not all of these members provided written response to the questions that follow, each of these members (and others) were critical to the completion of the BOM Specification and Guidance document.  Yet, the successful standardization of these two documents was a result of not just these individuals, but members of the SISO community who took the time to comment and vote on the two documents.Question 1 - Can you share at least one memorable experience related to the BOM PDG effort / perhaps a turning point that may help make the PDG effort a success?LARRY ROOT (PDG Chair)For me it was the consolidation of the two volumes into one volume, which occurred at one of our Face-to-Face meetings.  This cut down on complications and kept things simple.  Also, the final push to include the conceptual model information in the last round of updates provided for a broader community of potential users.A final thought that sticks out is the adaptation of the "assigned reviewers" concept to allow for a faster - yet still effective - accountability process for the DG and the changes that the DG made to the documents based on the PDG adjudication rounds.BOB LUTZ There were many.  Probably what I would characterize as the most significant was the PDG meeting we held out in San Diego where we decided to change direction and focus much more on the conceptual modeling side of things.  This was identified as a big hole as far as enablers for FEDEP activities, which the BOM filled very nicely.Gaining the endorsement of the XMSF people was another biggie.JANE BACHMANAt a F2F meeting where 2 sides of an issue were clearly stated yet as a group the 2 sides formed into a merger.  Also, recall the several attempts it took to create the BOM definition.  These are positive points in that they promote the need to be thorough and concise in the process of developing a standard.PAUL GUSTAVSONThe most memorable experiences where always related to our face – to – face get togethers.  After the first one in Laurel, MD, I realized pretty quick that each of these meetings, no matter how much homework you did, would introduce at least one  new thought, a different idea, and some head scratching moments.  And, invariably, that was always true!  So, what made the PDG effort a success in my mind, was the willingness for each of us to consider those different thoughts no matter what our convictions, argue them a bit, and, in the end, finding the middle ground and consensus.CHRIS TURRELLI think we all enter into a standards development process thinking we have the answer. After all, why have we spent the time up front in the PDG to develop consensus? In every case that I can recall, however, there came a time during the standards development that it became clear that changes, radical to some, would have to be made. The ability to shift direction or focus and not lose sight of the final objective is, to me, the key to success. In the BOM process it was the Orlando meeting, where thanks to Roy's decoding efforts it became clear that we were talking about the same thing, but with a variety of different understandings. Being able to throw out the bath water while retaining the baby is key!ROY SCRUDDER Setting a reasonable scope-first focusing on "interface models" and notboth interface models and encapsulated BOMS. Secondly, focusing theeffort on conceptual models.Question 2 - Based on your experience, what were the important aspects for making a standards development effort successful?LARRY ROOTSeveral things: Community involvement. Patience in ensuring everyone was heard and given ample opportunities to contribute. A dedicated DG team and experienced leadership (i.e., Bob Lutz) in the standards process.BOB LUTZLeadership, pure and simply.  The degree of interest and motivation shown by the leaders of the effort are infectious to the rest of the group, and inspires people to commit their own time to making it all happen.  Paul and Larry both did a great job in this regard, and in my opinion, is the major reason for our success.  Another important aspect of our success was our push to get the BOM concept out in front of the M&S community.  Over the past several years, there have been many BOM papers and tutorials provided which helped to advertise what we were doing.  I think this helped expand our community of interest, and based on their participation, helped to make the BOM specs a better product.JANE BACHMANI have three that stand out:1) Although somewhat difficult to organize (working with participants schedule and travel conflicts) periodic all day F2F meetings are highly beneficial in providing the opportunity to hammer out issues regarding the standard.  Our F2F meeting agenda were always well planned and resource prepared which aided in the success of the BOM's F2F meetings.2) A "trial use" period is beneficial to both the user community as well as the standard developers.  This technique provides users the opportunity to become "very" familiar with the standard (giving them the hands-on approach to decipher and explore the proposed standard) and giving the standard developers the opportunity to receive valuable feedback because problems can remain hidden until an "actual use period" reveals them.3) Several comment review rounds are needed to fully explore, define, determine, and comprehend the breadth and depth of the standard.PAUL GUSTAVSONFor me, as DG Lead Editor, I think if I hadn’t been willing to let some of my ideas set sail in the direction that others wanted to take it (even for short rabbit trail excursions) then I think we would have all been a bit disappointed.  Fortunately, the DG Chair impressed upon me that I had to be willing to let other people take ownership of the concept.  Certainly there were times I wanted to resist going in a different direction than what I had originally conceived, but by opening up each idea for discussion, which was encouraged by the biweekly telecons and adjudication process, we were able to develop consensus.  And, what I’ve realized most is that developing community consensus is what is absolutely critical for a standard development effort to be successful.CHRIS TURRELLA broad spectrum of community involvement in an open environment that encourages comment and opinion regardless of how radical they may be. This does not mean that there shouldn't be strong direction and leadership; ultimately someone has to do the work. It simply means that all participants need to feel that they are a part of the group, not a fringe element. A good mix of dreamers and pragmatists is key to a successful development group!ROY SCRUDDERI'll harp on this here and in the next few items too - From a technical standpoint, it's focusing on the semantics first, then the representation. We (and the OMT, BML, MSDL, and countless other efforts) would be best served if they first started by clearly stating the semantics of their domain through a highly structured approach (data models, UML class diagrams, OWL ontologies) etc. THEN, moving on to representations like tables, graphics, and XML DIFs.From an organizational standpoint, getting stakeholders with implementations involved. We could have done better - the SimVentions guys were both the intellectual capital leads for developing the standard, and the primary use case participants. This SISO (and IEEE) idea of establishing standards without at least one reference implementation can lead to unproven, and potentially flawed standards (anybody ever seen an implementation of the IEEE standards for IDEF1X97 aka IDEFObject). I believe it was balloted successfully, then retired 5 years later without a single proven implementation.Question 3 - What things would have changed in regarding to the process, the role of the people, the frequency of meetings, or other aspects?LARRY ROOTNothing comes to mindBOB LUTZNot much.  Sometimes, we were forced to hold meetings between SIWs, which as you would suspect, were not very well attended.  Still, the timing of standards events are sometimes such that this can't be helped.JANE BACHMAN:Do not see any changes needed.  The SAC and IST support provided the necessary tools and direction needed.PAUL GUSTAVSONWow, you know, part of me didn’t want to force bi-weekly telecons on everyone, just because I know everyone is busy, but we did it anyhow.  We also talked about having our adjudications done via telecon, but we resisted and tried to have a face-to-face for every adjudication.  In the end, I think we followed the BPDP script pretty thoroughly, and by doing so, we met our objectives.  There’s not much I would change regarding the process.  I will say though that I think People are just as important, if not more important, as the Process.  That said, I do wish even more people jumped in and shared their ideas.  CHRIS TURRELLI think the IEEE/SISO processes are good ones. I'm not sure I'd make changes. Individual development groups may be able to fine tune things to speed them up, but all-in-all the process works. Know the process and follow it!ROY SCRUDDER More involvement from those outside the drafting group.JAKE BORAHMaybe my first insight is that we (SISO) need to change the comment process so that it isn't so laborious to make comments on draft documents. I spent almost as much time entering my identification metadata as I did entering the problem and suggested solution. On the other hand I suppose it was to make it difficult to discourage casual comments from being entered.Question 4 - What are the myths that you often here about developing standards?LARRY ROOT“Long, hard, and by the time you’re done the standard is OBE and the community no longer needs it.” The length of the process is based on the maturity of the concept that is being considered, in the case of the BOM - everything was built from scratch, so it took us longer than most efforts will probably go. It will always be hard - i.e., excited and passionate discussion – but that is where the iron-sharpens-iron occurs, the real value added gets reflected in the products, and the community (not just a single individual) takes ownership. If it isn't hard then it isn't worth it.BOB LUTZ“That it is all pure drudgery.”  The amusing things we sometimes did at our meetings (pictures, videos, etc.) helped to make the process much more fun and interesting.JANE BACHMAN“Standards take too long to develop.”  Yes and yet when you actually take a few minutes to review the BOM schedule of events, the BOM PDG accomplished a great deal of work in the time spent.PAUL GUSTAVSONI think the myth is that “a standard should be developed behind closed doors.”  In our case, the door was always opened.  Sure, we had a private reflector email to keep the chatter down, but our meeting minutes were there for anyone, the face to face meetings where open to anyone, the encouragement we had for the community to comment and use the trial spec was there for anyone.  Also, the rationale that standards should be developed behind close doors so that it gets done more quickly can be and should be argued.  It’s those closed standards that may often end up being more slowly adopted by the community. I believe, based on my experience, that open standards can be and should be more effective, and garner more interest than developing a standard behind a closed door.  CHRIS TURRELL"No one really uses the standards anyway!" In our community this is true to some extent, because the requirements and technology always out pace the standards process. I don't think that negates the need for standards, though. Standards work well in reasonably stable environments, but more importantly provide the basis of the solution used in the more demanding environments. The fact that some environments bend the rules to make things work is OK. At least they had a point of departure and rules to bend as opposed to starting from scratch with a proprietary solution. Sometimes the school solution only works in the school!ROY SCRUDDER“It's the SISO process that drives us to a two-three year schedule to produce and ballot a standard.” It's not. It's the amount of resources the stakeholders and developers have to commit to the process. I suggest you do the math and show the timeline if a standard were developed and balloted with 3 drafts and 1 ballot round (or 2 drafts and 2 ballot rounds), assuming minimum review times.Question 5 - What additional lessons learned could you offer to help other standard development efforts?LARRY ROOT:A more direct plan and funded support effort that specifically addresses the post standard needs should be addressed. That is, now that we have a standard - how is word getting out: advertisement, DoD official position and support, training, tools, etc. For the BOM effort we tried to juggle these during our standards development effort by establishing portals, blogs, training briefs, papers, and tools, but now that the standard effort is complete - there needs to be additional funding that allows us to turn our full attention to getting the word out - making information readily available, promoting the standard through other events and conferences, offering training, etc.BOB LUTZ:Sponsorship is a great big deal.  It is really hard to motivate people to do a lot of standards work on their own time, but if you can find a sponsor, not only does it make for more willing participants, but it shows that there is an organization out there that thinks that what you are doing has value and is planning to use it upon completion.  This has an additional motivational effect. Another big deal is tools.  If you publish a new standard and there are no tools around to support it, it will either die on the vine or at best go unused until tools are available.  Having BOMWorks around when we completed the standard was great, but I still wish the commercial tool guys would develop other products.One other potential lesson learned is the importance of having potential users of your standard being active participants in its development.  We had mixed results with this, as we had a few users being willing to occasionally review our work, but not as many and not as active as I would have liked.  Engaging your early adopters in the actual development of the standard goes a long way toward jump starting the application of the standard after it is completed.JANE BACHMANSignificance of International participants:  It is important to recognize that our standards must be international for implementation to succeed.PAUL GUSTAVSONI think choosing the right people to help lead an effort is critical.   What I learned is that you want folks who all can contribute and share different (some times opposing) ideas.  As they say, iron sharpens iron, and I found that also to be true with the BOM PDG effort.  We had some battles, but we were all fighting on the same side, and in the end we came to consensus.  It’s pretty amazing, actually, how issues and ideas can work out when everyone takes time to listen to other peoples ideas and, as hard as it can be sometimes, try to address concerns and issues and marry one or more perspectives together offering a solution that everyone can be happy about. CHRIS TURRELLGet some experience on your team. The fact that the BOM effort drew heavily on the HLA effort contributed a great deal. Having people that could say, "This is the way we handled this before" helped expedite the resolution of issues that otherwise consume valuable time and effort. Put experienced people in key positions!The other thing that I would add is that social interaction helps smooth the bumps and take the sharp edge off the meeting. There is a correlation between good Barbeque and a successful meeting!ROY SCRUDDERI think I covered all the points I wanted to make.SummaryEven though the above questions and answers focused on personal high-lights from the 3-year BOM PDG effort, both positive and negative, we would like to provide you a more general list of accomplishments and activities that you may find helpful as you travel down the standards road:The BOM PDG topped out at more than 160 members that spanned more than 7 countries We established two reflectors (or discussion groups): one for the entire BOM PDG - that served as the main avenue for the exchange of information regarding BOMs and its documents between the PDG Officers/DG and the rest of the M&S community; and one for the PDG Officers and its Development Group (DG) team – that served as an avenue for offline discussions and coordination that did not require the whole PDG involvement (care was taken to ensure all issues discussed made there way to the primary BOM PDG)We graphically represented our PDG process and schedule – using these to consistently convey where we came from, where we were, and where we were headedWe held more than 80 teleconferencesWe had 7 Face-to-Face meetings besides the meetings that occurred in conjunction with the SISO SIWs (2 per year)We published and presented more than 10 papers relating to the BOM and BOM Standards effortWe sought out and participated in (via attending their meetings or inviting them to attend ours) SISO efforts that we thought related to the BOM PDG like: the eXtensible Modeling and Simulation Framework (XMSF) community; the Conceptual Model Study Group; the C4I Community; the Simulation Reference Markup Language (SRML) Study Group; the Composable Mission Space Community; the VV&A community; the RPR-FOM PDG; the Link-16 PDG; the HLA Evolved effort; and, the FEDEP communityWe were the first to seek and receive permission from SISO to establish a “trial use” period during our development effortWe followed the BPDP religiously, leveraging our TAD (Chris Rouget) for clarification and/or recommended changes as neededWe utilized the SISO SAC templates for the development of our documents (as well as provided feedback to the SAC on those templates)We took minutes at all meetings, posting the minutes to the reflector(s), and maintaining a copy for final inclusion in our Product Approval Package (thanks Jane!)We held 4 formal review rounds, a trial use period of 120 days, and 1 ballot round – which resulted in over 1000 comments made and adjudicated against the documentsAll comments made during review rounds were logged, presented to the DG for recommendations, then adjudicated by the entire BOM PDG prior to any changes being madeWe utilized an “assigned reviewer” team to ensure that the DG edited the document as consistently as possible based on the results from the BOM PDG adjudication processWe stood up a BOM web portal ( HYPERLINK "http://www.boms.info" www.boms.info) and a BOM blog ( HYPERLINK "http://www.boms.info/blog/" www.boms.info/blog/) to facilitate access to BOM related information and frequently asked questions, as well as acting as an alternate mechanism for asking questions and getting community inputWe established a community tool (BOMworksCE™) that was used to prove out our standards work and decisions, and, as a means to help the community get started with applying the new BOM standardWe established a tutorial session for BOMs that is presented at each SISO SIW (to include the last two EuroSIWs)We synchronized our two documents such that they could both be reviewed and balloted together, rather than separate, during the last two review rounds and the ballot period – allowing a single ballot pool to ballot both documents at one time (although casting separate ballots for each)Our ballot pool was 38 strong and balanced according to BPDP rules, but in addition, it contained representation from 6 countries We were firm (bordering on annoying) when it came time to formulate the ballot pool and ballot the BOM standard and guidance documents – working hard to get a response from all of our balloters prior to the deadlineWe had lots of fun, food, and fellowship over the course of this effortWe especially want to provide our thanks to SISO and everyone involved in the BOM PDG that helped to make this effort a successIn closing, the only additional information that can be shared to summarize what it takes to develop a standard is that it is important to recognize that standards are developed to make our lives easier; to help us utilize products and technologies in a clear way with other similar products and technologies.  Thus the worth of a standard for the BOM PDG is not in our ability to claim our success in having an official balloted and approved product, but it will be to see that standard used by the community in ways that make peoples jobs easier.  Other than that, as we wait to see just how successful our standard may prove to be, we can take stock in appreciating the relationships that have been forged through this development effort and recognize that, for that reason alone, our lives have been enriched.