Integrating Cost Estimating and Design Using SOAJeff McDowelljmcdowell@tecolote.comTecolote Research, Inc.4950 Corporate Drive; Suite 140-OHuntsville, AL 35805-6227Tom SchaeferTecolote Research, Inc.tschaefer@tecolote.com22299 Exploration Drive, Suite 101Lexington Park, MD 20636ABSTRACT: The objective of the work described in this paper is to develop data exchange mechanisms necessary to revolutionize the efficiency and accuracy of cost estimating through automated data exchanges with design and performance models and simulations.  This work also supports the goal of the Army’s Simulation & Modeling for Acquisition, Requirements and Training (SMART) costing initiative, which is to develop performance-based cost estimating capabilities linked to engineering design tools to enable cost trades optimizing performance for a given cost.  The Army’s Office of Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Army-Cost & Economic (ODASA-CE), is pursuing standard naming conventions with common semantics and structure for the cost analysis domain.  The benefit will be to enhance the determination of systems’ affordability by facilitating the discovery, automated composition, and remote invocation of cost estimating tools by system performance and design modeling and simulation (M&S) domains.This paper summarizes the progress to date including: Review variables and data elements contained in existing Army cost analysis models; Review existing Defense Department policy and guidance on M&S interoperability and data standards; Review and investigate other standards based initiatives and organizations to determine what data elements are included in their efforts that are also used within the cost estimating community; Prototype example data elements for integration using a Service Oriented Architecture (SOA); Identify specific registry or other type of forum to submit cost standards for approval and acceptance.  Feedback obtained from this conference is important to achieving this last objective.This paper will be of interest to system designers using models and simulations that are interested in cost as an output or a constraint.  The paper will describe a generalized Cost Modeling Object, with examples for estimating specific commodity items, such as missiles.  The development was pursued in a manner that supports linkages into “ACE” cost estimating models, the standard for Army ACAT I and II programs.  This development is intended as an early step towards fully integrating cost estimating into the M&S domain, enhancing the prediction of the affordability of future systems, and the understanding of the costs of alternatives courses of action and war fighting scenarios.1. IntroductionThe increasing complexity of modeling and simulation tools, combined with the imperative to control acquisition costs motivates the need to automate cumbersome and often repetitive processes such as the exchange of data between the technical and cost estimating communities.  Further, it is essential to the invocation of cost models to other models and simulations that these exchanges can take place in an automated, near real-time manner.  As the modeling and simulation community moves towards automated discovery and composability of models, the clarity of the data descriptions will be of utmost importance, as will adhering to common standards.  This need for common data standards motivates the effort described in this document.To achieve these goals, DOD is migrating to web-based Service Oriented Architectures (SOA).  SOA is independent of, and removes concerns about, the underlying hardware or operating system of the participating systems in a data exchange.  It requires adherence to a set of standards for the description, invocation, and exchange of information between systems.  It is being embraced at all levels of software design, including:System-of-systems, most importantly the Defense Information Systems Agency’s Network-Centric Enterprise ServicesWeapons systems Command, Communi-cations, Control and Computers and Intelligence (C4I), notably the multi-service Mission Planning SystemAcquisition supportModeling and simulation, having been adopted by the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO)Administrative and personnel support systemsThe broad and rapid growth of SOA is being driven by the compelling recognition that traditional tightly coupled integration is too expensive and inflexible to support the complexity and interoperability of modern software systems.  SOA began as a commercial initiative to create a light weight standard way to integrate software over the web.   The underlying information technology standards, have been endorsed by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), and include:Universal Description Discovery Integration (UDDI) provides increased awareness through service discoverability in registries Web Services Description Language (WSDL) facilitates rapid integration through semi-automated composabilitySimple Object Access Protocol (SOAP) provides increased availability through standard web-enabled remote invocation of serviceseXtensible Mark-up Language (XML) enhances portability, transparency, and reusability of results through common, easily interpreted  data exchange format Both of the major software development communities (Sun and Microsoft) have embraced these standards, and the programming tools vendors, such as IBM, are rapidly developing to them.  Many existing DOD applications are adapting their code bases to support SOA.  By adapting cost estimating data structures to XML, this effort will lay the groundwork to support SOA integration with other models and simulations as well as other acquisition processes that provide information to, or require information from, cost estimating.2. Standard InvestigationWe reviewed existing Defense Department policy and guidance on data standards.  Existing policy and guidance was identified via direct contacts and perusal of appropriate Government web sites.  Overall, the policy and guidance was very generalized and each had the common thematic consensus that standards are a good thing and that standards should be reused across organizations.  The only two notable documents with actionable guidance were the OMB Circular No. A-119 Government Recognition of Commercial /Consensus Standards and NIST Federal XML Naming and Design Rules.The OMB circular directs Government Agencies to use commercial and consensus standards whenever prudent.  The NIST document directed that existing schema be reused to the maximum extent possible.  It also provided explicit guidance on document object model format and testing.We also reviewed and investigated other standards-based initiatives and organizations to determine what data elements are included in their efforts that are also used within the cost estimating community.  This area was investigated by direct contact with individual researchers and perusal of appropriate Government and Commercial organization web sites.  Table 2-1 presents the Government organizations researched and Table 2-2 presents the commercial organizations researched.By directive, from OMB down, there is a hierarchy of responsibilities for establishing standards that may be relevant to this effort.  However, at the present time not all the officially available guidance has caught up with the SOA standards endorsed by DISA, W3C, and Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS).  Since it was these organizations which appear to be leading the SOA standardization efforts in a coordinated way, it was important as we reviewed the standards guidance to consider the responsibilities of the organization and how current the guidance was provided.  After reviewing the guidance and standards offered by the organizations in Table 2-1, a clear picture of the appropriate SOA standards required for this task emerged (discussed briefly in the introduction).  No guidance contradicting the standards adopted for this task was found at the organizations listed in Table 2-1 and Table 2-2.Table 2 SEQ Table \* ARABIC \s 1 1.  Government Standards Organizations SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Table 2 SEQ Table \* ARABIC \s 1 2. Commercial Standards Organizations SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT The guidance and policy found was for the most part, too general to be actionable for the purpose of developing cost modeling standards.  The standards were examined with the following in mind: Consistent with Policy (recommended standard by cognizant authority)Practical (meets needs of the Army’s Integrated Performance Cost Model efforts)Demonstrated (existing implementation and in use) Stability (unlikely to become obsolete during IPCM implementation and supported for the foreseeable future)Beyond examining the policy and guidance, the content of data standards published by these organizations was examined.  The only registry populated with schemas worthy of examination was the DoD Metadata Registry and Clearinghouse’s XML Gallery. It contains guidance in the generation and use of XML among DoD communities of interest and is the authoritative source for registered XML data and metadata components. We researched DoD XML Gallery to identify existing schema from which we could ideally lift repeatable segments or, at a minimum, learn from existing registered XML products.   Table 2-3 presents the inventory of information resources in the XML Gallery.(This paragraph has larger font) Another source of existing schemas examined was the DARPA Agent Markup Language (DAML) library.  DAML is an extension of XML to support the description of data items, and their relationships.  The latest release of the language (DAML+OIL) provides a rich set of constructs with which to create ontologies and to markup information so that it is machine readable and understandable.  DAML is one of several technologies on the leading edge of Internet development collected under the umbrella of “The Semantic Web” which will eventually increase the ability of computers to interpret and exchange information between each other with reduced involvement and effort by human information consumers.  But while the review of their schemas revealed many ontologies addressing the technologies and some data items of interest to our study, none were sufficiently mature or detailed to allow reuse.  However, it will be very important to achieving the objective of integration with the technical and acquisition communities to stay aware of the developments in DAML and the Semantic Web in general, to avoid duplication of efforts and conflicting standards.Table 2 SEQ Table \* ARABIC \s 1 3.  XML Gallery Inventory by Namespace (as of February 9, 2006)The review was disappointing as there were no segments that were suitable for direct use in cost modeling.  In fact there were only a few exemplary lexicons or vocabulary that would be useful to mimic in our own data standard development effort.  3. Development ProcessThe core of this effort was to develop a set of initial cost modeling standards for IPCM.  The sequence of analysis is described in this section.  The process began with a review of variables and data elements contained in existing Army cost analysis models, with special emphasis on the commodity cost performance models.  ODASA-CE provided the five IPCM cost performance models as ACEIT files.  Access to Force and Organization Cost Estimating System (FORCES), Army Military-Civilian Cost System (AMCOS), Operating and Support Management Information System (OSMIS), and Logistics Cost Estimating Tool (LCET) was also provided.  All the parameters were examined and tabulated as shown in Figure 2-4.  The final file contained 1,013 rows.These parameters were then categorized into a first level set of four buckets:  Technical, Programmatic, Logistics, and Cost as shown in Figure 2-5.   Next, a taxonomy was devised that took the categories down one more level as shown in Figure 2-6.  Finally, the original list of parameters was mapped against the taxonomy to test the completeness of the taxonomy as shown in Figure 2-7.  These steps were iterated several times until a workable taxonomy was achieved. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 2-4.  Parameter TabulationFigure 2-5. Categorizing ParametersFigure 2-6. Devised TaxonomyFigure 2-7.  Completeness CheckThe taxonomy was then used to layout the top level set of schema elements in XML.  The tool XMLSpy from Altova was used as the development platform.  As the XML files were developed, the FEDERAL XML NAMING AND DESIGN RULES 9 June 2005 Draft.doc were followed.  The terminal end of each branch of the schema tree specifies how the data will reside in future XML applications utilizing the schema.  Continuous consideration was given into whether the values should be elements or attributes.  The XML language is ambivalent on the matter (it permits either) and there is no community consensus on when to use attributes or elements.  Attributes have certain virtues relating to lexical typing and convenience and elements have the primary virtue of being able to contain sub-structure.  For the purposes of this project we have:Used attributes for metadata about the parent element. Used attributes for data that is semantically tied to the enclosing element. Used elements for data items that have a meaning separate from the parent and sibling elements. Used attributes when the value will be frequently present in order to improve the human readable form of an XML instance document and to make them easier to parse. 4. ProductsSeventeen (17) separate schemas were developed.  These are:General Purpose Cost Modeling SchemasCost ObjectCost Structure ObjectCost Modeling ObjectProgrammatic ObjectLogistics ObjectManpower ObjectDefense System Reference Schemas Based on IPCM ModelsDefense System Object MissileDefense System Object VehicleDefense System Object AircraftDefense System Object ElectronicsDefense System Object OrdnanceDefense System Reference Schemas Based on Cost Performance Estimating Relationships (CPER) DocumentsDefense System Object Ground IR SensorsDefense System Object Lasers and CamerasDefense System Object Millimeter Wave SensorsDefense System Object UAVDefense System Object UAV PayloadOtherDefense System Object SoftwareThe schemas are all located in one file as shown in Figure 4-1.  Figure 4-2 shows one example of a schema tree.  Figure 4-1. SchemasFigure 4-2. Cost Modeling ObjectThe DoD Metadata Registry is proposed as the registry of choice.  The instructions for preparing a package were obtained and conversations with the Modeling and Simulation namespace manager were held.  Their website has a submission package validator.   A package was prepared for registering the schemas and another package was prepared for registering the data elements.  The packages delivered have been run through the validator and are suitable for submission by ODASA-CE to the DoD Metadata Registry.All files have been delivered under separate cover to ODASA-CE and may be available through the DoD Metadata Registry at the time of publication (Fall 2006), by direct request to ODASA-CE, or through the authors with permission from ODASA-CE.  By adapting the cost estimating data structures to XML, this effort has laid a strong foundation for enabling cost model utility in an SOA setting.Future efforts to move beyond this initial data standard include:Develop a compelling reference end-to-end demonstration with a technical M&S partner.Prepare Information Data Exchanges (IDX) using the standard in order to link legacy models in an integrated framework.Add schemas for additional models.Socialize the data standard with the Cost and M&S communities.Additional engagement with the DoD Metadata Registry as it is populated further and its community of users seeks more data standard harmonization.Develop prototype UDDI and WSDL that will support integration of the products of this effort into a Web Service based Service Oriented Architecture. Identify candidates for prototype demonstrations.The authors strongly encourage others in the cost and technical modeling and simulation communities to obtain, comment on, and build onto these schema.   http://www.uddi.org/ http://www.w3.org/TR/wsdl http://www.w3.org/TR/soap/ http://www.w3.org/XML/ The DoD XML gallery is currently named the DoD Metadata Registry and Clearinghouse and is located at https://metadata.dod.mil/mdrPortal/appmanager/mdr/mdr.OMB  - E-Government PolicyNIST  - Government XML StandardsGSA   - XML RegistryDISA  - DOD Interoperability Standards - DOD Architecture Policy and XML Registry - XML Registration Procedure - UDDI Service - DoD Metadata Registry and Clearinghouse –       XML Gallery - UnitsML - Contracts XMLArmy CIO/G6  - CIO Goals: “2. Lead enterprise integration to achieve decision superiority by transforming processes, applications & data into network-centric capabilities across the Army.”Army Publishing Directorate  - Army XML Policy and Registry - XML Registration ProcedureAMSO POCs DARPA Agent Markup Language (DAML)World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) / Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) - Fundamental Internet Standardsi.e HTML, XML, MathML, UDDI, SOAP, Object Management Group (OMG) - UML & XMI, CORBAOrganization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS) - ebXML, Web Services & SOA, Industry Domain StandardsOpen applications Group (OAGi) - Standards Compliant B2B Web Services Documents - Industry DomainsUnited Nations Centre for Trade Facilitation and Electronic Business (UN/CEFACT/ISO) - XML Core Component Technical Specification, ISO Std 15000-5 - Project Data Exchange StandardCS-Solutions Inc. - Project Data XML Format Implementation