Test & Evaluation in the Virtual WorldDavid R. Pratt, PhDRobert W. Franceschini, PhDScience Applications International Corporation (SAIC)12901 Science DriveOrlando, FL 32817407 243-3308 HYPERLINK "mailto:prattda@saic.com" prattda@saic.comKeywords:Interoperability, DIS, TENA, T&SABSTRACT: Increases in joint military operations, service interdependence, weapon lethality and range advances, and budget constraints have made it increasingly difficult to effectively test and evaluate systems in an operationally relevant environment.  The need for creative alternatives, such as modeling and simulation, to support training, test and evaluation (T&E) is, therefore, compelling.  We conducted a proof-of-concept interoperability experiment involving three different systems from the experimentation, testing, and training communities.  We began with the Unmanned System Testbed (USTB), currently in use at the U.S. Navy’s Pacific Missile Range Facility (PRMF) in Barking Sands, Kauai, Hawaii.  Because limited testing with the USTB could be done in a task-loaded environment, digital data from the PRMF was imported into the U.S. Army’s OneSAF Objective System (OOS) so it could be used to provide the context.  Unfortunately, the USTB and OOS data capture and analysis systems were inadequate for our needs, so the Modular Analysis Test Support System (MAnTSS) was added to provide the required testing data.  Finally, the systems were linked together using the Test and Training Enabling Architecture (TENA)—a logical choice for the middleware, given its current operational use at PMRF—and the OOS was extended to support TENA.  This paper will cover the design concepts, issues and results of our experiment.IntroductionToday’s warfighters operate in an ever-changing environment characterized by increased interdependence of joint and multi-national forces, higher thresholds of weapons lethality and range, encroachment on ranges, and a prolific number of situational uncertainties.  Additionally, constant cost and time pressures now make it nearly impossible to test and train in an operationally relevant world. In practice, successful weapon systems are formed using a combination of design, analysis, and experimentation.  Unfortunately, it is difficult, if not impossible, to determine, in advance, the impact of the system in a complex organization (such as the U.S. Army) that applies to any conceivable enterprise to which that organization might contribute when solely looking at one element.  For any particular enterprise, therefore, there is a risk of compromising enterprise goals because constituent organizations or systems may not provide a needed capability.  This risk arises primarily when the enterprise does not properly understand the contribution of one or more systems and their interrelationships.  A thorough understanding of the capabilities of a system, as well as an understanding of how those individual capabilities combine to form enterprise capabilities, is critical to achieving enterprise goals.  To mitigate the risk of discovering adverse system interactions at inopportune times (such as in combat), enterprise designers turn to modeling and simulation (M&S).M&S is becoming ubiquitous.  Models and simulations are routinely developed to support various aspects of concept development, system design, testing, training, and mission rehearsal.  This is possible today because computational systems, software engineering, and M&S technology have matured to the point that reasonable fidelities are feasible within available computational resources.A further trend in M&S is vertical and horizontal convergence.  Horizontal convergence means that, through components, whole simulations or federations of models are capable of simultaneously representing a variety of domains: live, virtual, and constructive (LVC).  Such a horizontally converged simulation can be applied within any of the three domains, or across any combination of domains, without modification.  Vertical convergence means that a single instance of a model/simulation can be used for a variety of applications, such as concept development, experimentation, system design, risk reduction, testing, training, and mission rehearsal.  Convergence, whether horizontal or vertical, provides a significant increase in the consistency and validity of a system, while also providing a significant decrease in the maintenance and development requirements when considered across the various application domains.During the December 2005 Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation and Education Conference (I/ITSEC), we witnessed an example of the horizontal and vertical convergence as it applied to a test and evaluation event.  Specifically, on the overall functional scenario, we looked at the functional difference between an armored vehicle with hybrid electric drive and active suspension system and a standard OOS vehicle.  Using TENA and DIS standards, we integrated both legacy and emerging systems to respond to our customers’ requirements for the capability to integrate their LVC systems in an operationally relevant manner.Component SystemsThe overall demonstration was conceived and executed as part of our ongoing research and development efforts to develop a product line architecture that can be used to rapidly deploy instances to satisfy an event’s specific requirements. The Live Virtual Constructive Integrating Architecture for Battlefield Applications (LVC-IABA) performs battlefield planning, command and control, and blue force tracking.  It is integrated with the Common Architecture Desktop / Embedded Trainer (CADET) crew station, instrumented individual combatants and unmanned (robotic) vehicles.  The network backbone is an ad hoc, self-healing/balancing wireless network.Early in the process of developing the demonstration, we determined there would be little or no system development.  Rather, this would be primarily an integration task.  With the exception of extending the U.S. Army’s OneSAF Objective System (OOS) to use the Test and Training Enabling Architecture (TENA) protocols, we were able to hold true to that stipulation.  As shown in  REF _Ref125609095 \h Figure 1, the following products function together in a simple battlefield scenario:OneSAF Objective System (OOS) – provides context, environment and synthetic convoyCommon Architecture Desktop / Embedded Trainer (CADET) – provides a virtual simulator with the embedded high fidelity vehicle simulation using MATLAB / C++ modelTalon – A live robot that is capable of interacting in the synthetic environment Expedition DI – provides a dismounted infantry immersive environmentTest and Training Enabling Architecture (TENA) – functions as middleware for live testUnmanned Systems Test Bed (USTB) – emulates an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)Modular Analysis Test Support System (MAnTSS) – collects and analyzes testing data EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1.  Component SystemsThe remainder of this section discusses the component system in more detail.OneSAF Objective System (OOS)OOS is a composable, next-generation computer-generated force (CGF).  It can represent a full range of operations, systems, and control processes, from the individual combatant and platform level to blue force Battalion level and opposing force Brigade level.  OOS also has levels of fidelity to support various modeling and simulation (M&S) domains.  It represents specific activities of combat, combat support, combat service support, and command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance.  The system uses appropriate representations of the physical environment and its effect on simulated activities and behaviors.  OOS supports three simulation domains: research, development, and acquisition; advanced concepts and requirements; and training, exercise and military operations.  It is also being integrated into the Army’s Future Combat OneSAF as a Training Common Component.  SAIC completed final operational capability development of OOS on September 30, 2005, and is currently preparing the system for government acceptance test in June 2006.Emerging ApplicationsSAF/CGF Training Common Component for Future Combat Systems (FCS)Support of FCS M&S for acquisition requirements and training effortsInterface with FCS system of systems common operating environment, providing an embedded training solutionComposable constructive simulation, supporting local enhancements for training and development activitiesOwnship simulation capabilities, providing basis for low-cost crew and unit trainersCapabilities and FeaturesA variety of M&S application supportFull life-cycle tools for scenario generation, battlespace composition (entities, units and behaviors), runtime monitor and control, and after-action review analysisArchitecture developed using Java™ to enhance platform independenceArchitecture built using commercial standards and technologies (e.g., JavaBeans™, XML, UML)Web-based development environment, which enhances communication with developer and user communitiesRobust DIS interfaceFederation Object Model (FOM)-Agile High-Level Architecture (HLA) interface, with existing mappings to the Army’s Multi-Resolution FOM and the Joint National Training Capability FOMCADET Crew StationThe CADET crew station is a reconfigurable system designed to act as surrogate for a full virtual crew cabin or a command post.  Shown in its FCS/STRYKER configuration in  REF _Ref125722238 \h Figure 2, we have used it as both a risk reducer and emulator for different vehicles.  The internals of the system are based on the OOS baseline,  REF _Ref125722725 \h Figure 3.  The top multi-channel display provides the out-of-the-window view, the lower left screen provides the gunner’s view, and the OOS GUI is used as a C4I display in the left center.  The right center screen contains the instrument view.  A full version of OOS is running on the screen on the lower right.  The OOS provides the overall context for the event.Java and JavaBeans are trademarks of Sun Microsystems, Inc. in the United States and/or other countries. EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2.  CADET Crew Station EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3.  CADET Internal StructureCapabilities and FeaturesProvides common architecture to support battlefield operations, capability sustainment training and mission planning/rehearsalEasily integrates new componentsOffers a large vehicle library using OneSAF models (wheeled, tracked, individual combatant, fixed and rotary wing aircraft)Embeds within existing FCS organic processing elementsIntegrates live, human-in-the-loop and robotic elements with OneSAF constructive simulationSupports controlling numerous robotic elementsSupports extension as new requirements ariseSupports the full spectrum of training (from classroom command and staff training to vehicle simulation for training tactics, techniques and procedures)Offers a large vehicle library using existing OneSAF modelsCan take control of any entity in an exercise at runtimeOffers low cost, rapid configuration and flexibilityUses commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) hardware and softwareCan be used as an independent vehicle or as part of a larger unit (i.e., platoon or company)Scalable to provide multiple levels of fidelity, from generic to system-specificHelps enable live, virtual and constructive convergenceHigh-Fidelity Vehicle ModelAs alluded to above, one of the key reasons for using OOS as the basic architecture and software baseline for the CADET crew stations is the extensible nature of the OOS product line.  For this demonstration, we used a MATLAB / C++ model, developed in support of the U.S. Army RDECOM’s Tank Automotive Research, Development and Engineering Center (TARDEC) Power and Energy System Integration Laboratory (P&E SIL) program  REF _Ref125727280 \w \h [6].  This model was run on a separate host and interfaced to OOS via a proxy that emulated the mobility and dynamics models.  By taking this approach, we were able to make use of the all of the functionality provided by OOS and not modify or create a new code branch.  This allowed us to not only have the model available to the OOS-based crew station, but also to all of the entities managed by the constructive version of OOS.   Talon RobotThe Talon is a small, tracked, unmanned ground vehicle (UGV) with a chassis manufactured by Foster-Miller.  We modified this particular one by adding a blank firing M-16 rifle and a small video camera.  As shown in  REF _Ref125776097 \h Figure 4, the weapon is mounted on a pan/tilt base that can be remotely controlled by a modal joystick at the crew station or on the Expedition’s front handgrip.  The camera (not shown in the picture), is bore-sighted with the weapon so the user can conduct reconnaissance and target selection.  The unit relays video via wireless communication back to the crew station or the Expedition’s head set.  A trigger on the joystick is used to fire the weapon.  By shifting the mode of the joystick the Talon can be teleoperated by the user.  The position and location of the device is relayed back to the operator over an 802.11 network.  When operating outdoors, the position of the Talon is determined using GPS.  For this demonstration, we mounted the unit on blocks and determined its position and orientation using wheel counters.  EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 4.  Modified Talon UGVExpedition DI SystemAs shown in  REF _Ref125723036 \h Figure 5, the Expedition system is made up of three major elements: a load-bearing vest with THERMITE™ Tactical Visual Computer and batteries, a helmet with integrated binocular display, and a simulated M4A1 training weapon.  The THERMITE is connected via an 802.11 network.  The M4A1 is not tethered and the weapon’s position, orientation, and switch settings are sensed and processed by the computational platform.  The display, mounted on the helmet can be driven either by the THERMITE generating a synthetic scene from the terrain database or via video input.  In this demonstration, we used the synthetic scene generator, although we have used the video in from the Talon’s camera in other experiments.  When operating in the lab, the position and the orientation of the user are determined in reference to a fixed sensor.  The motion of the user is derived from the small joystick located on the front handgrip of the M4A1.  We made this joystick modal and it can also control the Talon, as discussed in section  REF _Ref125776686 \r \h 2.4. EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 5.  The Expedition SystemTest and Training Enabling Architecture (TENA) As described in  REF _Ref125724143 \w \h [7], TENA is designed to support DoD’s vision of providing an integrated “logical range” comprised of testing, training, simulation, and high-performance computing technologies, distributed across many facilities, and connected via a common architecture.  According to the reference, TENA is comprised of:An operational architecture view that includes a concept of operations for how to use TENAA technical architecture view detailing rules and standardsA domain-specific software architecture view that contains a common meta-model, a common object model, a common infrastructure, and a common technical processAn application architecture view focused on how to build an applicationA product line that identifies many utilities, tools, and gateway applications necessary for TENA to operate.Perhaps the most relevant element of TENA for this interoperability demonstration was the fact that, in the development of TENA, the developers examined the predecessors, Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) and High Level Architecture (HLA)  REF _Ref125725657 \w \h [5] and used the parts that were most relevant to live-range use cases. The result is a lightweight and flexible architecture.  In doing this, there are some domain-specific standardizations such as the Time Space Position information (TSPI) object model,  REF _Ref125725866 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 6, that can be taken advantage of to improve efficiently and interoperability. EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 6.  The TENA TSPI Object ModelUnmanned Systems Test Bed (USTB)Soldiers who operate unmanned systems and vehicles need training before they go into combat.  That training must be realistic, mimicking real-world situations so soldiers know the systems’ capabilities and how to focus those capabilities on situations they encounter on the battlefield.  The Unmanned Systems Test Bed (USTB) provides this essential training.  It enhances live-range capabilities by integrating live-range facilities and assets with synthetic environments to support test, evaluation and training events.Capabilities and FeaturesClosely mimics real-world operations, using the appropriate level of resources, energy and investmentAugments live-range exercises with computer simulations of existing or proposed systemsReduces the cost of exercises by reducing the number of real assets usedEvaluates the capabilities of unmanned systems in a variety of locations – urban, underwater and littoralProvides a test bed for experiments on unmanned systems to evaluate their effect on ongoing operationsEvaluates the costs and benefits of a platformTests the functionally and capabilities of a systemTrains operators for their assignments, enabling warfighters to train as they fight.Simulations of real-world exercisesUnmanned system tests in a controlled environmentDiverse operational environmentsHigh-fidelity map that includes terrain, features and imageryTENA-capable test bed for intra- and inter-range experimentsVideo registration technologyEnhanced operational testing, evaluation and trainingThe Modular Analysis and Test Support System (MAnTSS) One of the major issues facing M&S and other computers in the loop Training and Simulation events is the amount of data generated and the ability to make sense out of the shear volume of the data on the network.  Historically, the telemetry data has been analyzed after the event during a long past processing phase.  However, with the model-test-model cycle time of the current systems, this is no longer feasible. A new generation of T&E tools are being used that take advantage of emerging standards, like TENA, to collect and analyze the data in real time.  MAnTSS supports the effectiveness of operational test and evaluation (OT&E) programs that require kill-chain and event-based analysis.  MAnTSS was developed to support integrated OT&E at the Air Force Operational Test and Evaluation Center (AFOTEC).  MAnTSS implements AFOTEC’s model-test-model approach in an adaptable tool that has proven its worth on AFOTEC and Joint programs, including F-22 testing.MAnTSS enables users to develop truth-tracking problems, stimulate sensors and trackers, record truth and track data, and generate integrated data collection document (IDCD) events.  MAnTSS’s robust simulation support is based on actual open-air data and other verified measurements of real-world performance.Capabilities and FeaturesSupports constructive modeling, man in-the-loop simulation and open-air range testingEnables Joint testing and evaluationTransforms diverse formats and coordinate systems into the IDCD standardSupports scenario preparation, scenario execution, observation, post-test review and after-action analysisDisplays simulation results in graphic and database formatsDemonstration ScenarioThe play box chosen for the demonstration was the Pacific Missile Range Facility (PRMF), on the island of Kauai, Hawaii.  We chose this area due to the availability of source data that we could utilize in all of the systems, and it provided a new comprehensive database to conduct such testing.  Shown graphically in  REF _Ref125726224 \h Figure 7, the basic scenario was the interdiction of a convoy.  EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 7.  The Operational ScenarioThe four OOS-controlled red trucks proceed along the road heading north from south.  They are detected by the operator of the USTB flying a Vigilante® class UAV.  This detection is relayed to the CADET crew station emulating an FCS/STYKER vehicle with hybrid electric drive and active suspension.  The crew station then drives north and engages the convoy.  After the engagement, a soldier dismounts, using the Expedition system, and maneuvers the Talon to examine the remains of the convoy.  Finding nothing of interest, the Talon returns to the crew station.  The performance of the crew station, Talon, and UAV are monitored and evaluated by the MAnTSS.  The total scenario takes less than 10 minutes of simulation time.Results Given that this was the first time these systems had come together, the integration was remarkably smooth and the final product was quite stable.  As with most interoperability demonstrations of this kind, there were issues concerning terrain registration, data field interpretation, etc.  However, they were all resolved in the scheduled testing phase and the systems were operational when the show opened.  That is not to say that we did not take advantage of having the systems together and added a few features on the floor.  Perhaps the greatest, most lasting contribution of this effort was the integration of TENA and OOS.  The modular nature of the OOS network interface, the similarity of TENA to HLA, and the experience with OTB and TENA made the implementation a relatively straightforward process.  We have provided the resulting source code to the OOS program for inclusion into a future baseline.Based on the success of the technical approach taken in the integration of the high-fidelity engine and suspension model, we are starting a project with the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) and the Communications Electronics Research and Development Center (CERDEC), to integrate high-fidelity urban winds, aerosol dispersion, and radio modeling.  Due to the computational complexity of these models, we will be using high performance computer class resources, most likely a Linux Cluster at NRL.In talking to both management and the visitors on the show floor, the project was a success in that we were able to stimulate T&E assets, tools, and processes through an M&S system completely transparent to the devices and users.  Likewise, we were able to provide a more realistic context for the USTB systems and operators than previously possible.  ReferencesExpedition System Home Page,  HYPERLINK "http://www.quantum3d.com/products/Expedition/ExpeditionDI.html" http://www.quantum3d.com/products/Expedition/ExpeditionDI.htmlHudgins, Gene, “The Test and Training Enabling Architecture (TENA) - The Foundation for DoD Range Interoperability”,   HYPERLINK "http://www.dtc.army.mil/tts/2003/proceed/hudgins/index.html" http://www.dtc.army.mil/tts/2003/proceed/hudgins/index.htmlPoch, Keith, “Test & Training Enabling Architecture (TENA) Overview”,  HYPERLINK "http://www.dtic.mil/ndia/2002training/rumford.pdf" http://www.dtic.mil/ndia/2002training/rumford.pdfFoster-Miller, “TALON Robots -- The Soldier's Choice”,  HYPERLINK "http://www.foster-miller.com/lemming.htm" http://www.foster-miller.com/lemming.htmIEEE Standards, “Computer Simulation Standards”,  HYPERLINK "http://standards.ieee.org/catalog/olis/compsim.html" http://standards.ieee.org/catalog/olis/compsim.htmlSimon, M., Compere, M., Connolly, T., Lors, C., Smith, W., Brudnak, M. “Hybrid Electric Power and Energy Laboratory Hardware-in-the-Loop and Vehicle Model Implementation,” accepted for publication in SAE 2006 World Congress & Exhibition, Military Vehicle Modeling and Simulation session, April 2006, Detroit, MI, USA“TENA - The Test and Training Enabling Architecture, Architecture Reference Document”, https://www.tena-sda.org/public_docmanager/userdocuments/TENA%20ARCHITECTURE%20REFERENCE/TENA%20Architecture%20Reference%20Document%202002.pdfAuthor’s BiographiesDAVID R. PRATT is currently the Chief Scientist (Fellow) for SAIC’s Strategies Simulation and Training business unit.  As a vice president for technology, his responsibilities include developing and fostering leading- edge information technology and M&S technologies.  He also serves as the Forces Modeling and Simulation point of contact for DoD’s High Performance Computing Modernization Program (HPCMP).  He received a Master of Science degree and a Ph.D. in Computer Science from the Naval Postgraduate School and a Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering from Duke University.ROBERT FRANCESCHINI is a Chief Systems Engineer/Technical Fellow at SAIC.  Dr. Franceschini earned a Ph.D. in computer science from the University of Central Florida.  In his 13 years of experience in modeling and simulation, he has published over 50 scientific papers on these topics. Talon is a trademark of Foster-Millrer, Inc. in the United States and/or other countries. THERMITE is a trademark of Quantum3D, Inc. in the United States and/or other countries. Vigilante is a registered trademark of Science Applications International Corporation in the United States and/or other countries.))