Name of Forum or Group:  C2 / M&S ServicesChairJohn DalyVice ChairAndreas TolkSecretaryTom MullinsObjectives for this Workshop:Discuss developments in the domain of net-centric operations, in particular composability of C2/M&S Services and necessary standards.Discuss the contribution of the forum to the PDG C-BML.Get user requirements back into the forum.Comments and Recommendations:C-BML and MSDL has been in the focus of many papers.  Grammar, topologies, and ontologies are presented and first papers show the necessity and feasibility of holistic approaches.  This will remain a mainstream topic of the C2/M&S Service Forum.Effect-based Operations may not be sufficiently supported by M&S Services in planning, training, and execution.  The forum will focus on this question and will ask for explicit papers dealing with these questions.The forum needs to encourage papers on Predictive Environments, and help frame the discussion of how they would best interact with C2 systems real/near-real time. A special presentation on this subject will be included in plans for the next SIW.While most papers looked at broad solutions and observations, a lot of detail work is still necessary, in particular IO applications and EBO applications.  Contributions to a C2/M&S Service ontology may be another worthwhile goal.  This goal was strongly endorsed by forum attendees and may result in formal activities, such as a study group.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)30-40Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)50Peak attendance (including joint sessions)72Total papers presented20“No-show” presentations (06S-SIW-072, 06S-SIW-098)2Other presentations and panel discussionsNoneRecommended Reading List nomination:06S-SIW-007 identifying future C2/MS research topics of relevance to SISO.Additionally, the C2/M&S Service Forum nominates paper 06S-SIW-068, as this paper outlines a significant component of the PDG C-BML effort.The papers 06S-SIW-016, 06S-SIW-043, and 06S-SIW-121 are also outstanding contributions to the C2/M&S Service Forum, as they contribute significantly to the PDG C-BML effort, but paper 06S-SIW-068 was evaluated to have the broadest effect concerning SISO.  The RRL Selection Committee is encouraged to evaluate the appropriateness of this decision.2006 SPRING SIW OUTBRIEF FORM PAGE 1