Name of Forum or Group:  Research, Development, and Engineering (RDE)ChairCynthia  BallardVice ChairDoug WoodSecretaryJohn FayObjectives for this Workshop:1.	Concentrate Focus on User Community Research and Engineering.2.	Conduct New Format for Spring SIW with RDE Grand Challenges Forum.  RDE may choose to offer this every Spring SIW.Promote Joint Sessions to reduce Paper Presentations.Brief all pertinent information (Agenda Format, Elections, Fall SIW Theme and Format) and meet F2F with PRP Members to kick-off the day.Comments and Recommendations:Investigate collaboration with BRIMS for cutting edge technology given Fall SIW 06 Theme.Involve RDE User Community via reflector for Call for Papers to focus abstracts call to address M&S challenges that exist in the RDE User Community.Continue to post all accepted paper abstracts on reflector.Where is the investment/community direction for interoperability (HLA, TENA, RTI, etc.) infrastructure?  What impact is the RDE having – if any – on shaping the interoperability infrastructure discussion in SISO, to steer PDG’s, or impact on the User Community?Continue to publish schedule for PRP members for abstract and paper review.Send thank you letters for Grand Challenges Presenters.Handout for Tuesday schedule was incorrect for 0800.  It showed 06S-SIW-001 as starting at 0800 and not 0830.Joint Session with SAPD was hindered (started late) because SAPD Forum was relegated to the East Hall (poor coordination on locale).Renewed interest was shown in HPC usage.  Lots of interest in SGI.  RDE suggests that SGI be invited as a vendor for Fall SIW.Request from User Community to support CBML wrt C-CML and ISO/TC 223.Request from User Community for IEEE PDU Standard to address XML Format.No apparent co-mingling with SCS – again.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)30Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)37Peak attendance (including joint sessions)75Total papers presented9“No-show” presentations0Other Presentations and Panel Discussions3 – Invited PresentationsRecommended Reading List nomination: 1.	06S-SIW-0742005 FALL SIW OUTBRIEF FORM