“Some Tactics, Techniques and Procedures for Simulating and Analyzing Net-centric Warfare Concepts - Representing Airspace ManagementMonte PorterMichelle HermanJohn W HughesMehry AbidiTerri WoodLewis HarmonComputer Sciences Corporation4090 South Memorial ParkwayM/S 3-3-11Huntsville AL 35802 HYPERLINK "mailto:mporter@csc.com" mporter@csc.com HYPERLINK "mailto:mherman@csc.com" mherman@csc.com HYPERLINK "mailto:jhughes23@csc.com" jhughes23@csc.com HYPERLINK "mailto:mabibi@csc.com" mabidi@csc.com HYPERLINK "mailto:twood23@csc.com" twood23@csc.com HYPERLINK "mailto:wharmon@csc.com" wharmon@csc.com800-477-1140Key Words: A2C2, C4I, Modeling and Simulation Software, C2, Modeling and Simulation Software, Net-Centric Warfare. Abstract:  “Net centric” technologies are touted as providing a force multiplier to enable the US to fight and win the next war.  Tied to the cornerstone of Networked Effects is the need to control the third dimension, airspace management.  To look at future concepts, models and simulations are used to represent the fight and then represent the command and control messages and command and control decisions of that fight.  This is typically expensive in resources because command and control problems happen more often at scale, in a larger battle where interfaces conflict, different command levels don’t understand what each other are doing, and synchronizing actions is difficult.War fighting simulations are an excellent venue in which to look at new C2 concepts – the same issues that will face future commanders and their staffs can be represented and prototype solutions can be tested.  However, data collection hooks must be imbedded in the simulation to ensure that the effort produces analyzable data. This paper will inform you of general lessons learned while implementing A2C2 at RDECOM. It will describe the approach, the procedures used, and the issues surrounding A2C2 simulation.1.0 Background1.1 Purpose.  In all of the challenges of simulating net-centric warfare, one of the least exercised concepts is airspace control. Working with the US Aviation Center and PM TAIS, RDECOM has taken an aggressive role in the development of simulation capability to examine emerging A2C2 concepts with simulation.  This paper describes the advancements in A2C2 functionality, simulation issues and future plans for A2C2 simulation.  1.2 Definitions.  JP1-02/FM 3-52 defines airspace control in a combat zone as a process used to increase combat effectiveness by promoting the safe efficient and flexible use of airspace.  The primary issue is the deconfliction of airspace demands between aerial platforms and effects platforms.  A secondary but just as important issue is deconflicting helicopters and low flying UAV’s. 1.3  TRADOC’s Integrated Process #6 (A2C2), states that in the future net-centric domain, the effectors will be selected by a combination of A2C2 and networked fires architecture built into the Battle Command system.  The networked effects application will select the effector for the desired effects based upon ammunition availability.  A2C2 will select the effector based upon airspace trajectory clearance requirements.  The two applications will work in tandem to allow the permissive process to work.  The purpose of the A2C2 portions of the Battle Command Network is to provide the common asset visibility, control, procedural coordination, synchronization, and regulation for Army and Joint manned and unmanned aerial assets, indirect fire munitions (loiter attack munitions [LAM], precision attack munitions [PAM] and conventional) and other airspace users.1.4 Doctrinal Elements.  Key doctrinal elements of A2C2 continue to be the Air Tasking Order (ATO), and the Airspace Control Order (ACO)3.  Typically, the Air Force controls the airspace above the coordinating altitude and the Army controls the airspace below the coordinating altitude.  The ATO and ACO are usually published 24 hours in advance and changes are typically slow.  What is needed then is a way to speed up the deconfliction of airspace, inform the airspace users of changes in the current situation and where necessary, develop and test new messages that complete the information exchange requirements (IER’s) needed to accomplish the mission.  1.5 A2C2 Need.  The areas of research are methods that provide accurate aircraft location reporting that reduces fratricide, increase in the number of indirect fire missions that are not inhibited by manned/ unmanned systems, and increase the overall A2C2 SA especially for aircraft.  The future A2C2 must have dynamic near real-time changes to ACMs for example, but the key to success is getting that SA to the manned aircraft quickly.  2.0 Advancements in A2C2 simulation functionality.2.1. Airspace Control Measures.  The lingua franca’ of procedural airspace management continues to be airspace control measures.  These may coordinating altitude, restricted operating areas/zones (ROA/ROZ), standard use army aircraft flight route (SAAFR), Air Control Points (ACP), and UAV blankets. 2.1.1 The airspace control order (ACO) normally specifies the coordinating altitude and may include a buffer zone for small altitude deviations.  2.1.2 Restricted Operating Zones/Areas (ROZ/ROA) is airspace of defined dimensions created in response to specific operational situations or requirements within which the operation of one or more airspace users is restricted.  Establishing a ROZ helps prevent fratricide by closely restricting access over a designated surface area.  Typical uses are over Army Tactical Missiles System (ATACMS) launch (platoon area hazard – PAH) and target areas (target area hazard TAH) well as UAV launch and recovery areas.  2.1.3 Air corridors are restricted air route of travel specified for use by friendly aircraft and established for the purpose of preventing friendly aircraft from being fired on by friendly forces.  Air Corridors are used to route combat aviation elements between such areas as forward arming and refueling points (FARPS), holding areas, and battle positions.  These corridors also deconflict artillery firing positions with aviation traffic including UAVs.  Altitudes of an air corridor do not exceed the coordinating altitude.    2.1.4 Air control point (ACP) An air control point is an easily identified point on the terrain or an electronic navigational aid used to provide necessary control during air movement.  Air Control Points are generally designated at each point where the flight route or air corridor makes a definite change in any direction and at any other point deemed necessary for timing or control of operations.  It is a graphic control measure used to segment an air corridor similar to checkpoints on a ground route.2.2 A2C2 Prototype. In order to portray the ACO within simulation (outside of tactical nets) we developed an A2C2 Prototype that represents the ACP’s SAFFRS, UAV blankets and ROZ’s at simulation start-up.  Figure 1 shows a screen shot of the surrogate.  Key functionality of the surrogate included display of the ACO, automated issuance of UAV blankets based on air track data (surrogated from DIS Entity State PDU), sub-divided air corridors, automated issuance of TAH’s based on LAM loiter patterns (part of the effects process), protective areas around aircraft operating outside of corridors.  The surrogate was also was linked to the fires screen which displayed both the protective areas and the occupied portions of the sub-divided air corridors. Figure-1  Advanced A2C2 Surrogate2.2.1 ACO display.  The ACO displayed all ACM’s (read from a data file) and all new ACMR’s.  Routes can be built from the surrogate by connecting ACP’s.2.2.2 Automated issuance of UAV blankets based on air track data (surrogated from DIS Entity State PDU).  The battle space was partitioned into zones of responsibility roughly 10kmX10 km but following the terrain much like phase lines and boundaries would be.  The intent of the zones was to provide definitive responsibility for maneuver and fires over the entire battle area.  These boxes also made good UAV blankets because they were small enough to allow flexibility and closely related to the unit that was maneuvering in that space.  As UAV’s were launched or flew into each area, an ACMR was automatically created and sent to the network.  For each type of UAV, different specific altitudes (AGL) and relative ranges apply.  The different UAV’s were deconflicted by altitude with each UAV having different operating ranges driven by the sensor capabilities. The A2C2 prototype kept track of the number and types of UAVs operating within that blanket.  As each altitude slice was vacated, a new ACMR was issued canceling the UAV blanket. Using small UAV blankets provided the commander with flexibility to use the same airspace at other altitudes for safe transit.   2.2.3 Sub-divided air corridors.  Air corridors dramatically restrict fires because controllers typically block out the entire corridor to fires or other airspace users when the corridor is occupied by a friendly even though the user might be at the beginning, the end or in the middle of the corridor.  The concept behind subdividing air corridors is to use vector data included in the air track to determine direction and speed along the corridor.  Once a particular part of the corridor is vacated, it can now be disabled and fires can be cleared through that area.  Parts of the corridor well ahead of the transiting air asset could also be declared free if real-time updates and estimate of rate  through the corridor was available.  Figure 2 shows a screen shot of the segmented corridors.Figure 2 Segmented Corridors2.2.4 Automated issuance of TAH’s based on LAM loiter patterns (part of the effects process).  In order to inform the airspace users of platoon and target area hazards, rules were place in the fires surrogate to issue a TAH when LAM loiters were planned.  These were given max – min altitude parameters and a estimated time parameter.   2.2.5 Protective areas around aircraft operating outside of corridors. For manned systems transiting the area, SAAFRS and corridors were the normal method of maintaining a safe airspace.  When helicopters left the transit corridor (and slowed down) the A2C2 surrogate placed a protected area around the helicopter with the area size being based on speed and the area offset to the direction of travel.  This created a protective buffer around the aircraft.  Figure 3 shows this concept.  In the initial implementation, the radius of this area was static.  In future exercises it should be dynamic. Figure 3 Protective areas2.2.6 Linkage to fires.  In the initial implementation the protective areas and the occupied positions within the corridors were superimpose on the fires screen and became of fire areas for fires.2.3 ACMR DIS Messages.  To represent these measures in simulation we wrapped the contents of a USMTF Airspace Control Means Request (ACMR) in a DIS PDU.  This allowed the interactive ACMR’s to be created and transmitted to other simulations.  2.4 Integrating TAIS. The Army’s Tactical Airspace Integration System (TAIS) [4 is the current A2C2 system for the management and clearance of airspace. When used for training, TAIS has no interface to DIS simulations but gets it feeds from other tactical systems that have DIS/HLA drivers.  This made it logistically difficult to insert the TAIS system into RDECOM experimentation. To solve this problem we developed a tactical systems interface unit (TSIU) or translator to provide track updates to TAIS and to pass airspace control measure requests to and from the TAIS system. 2.4.1 The TSIU provided the means to pass blue air track data via the Joint Communications Processor Interface (JCPI).  Using the data from the entity state protocol data unit (PDU), the TSIU provided air track data in tactical format at the appropriate update rate.  2.4.2 The team designed an airspace control means request (ACMR) PDU that provided airspace control measure data between the simulations. The TSIU provided the interface between the simulation federation and TAIS by translating the ACMR PDU to the United States Message Text Format ACMR message.  Once routed to the TSIU, the system translated the request into USMTF format and sent the request to TAIS via send-mail.  A diagram of the data flow is shown Figure 4.Figure 4: TAIS Data Flow Diagram2.5 Notifying the airspace users.  Procedural control is not enough when dealing with the A2C2 issues.  Positive control measures including frequent collaboration by message informing the manned airspace users of danger areas, UAV blankets, or other airspace changes so that the airspace user can take actions to avoid collision.   Keys to this capability are to alert the airspace user, provide a safe direction, location and altitude for avoidance.   Upon the alert the user should be prompted with graphics on the screen showing that they are in a potential impact zone. 2.6 Integrating A2C2 with Fires.   The major challenge of getting the Networked Effects and A2C2 to collaborate is to modify the effects nomination process to include a request to A2C2 that “clears the trajectory” and then responds to the effects execution cell in a timely manner that allows the effects mission to continue.   2.6.1 The effects process begins with a target value analysis and then an attack analysis.  At some time during the attack analysis a list of potential effectors is derived.  These potential parings must be vetted / cleared by the A2C2 system.  When fires are performed remotely, (e.g., BLOS or laser guided missions) the mission must be cleared by the A2C2 service.  This suggests a message that contains a target and a potential shooter list must be developed to allow an A2C2 clearance of fires service to be available to the network. 2.6.2 Defining the clearance of fires check is complicated and must be answered by experimentation.  We will look down range with the trajectory, but how close do we get to the aircraft before we say there is a conflict?  The aircraft factor of velocity and direction could make this even more complicated.  Plus what is the time-of-flight for the munitions? What will the airspace situation look like when the round arrives later?  Using the “future” location and direction information in RF Tags or from a known flight plan be of help to the indirect fires question. 3.0 Future Work.Plans are beginning now to continue to build/refine A2C2 simulation capability at RDECOM.  Clearance of fires, informing the  airspace user, collision avoidance (SOAR) technologies and kneeboard A2C2 SA are some of the concepts under consideration.  4.0 References[1] JP 3-52.  Joint Doctrine for Airspace Control in the Combat Zone.  30 August 2004.[2] TRADOC Integrated Process 6 Conduct Airspace Management.[3]  Goodman, Glenn W, Congested Airspace, C4ISR Journal, January/February 2006[4] Kelton, James: “Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures for the Tactical Airspace Integration System (TAIS)”, January 2004. Authors BiographiesMonte Porter is the major contributor for JAMUS A2C2 planning in support of RDE Command.  He works at CSC’s Simulation Center of Excellence.Michelle Herman is lead simulation engineer and designer of the DIS / ProtoCommand interface and the ACMR PDU at CSC’s Simulation Center of Excellence.Terri Wood is the lead / primary developer of the Networked Fires and A2C2 functionality at CSC’s Simulation Center of Excellence.John Hughes is the TAIS Integration lead for JAMUS at CSC’s Simulation Center of Excellence.Mehri Abidi is the lead software developer of the DIS / ProtoCommand interface at CSC’s Simulation Center of Excellence.Lewis Harmon   is the lead engineer for the TSIU interface at CSC’s Simulation Center of Excellence.PAGE  