Technical Aspects of the Multi-Service Distributed Environment to Support Joint Test and EvaluationRalph LiebertUS Army Electronic Proving Ground Ft. LewisCSTE-DTC-EP-TMFt. Lewis, WA 98433253-967-8106 HYPERLINK "Ralph.liebert@epglewis.dtc.army.mil" Ralph.liebert@epglewis.dtc.army.milMichael J. O'ConnorITT Industries6767 Old Madison Pike, Suite 160Huntsville, AL 35806256-964-1470 HYPERLINK "Michael.oconnor@itt.com" Michael.oconnor@itt.comRichard WymanUS Army White Sands Test CenterCSTE-DTC-WSWhites Sands Missile Range, NM505-678-4665 HYPERLINK "mailto:Richard.wyman@us.army.mil" Richard.wyman@us.army.milKey Words:Joint Test and Evaluation, Distributed Testing, Live, Virtual, and Constructive Capabilities, Classified Networking, Southwest Asia TerrainABSTRACT: The Multi-Service Distributed Environment (MSDE) applied the interaction among the Multi-Service Partners to investigate a Joint Test and Evaluation (JT&E) environment for use across the acquisition life cycle in support of the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) Testing in a Joint Environment Roadmap. MSDE sponsorship/entry for United States Air Force (USAF) was through the Air Force-Integrated Collaborative Environment (AF-ICE). Sponsorship/entry for the United States Army (USA) was based on the Distributed Test Event (DTE) program with the Army Test and Evaluation Command (ATEC) as lead organization. The United States Navy (USN) and United States Marine Corps (USMC) sponsorship/entry into MSDE was based on the Navy Distributed Engineering Plant (DEP) and the Naval Sea Systems Command (NAVSEA) 62 was the lead for Navy integration.  The Joint Interoperability Test Command (JITC) assisted the MSDE event by coordinating the Network Memoranda of Agreement (MOA) required to enable the classified secret environment.The US Army was the lead service for the Technical aspects of MSDE.  Each service and the JITC contribute personnel to support the development of the classified network, architecture, terrain and the live, virtual and constructive (LVC) capabilities required by MSDE to support operational and analytical requirements.  This construct was developed and implemented to support JT&E tenants described by the JT&E Roadmap being supported by the JTEM program.  The environment serves as the technical baseline for evolving JT&E and provides a venue to expand upon for future JT&E events.  This paper describes and investigates the technical elements supporting the distributed test environment developed for the MSDE.1. IntroductionThe mandate to develop a Joint Test and Evaluation (JT&E) capability to support acquisition of complex military systems that must operate in Joint environment is witnessed by the real world events the US military forces are facing today.  This challenge is being attacked by the US Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) through the creation of a plan described in the JT&E Roadmap and an initial step at manifesting some of these concepts is the distributed test capabilities developed in the Multi-Service Distributed Environment (MSDE).  The MSDE applies the interaction among the Multi-Service Partners to investigate the tenants set out in the JT&E Roadmap.  MSDE sponsorship/entry for United States Air Force (USAF) is through the Air Force-Integrated Collaborative Environment (AF-ICE). Sponsorship/entry for the United States Army (USA) is based on the Distributed Test Event (DTE) program with the ATEC as lead organization. The United States Navy (USN) and United States Marine Corps (USMC) sponsorship/entry into MSDE is based on the Navy Distributed Engineering Plant (DEP) and the Naval Sea Systems Command (NAVSEA) 62 is the lead for Navy integration.  The Joint Interoperability Test Command (JITC) assisted the MSDE event by coordinating the Network Memoranda of Agreement (MOA) required to enable the classified secret environment.  The MSDE leveraged the Distributed Test Event 5 (DTE 5).  The DTE 5 was the continuation of the Army Test and Evaluation Command (ATEC)-sponsored program to develop a distributed test capability to support Army Test and Evaluation (T&E).  The DTE 5 was conceived, planned, integrated, executed, analyzed and reported from August 2004 to December 2005, the event was conducted between 23 August and 02 September 2005.  The impetus for DTE 5 was three fold to emulate the Future Combat System (FCS) Experiment 1.1 (Exp 1.1), support the objectives for the US Army Cross Command Collaborative Effort (3CE), and support the objectives for the Joint service MSDE.  The foundation for DTE 5 was the ATEC distributed test capability demonstrated in DTE 4, which was the pivotal capability that tied 3CE and MSDE programs together.  The 3CE program integrates Army M&S capabilities, tools, and processes from the ATEC, Research Development and Engineering Command (RDECOM), Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC), and the Program Manager FCS Brigade Combat Team (PM FCS BCT) / FCS Lead Systems Integrator (LSI).  The 3CE program is aligning itself to support the acquisition of FCS, in so doing the 3CE leverages the fact that DTE 5 emulated the FCS Exp 1.1.The DTE 5 used a mix of simulated and live capabilities integrated in a mixed protocol architecture in a classified environment with capabilities from the three services and supporting commands in a Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC)-approved FCS BCT mission integrated with several Joint Forces Command (JFCOM)-approved Joint Tasks (JT).  This construct enabled ATEC to assess distributed test capabilities to support FCS testing, enabled 3CE and FCS a venue to assess capabilities, methodologies, and processes to support FCS acquisition aspects, while enabling MSDE to assess JT&E aspects set in JT&E Roadmap.The US Army was the lead service for the Technical aspects of MSDE.  Each service and the JITC contribute personnel to support the development of the classified network, architecture, terrain and the live, virtual and constructive (LVC) capabilities required by MSDE to support operational and analytical requirements.  The environment serves as the technical baseline for evolving JT&E and provides a venue to expand upon for future JT&E events.  This paper describes and investigates the technical elements, (classified network, architecture, terrain and the live, virtual and constructive (LVC) capabilities) supporting the distributed test environment developed for the MSDE.2. System Overview and ParticipantsThe MSDE used LVC capabilities to emulate FCS and Joint systems required for the Exp 1.1 FCS BCT and JT scenarios, respectively.  The LVC capabilities represented the requisite platforms, sensors, weapons systems, battle command, and users and supporting environments for an Army urban ground scenario integrated with joint service close air support and fires.  The USAF also conducted an aerial electronic attack scenario, which was separate from other service participation.LVC were integrated in a mixed protocol architecture and a classified network.  A mixed protocol environment was necessary to facilitate the rapid integration of multiple service and command capabilities as required for MSDE with little or no modifications to the capabilities.  Existing architecture elements were optimized and gateways used to enable the mixed protocol environment.  MSDE provided a venue to investigate mixed protocol architecture The selected network, common to the majority of the participating services and commands, used an Internet Protocol (IP)-based classified Defense Research and Engineering Network (DREN) and a number of MOAs among services and commands were developed to facilitate classified connectivity.  A common Terrain Data Base (TDB) supported DTE 5 and was used by the majority of participants.  Figure 2.1 shows the MSDE service network hubs and lists the participating site as well as the high level network topology.  The following sites participated in the DTE 5.2.1 US ArmyAberdeen Test Center (ATC), Aberdeen Proving Ground (APG), MarylandAviation Technical Test Facility (ATTC), Fort Rucker, AL*Developmental Test Command (DTC) Headquarters, Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD**Electronic Proving Ground Fort Lewis (EPG FL), Fort Lewis, WashingtonElectronic Proving Ground Fort Huachuca (EPG FH), Fort Huachuca, ArizonaRedstone Technical Test Center (RTTC), Redstone Arsenal, Huntsville, AlabamaWest Desert Test Center (WDTC), Dugway Proving Ground (DPG), Dugway, Utah***White Sands Test Center (WSTC), White Sands Missile Range (WSMR), New MexicoYuma Test Center (YTC), Yuma Proving Ground (YPG), Yuma, Arizona****Night Vision and Electronic Sensor Directorate (NVESD), Fort Belvoir, VirginiaTopographic Engineering Center (TEC), Fort Belvoir, VirginiaAviation and Missile Research, Development, and Engineering Center (AMRDEC), Huntsville, AlabamaFort Gordon, GeorgiaUnit of Action Maneuver Battle Lab (UAMBL), Fort Knox, Kentucky2.2 US NavyNaval Surface Weapons Center (NSWC), Dahlgren, VANaval Air Weapons Center – Air Division (NAWC AD), Patuxent River, MDNaval Air Weapons Center – Weapons Division (NAWC WD), China Lake, CASpace and Naval Warfare Systems Center, San Diego, CA2.3 US Air ForceDistributed Mission Operations Center (DMOC), Kirtland AFB, NMSimulation and Analysis Facility (SiMAF), Wright-Patterson AFB, OH46th Test Wing, Eglin AFBAgency for Modeling and Simulation – C4ISR Visualization Center (AFAMS-CVC), Pentagon**Command and Control Enterprise Integration Facility (CEIF), Hanscom AFB, MACombined Air Operations Center (CAOC), Langley AFB, VAEdwards AFB, CA* This site did not have an accredited network.  Therefore, they participated by moving their equipment stacks to RTTC.  RTTC’s network was accredited with ATTC’s equipment stack included.** Viewing portal*** This site did not have an accredited network.  Therefore, they participated by moving their equipment stacks to EPG-FL.  EPG-FL’s network was accredited with DPG’s equipment stack included.**** This site was connected to the network but did not participate in the event. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 2.1 Depiction of the Multi-Service Distributed Environment service hubs and networked sites.3. Scenario OverviewThe MSDE scenario was derived and optimized from the TRADOC-approved FCS Experiment 1.1 scenario and from JFCOM-approved JTs.  Since the actual FCS systems were not available for DTE 5, LVC representations and emulations were used.The scenario supporting 3CE and FCS objectives was a tactical vignette (V3–Urban Operations) from the TRADOC-approved Caspian Sea 2.0 scenario. The developers mapped the scenario to a portion of the SWA terrain, in which the cantonment area from WSMR and the RTTC Hazard Devices Site (HDS) Military Operations on Urban Terrain  (MOUT) site was virtually integrated or “stitched in”. The integrated MOUT sites supported the urban operations from the FCS Exp 1.1 scenario and enabled virtual integration of live elements participating at the MOUT sites with simulated elements. The FCS BCT and higher missions from this scenario also enabled the Joint tasks.  Figure 3.1 shows the FCS BCT scenario that was integrated with JTs. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 3.2 The Future Combat System Brigade Combat Team urban ground scenario integrated with the Joint Tasks Multi-Service Distributed Environment scenariosThe MSDE scenario design was based on three joint tasks; Joint Suppression Enemy Air Defense (JSEAD), JFIRES and Joint Close Air Support (JCAS).  The event started with the JSEAD scenario to prepare the battlefield.  Once the JSEAD mission prepared the EW battlefield, the JFIRES portion of the event was executed.  JFIRES exercised the integration of USAF and USN forces to take out targets using Naval fires.  Once the JSEAD/JFIRES threads were completed, the USA ground forces moved into the territory and proceeded to the area required to accomplish the Exp 1.1 FBCT mission.  When the FBCT elements were in place, enemy reinforcements were identified moving toward the ground forces location.  The JCAS portion of the event was then initiated to protect the FCS BCT elements using the USN and USAF to take out targets with Joint Tactical Air Controller (JTAC) voice and data calls.  Figures 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4 depict the three JTs in MSDE. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 3.2 Joint Suppression of Enemy Air Defense (JSEAD) a Multi-Service Distributed Environment Joint scenario SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 3.3 Joint Fires a Multi-Service Distributed Environment Joint scenario SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 3.4 Joint Close Air Support (JCAS) a Multi-Service Distributed Environment Joint scenario4. Network Based on the data transfer requirements to support the MSDE environment, an IP-based DREN network was implemented to allow for Transmission Control Protocol / Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) traffic between the participating sites within and among the three services and supporting commands.  The DREN is a robust, high-capacity, low-latency nation-wide network that provides connectivity among geographically dispersed HPC user sites, HPC Centers, and other networks.  The DTE 5 network was created through the integration of three existing networks from ATEC, RDECOM, and TRADOC and linked or “peered” to the to the USAF and USN networks.Participating sites were selected for MSDE based on the information from the scenario defined by the MSDE Operations group.  As such, each of these sites had an accredited classified non-foreign DREN connection  Figure 2.1 depicts the relative geographic locations and high level topography of the MSDE peering points and connected sites throughout the United States.  4.1 Network PlanningThe MSDE Network subgroup was created under the Technical group.  The Network subgroup was responsible for planning and implementing a network to connect the MSDE assets.  The subgroup was also responsible for all security issues relating to the network.  For this event, an IP-based network was implemented to allow for TCP/IP protocol traffic between various test centers, within the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Joint services.  It was agreed that this network would utilize, as its core, the DREN.  Once established, the MSDE network allowed for the connectivity and data exchange required to leverage the existing service capabilities and expertise needed to establish the viability to test in a Joint mission LVC environment; and to investigate any capability gaps in conducting efficient, distributed testing, between geographically dispersed sites.  The Network Subgroup held weekly teleconferences to aid in discussing various issues, to include, but not limited to, the following:Identifying the network requirementsPossible Network topologiesSecurity and Information Assurance (IA) issuesKeying and Encryption Issues.Configuration Management4.2 Network Requirements.The sites identified in Sections 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3 were selected as MSDE participants based on the information from the Simulations subgroups of the Operations group.  As such, each of these sites was required to have an accredited DREN connection.  The MSDE Network Sub-group developed the network topology and concept for operations in classified environment to enable the MSDE sites to participate from their home station and integrate fixed capitol assets and leverage site expertise and military personnel.  The network had to follow these basic attributes.Persistency: Capability for the network to remain operational to support 3CE distributed activities or to stand up quickly.Stability: Capability of the network to support required traffic for 3CE distributed activities.Classified: Capability for the network to operate in a classified secret mode.These requirements drove a network solution based on existing capabilities among the 3CE and MSDE sites relying on an IP-based DREN. The network design for DTE 5 was that the USN, RDECOM and ATEC sites were in a “fully meshed” topology, while the TRADOC and USAF sites were in a “hub and spoke” topology.  The requirement to operate in a classified environment for both programs drove a fast pace accreditation process and the development of multiple MOAs among services and commands.  Development of the classified network caused delays in data communications among sites and subsequent delays in LVC integration.  Details of the requirements, planning, execution and monitoring of the DTE 5 network are in the “Distributed Test Event 5 Network Report”, January 2006.4.3 TopologiesSpecific topologies for each participating site were developed but not included in this paper due to their sensitive nature.  Site topologies may be requested and provided upon approval.  Due to the peering topology among commands and services, there was no “top-down” visibility into entire 3CE or MSDE network.  Each service or command was responsible for the operation and maintenance of their network.  Inter-command and inter-service issues were worked real-time as a team.  The following is a high level description of each service peering point that participated in MSDE.4.3.1 WSMR - IRCCThe WSMR-IRCC represents the ATEC distributed test control site and is the Network Operations Center (NOC) for the ATEC Test and Integration Network (ATIN) network.  The ATIN network is a full-meshed network between ATC, ATTC, DPG, EPG FH, EPG FL, RTTC, WSMR, and YPG.  The ATIN network uses the DREN for connectivity, and interfaces to the DREN via Taclane KG-175 E-100.  4.3.2 USN – NSWC DahlgrenNSWC-Dahlgren was chosen as the peering point for the Navy, in support of MSDE.  As such, NSWC-Dahglren was connected to the MSDE network via KG-175 Taclanes, with the MSDE key.  NSWC-Dahlrgen, in turn, was connected to NAWC AD Patuxent River E2C and ACETEF enclaves, NAWC WD China Lake F/A-18 enclave, and the SPAWAR enclave.  While Edwards AFB was a signed the MOA, they did not participate.  Had they participated, they would have been part of the Navy enclave, and connected to the MSDE network via NSWC-Dahlgren. 4.3.3 USAF – DMOCThe DMOC at Kirtland AFB was the peering point for the Air Force.  DMOC already had a DREN-based network established to the sites participating in MSDE.  DMOC was connected to the MSDE network, via KG-175 Taclanes, with the MSDE key.  DMOC, in turn, was connected to SIMAF, 46th Test Wing, CEIF, and CAOC, via the DREN.  DMOC was connected to the AFAMS-CVC viewing portal, via a stand-alone, encrypted T-1 link.   Edwards AFB is not part of the DMOC network, so would have connected via NSWC-Dahlgren, as mentioned in Para 4.3.2, above.4.3.4 JITC – Ft. HuachucaJITC was a stand-along enclave which was connected to the MSDE network via a KG-175 Taclane, with an MSDE key.  Therefore, it peered with the WSMR-ATIN,   DMOC, and NSWC-Dahlgren networks.4.4 Security and Information AssuranceThe MSDE events was classified at the SECRET/NO FORN level.  As mentioned, MOAs were established among the DAAs of each network or enclave desiring to participate.  This meant that the DAAs were responsible for the data that originated at their sites.  In addition, it was the responsibility of the DAA, and their support team (i.e. System Administrator, Information Assurance Manager, etc.) to ensure that any addition or reconfiguration of network assets did not change the security classification or diminish the integrity of the network.4.5 EncryptionThere are three levels of encryption for both the MSDE network.  At the highest level, there is a MSDE-level key, which is distributed and loaded on the MSDE peering Taclanes at each peering point.  The WSMR-IRCC is responsible for DTE 5 key distribution and loading, and the WSMR COMSEC custodian coordinated with the COMSEC custodians at the MSDE peering point sites.  At the service, command, and site level, each organization is responsible for their key distribution and loading.4.6 Configuration ManagementThe MSDE network comprised of three separate networks including the three services, connected via KG-175 Taclanes with common keys.  Each network DAA was responsible for their network.  Therefore, the Network Operations and Security Centers (NOSC) of each network were largely responsible for the Configuration Management (CM) of their network.  From the higher, 3CE and MSDE level, a network help desk was provided.However, CM includes the consolidation and posting of data.  The file repository for the MSDE event is the ATEC VDLS.  The following documentation is on the web portals to support the network effort.  Note, that access to these web portals is restricted and use encryption to upload/download; hence they are for FOUO files as well.Teleconference MinutesNetwork topologies  MOAsPOC Lists4.7 Network Monitoring and ToolsThe information provided is from the ATEC ATIN network and no specific network troubleshooting, monitoring, or characterization data is available from the USN or USAF MSDE networks.  No overarching Network Manager or Network Operations Center had visibility into each service’s network.  Essentially each service was responsible for characterizing and monitoring their network.  Inter-Service network issues were largely addressed as a team effort.  As the Network Lead, the WSMR-IRCC was the de-facto point for network issues.  Each peering point site had a variety of tools to monitor their network.IpSwitch What’s Up Professional.  This tool allows monitoring of local and remote network devices, encryptors, routers, switches, host computers, etc.  Shows up/down times, latency and availability.  Every site participating is monitored to determine availability and connectivity across the ATIN and 3CE networks.SolarWinds Network Engineer’s Toolset.  This toolbox provides network interface statistics to be gathered such as throughput, bandwidth utilization (max and min) as well as averages.  This tool shows IRCC network availability and utilization.Network General Distributed Sniffer.   The sniffer shows a detailed list of active/latent network communications between hosts across the LAN and WAN.  It provides a detailed protocol analysis and capture available to isolate trouble spots for in depth troubleshooting.  The Top-Talkers feature shows top 20 bandwidth users at any given time.Etherreal – Packet sniffer.  This tool is used to capture all network traffic to files for later analysis (if needed).Active Measurement Program (AMP) for DREN.  AMP is a collection of dedicated processors located at DREN points-of-presence that measure delays, packet loss, and throughput of the DREN. 5. Architecture The architecture for MSDE was coordinated and implemented by the MSDE Simulations subgroup.  The requirements that drove architecture selection and implementation for MSDE were based on the reuse of standard architecture elements from the established DTE capability and the MSDE requirement to integrate USA, USN, and USAF LVC capabilities. The event required a mixed Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) and High Level Architecture (HLA) protocol architecture to support the integration of the three services and multiple commands LVC capabilities and to use many capabilities that were DIS and have not migrated to HLA. The event used the Test and Training Enabling Architecture (TENA) to support the integration of some live capabilities and data collection assets.Based on the stated requirements the DTE 5 architecture selection was driven by the LVC capabilities selected to participate rather than the architecture driving the LVC selection.  The LVC capabilities were selected based on scenario and evaluation criteria requirements.  As noted, this approach resulted in a mixed simulation architecture using multiple simulation protocols.  The HLA was selected as the primary Wide Area Network (WAN) protocol.  Gateways were used at each site that had DIS traffic on their Local Area Network (LAN).  USAF sites were connected using DIS over their internal WAN.  SIMPLE was used to send limited data across the WAN.  As noted, the TENA was used to connect live range assets.DTE 5 was divided into two HLA Federations, DTE and MATREX.  Each Federation had a Federation Object Model (FOM) and a Run Time Infrastructure (RTI).  The DIS, TENA, and SIMPLE federates were considered part of the DTE Federation.Figure 5.1 shows the simulation Architecture for the DTE 5.  The Figure includes a key that shows the meaning of the site boarders and the connecting lines.  This figure is not a network architecture.  The figure shows the logical simulation architecture.  Only significant sources of simulation data are shown.  Data loggers, collectors, viewers, other support tools are not shown in the figure.  Listen only sites are not shown in the diagram.6. Live, Virtual, Constructive CapabilitiesThe LVC capabilities identified and implemented in MSDE were coordinated by the MSDE Simulation subgroup. These LVC were selected to represent Joint and Army-specific tactical battle command systems, platforms, sensors, weapons systems, and the required environments to provide stimulus to these capabilities as well as the users, role player, and military personnel to operate them and execute the scenario.  The LVC capabilities varied in resolution and fidelity.   The scenario and evaluation criteria drove these system emulations and environments and for the most part they were the “best available” LVC capabilities to support the requirements for the event.The complex environment dictated that developers used multiple levels of resolution and varying fidelity for system representations to support emulation of the Joint Task Force (JTF) down to the FCS BCT Team. In some cases, systems of interest for assessment required greater fidelity and resolution for the system representation and environment interactions to achieve higher quality data generation.  In addition to simulated representations, the event required live system representation and integration and translocation into the simulated environment.  The simulation components used in MSDE were selected in a three step process.  First, all participating sites were asked to identify candidate federates based on the general objectives of the test event.  Second the event scenario was reviewed to determine the required simulation elements.  Third the list of required simulation elements was checked against the list of candidate federates.  This process produced three outcomes:1. One Federate to One Required Element match: In the case only one federate was available to play a required element, that federate was selected. EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure 5.1 The Multi-Service Distributed Environment Live, Virtual, and Constructive architecture2. N Federates to One Required Element match:  In the case more than one federate was available to play a required element, the better federate was selected.  Better is determined relative to the test objectives, not the overall goodness of the Federate.  The selection also considered the other Federates in the thread.  If two Federates could play the required element, but one of the federates had worked with other federates in the thread, then this federate was selected.3. Zero Federates to One Required Element match:  In the case no listed federate could support the required element either the element was dropped or a capable federate was found.  In some cases a new federate was developed or capabilities were added to an existing federate.Details regarding the DTE 5 LVC capabilities and integrating architecture may be found in the “Distributed Test Event 5 Distributed Test Control Document”, January 206.7. TerrainA common MSDE Terrain Data Base (TDB) was provided to all the participants.  The MSDE TDB was constructed in coordination with the MSDE Terrain subgroup and driven by the scenario requirements and the LVC capabilities used to support the scenario. Originally, the program planned to use the DTE 4 WSMR 60x60 KM terrain box. At the behest of the FCS TRADOC System Manager (TSM), the planners switched the terrain to a play box in the Southwest Asia (SWA) region.  This switch caused delays in delivery of TDB products and in LVC integration.  The use of SWA terrain enabled the DTE 5 to position this program and other related programs to support future SWA scenarios. The terrain database supported the required simulation and visualization requirements. The MSDE used the following terrain formats:Compact Terrain Data Base (CTDB) with Multiple Elevation Structures (MES)Open FlightTerraPageTactical Systems Format (CADRG)The CTDB serves primarily to support Semi-Automated Forces (SAF) models and the MES format enables the use of building interiors. Open Flight and TerraPage primarily support visualization and IR scene generation. The tactical formats are those terrain formats that support digital battle command systems.The source data primarily came from National Geospatial Agency (NGA) and the acquisition was facilitated by TRADOC Analysis Center – WSMR (TRAC-WSMR), which was developing similar TDBs for use in studies with the Janus SAF.  The source data consisted of elevation, cultural, and imagery data.  The MSDE used the following tools to process the source data to the required formats:TerraVista, TerraSim, or a government product to produce initial CTDB, TerraPage, Shapefiles (for paper), elevation fileArcInfo, Arc Workstation to process elevation and other files for use in MC2, Warrior-Machine Interface (WMI), etc. (map products)LEICA Imagine to convert imagery ER MapperEnvironment for Visualizing Images (ENVI) pre-processing of imagery (usually to feed into TerraVista)Valuable information regarding terrain requirements, data acquisition and processing, and distribution was gleaned from the MSDE terrain implementation.  MSDE TDB requirements were defined and gathered by a questionnaire that was disseminated to all the participating sites and provides valuable information regarding the breadth of TDB formats required to support a complex LVC environment.  Due to the sensitive nature of the SWA TDBs, a Distribution Agreement (DA) was required and originally the TDB s were to distributed via the ATEC web portal but due to file size issues the web portal could not be used and CDs had to express shipped.  These and other details regarding the DTE 5 terrain implementation are provided in the “Distributed Test Event 5 Terrain Report”, January 2006.8. SummaryThe MSDE used available capabilities from the USA, USN, and USAF to develop a baseline JT&E capability to inform a Joint Feasibility Study (JFS) supporting the OSD JT&E Roadmap.  Many aspects of the developed capability were not ideal due accelerated schedule and insufficient resources but provided an excellent start at establishing several firsts:Developed a set of Joint evaluation  requirements supporting actual and surrogate service systemsDeveloped a data collection and analytical plan to support the Joint requirementsDeveloped a scenario based on approved mission and defined tasks to support system assessment and analytical requirementsDeveloped an appropriate LVC classified environment to support scenarioEstablished a semi-persistent classified network and architecture for integrating service LVC capabilitiesEstablished a SWA TDB baseline for future application in an approved scenario region and an overall process for identifying TDB requirementThe MSDE should be leveraged as a first step in developing a required JT&E capability to support assessment of complex Department of Defense systems in a realistic Joint environment.NSWC - DahlgrenWSMR - ArmyDMOC - AFClassifiedDRENARMY - IRCCWSTC - WSMR, NMATC / DTC - APG, MDEPG / DPG - FT LEWIS, WAEPG - FT HUACHUCA, AZ RTTC/AMRDEC - Huntsville, ALJPSD JPO / NVESD – FT Belvoir, VAAIR FORCE - DMOCDMOC - Kirtland AFB, NMSIMAF – Wright-Patterson AFB, OH46thTW – Eglin AFB, FL19 SOS - Hurlburt Field, FLCAOC-X – Langley AFB, VACEIF – Hanscom AFB, MAAFAMS-CVC – PentagonSWC – Los Angeles  AFB, CASWC – Schriver AFB, CO aJITC – Joint  a        NAVY - NSWC DahlgrenNSWC – Dahlgren, VANAWCAD – Patuxent River, MDSPAWAR – San Diego, CANAWCWD – China Lake, CA                       