Distributed M&S Security Capability Gaps Scott HolbenGestalt LLC9432 Baymeadows Road, Suite 155Jacksonville, FL 32256904-899-0290 x1702 HYPERLINK "mailto:sholben@gestalt-llc.com" sholben@gestalt-llc.comKeywords: SOA, GIG, NCES, AF-ICE, Firewall, Sensitive Information Protection, Export Control, SIP, UDPABSTRACT: DoD (Department of Defense) acquisition requirements, laws, treaties and enterprise security policies will drive the security services open standards-based distributed M&S infrastructure must render in a sophisticated persistent networked environment shared by DoD, Industry, Academia and Coalition Nations. In past years, it was unrealistic to expect explicit distributed M&S security services to be provided because application security policies were not well understood by IT departments and the technologies for implementing them were immature.  That time has passed and policies are firm and technologies are mature. Thus the SISO community can no longer ignore providing explicit security services as an integrated part of distributed M&S standards. Security services will be expensive to develop and incorporate into distributed M&S standards because they impact about every major piece of infrastructure current DIS, HLA and TENA implementations provide. Hence, a leveraging strategy is needed to add security services to these standards. However, before security standards can be developed the security capability gaps must be clearly defined.  This paper identifies those security capability gaps along with a candidate strategy to minimize the cost for incorporating security services into SISO efforts.Effort sponsored in whole or in part by the Air Force Research Laboratory, USAF, under Memorandum of Understanding/Partnership Intermediary Agreement No. FA8652-03-3-0005 with The Wright Brothers Institute, Inc.  The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation thereon. The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of the Air Force Research Laboratory.1. IntroductionNet-centric technologies must achieve the reach, richness, agility and assurance features identified by the NCOW RM (Net-Centric Operations Warfare Reference Model). DIS, HLA and TENA are not currently net-centric distributed M&S standards because they do not provide reach for real-time UDP packets when domain firewalls exist, nor do these standards explicitly support IA (Information Assurance) services such as integrity, availability, authentication, authorization, accounting and confidentiality. A previous SISO paper, 05F-SIW-075, identified the mechanisms for using the SIP Web standard to get UDP packet streams to traverse enterprise firewalls in real-time to provide a reach back service across enterprise boundaries.[1][2] This paper focuses on distributed M&S IA capability gaps and identifies security requirements required by the DoD acquisition community, with the AF-ICE (Air Force – Integrated Collaborative Environment) program being used as the litmus test for identifying the security requirements.Section 2 describes the AF-ICE program’s expectations with respect to net-centricity. Section 3 identifies an obscure but important U.S. security policy impacting NSSs (National Security System), the GIG (Global Information Grid), NCES (Network Centric Enterprise Services) and classified distributed M&S simulations. Section 4 discusses the 8500 series of IA acquisition documents with which all new GIG systems must comply as the IA continues to move from the network’s perimeter to the edge. Section 5 describes net-centric confidentiality service levels defined by U.S. government security policies. Section 6 addresses IP (Intellectual Property) issues AF-ICE must address to encourage industry participation in distributed M&S study efforts led by a DoD test director. Section 7 is an introduction to the ISO 15408 Common Criteria Standard used by DoD to characterize the security robustness of COTS (Commercial Off The Shelf) products. Section 8 identifies four different classes of guards connecting networks operating at different levels of sensitivity. Section 9 identifies three IA end-state capabilities AF-ICE must support. 2. AF-ICEThe AF-ICE will be a national distributed asset comprised of DoD, contractor, academic and coalition facilities and personnel performing net-centric acquisition operations for evaluating joint, multi-agency, coalition candidate capabilities with calibrated distributed M&S predictive analysis tools.  This asset will facilitate acquisition decisions ultimately leading to the award of weapon systems contracts. AF-ICE is being developed to shorten the evaluation process for new and emerging technologies to be integrated into new or existing weapon systems. This will enable capability managers to force information to flow between weapon system programs, facilitating the manager’s ability to make better acquisition decisions. AF-ICE will ensure system of system compliance and interoperability by providing common infrastructure between its systems and future fielded weapon systems. The persistent AF-ICE physical network will be used to connect all future acquisition program phases (types: concept refinement, technology development and integration, system development and integration, production and deployment, operations and support). To be a net-centric acquisition command and control system, AF-ICE requires a persistent network to enable analysis and trade studies requiring distributed M&S services. The development of new defense capability requirements will be collaborative efforts between government, industry and academia. However, the solutions to those requirements frequently will be proprietary. Hence, Industry has a notable concern about connecting its sensitive distributed M&S resources to a network that is likely to lead to unauthorized disclosures of intellectual property. Additionally, the U.S. Government does not have the time or budget to establish and accredit an array of temporary network connections to protect IP on a case-by-case basis.3. Net-centricity and NSTISSP Number 11Net-centric concepts are driving DoD's vision of the GIG. Simply stated, the GIG "is to empower users through easy access to information anytime and anyplace, under any conditions, with attendant security."[3] "The GIG includes all Information Technology (IT) and National Security Systems (NSS) throughout the DoD, and their interfaces to allied and coalition forces, industry, and other Federal agencies."[3] The definition of a NSS is contained in section 5142 of the Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996 (40 U.S.C. 1452).  NIST Special Publication 800-59 is the official guideline for identifying information systems as NSSs.[4] In addition to the Clinger-Cohen Act criteria, NIST defines any system storing, processing, or communicating classified national security information as a national security system. This requires all classified distributed M&S simulations to be subject to the same regulations as NSSs. NSTISSP (National Security Telecommunications and Information Systems Security Policy) Number 11 applies to all NSSs.[5] This policy requires NSSs to use “IA” and “IA-enabled IT” products. An IA product’s primary purpose is to provide security services. An IA-enabled IT product’s primary role is not security, but to supply security services as an associated feature of its intended purpose. Both of these product types ensure the integrity and confidentiality of information, ensure the authentication and non-repudiation of the communications between parties and may improve the availability of the systems.[5] NSTISSP Number 11 requires the use of one of the three types of accredited IA or IA-enabled IT products: 1) COTS ISO 15408 Common Criteria mutually recognized by treaties, 2) COTS or GOTS (Government Off The Shelf) NIAP (National Information Assurance Partnership) and 3) COTS NIST FIPS (Federal Information Processing Standard). These IA and IA-enabled IT products are given DoD preferential treatment for incorporation into DoD IT systems.[5] NSTISSP Number 11 took effect in 2001. It has been rigidly enforced since July 1st, 2002, for new systems being deployed on the GIG.Net-centricity has the following four views: data (data modeling and repository technologies), services (network protocols), IA (security services) and transport (UDP, TCP, IPv6 and the physical networking pipes).  These views are important enough for DoD to create corresponding strategies: Net-Centric Data Strategy, NCES Strategy, IA Strategy and the IPv6 Adoption Strategy. The purpose of the NCES is to connect seamlessly consumers of data and services to producers of data and services using a "publish-find-bind" paradigm integrated with appropriate security measures. NCES has four core products: 1) SOA (Services Oriented Architecture) Foundation, 2) Enterprise Collaboration, 3) Content Discovery and Delivery, 4) Defense Online Portal. These products utilize core enterprise services. The NCES supplies nine core enterprise services: 1) Application, 2) Discovery, 3) User Assistance 4) Collaboration, 5) Enterprise Services Management - NetOps, 6) Information Assurance - Security, 7) Mediation, 8) Messaging and 9) Storage. NCES depends on the underlying communication network transport technology (GIG-BE, DISN, JTRS) to deliver its core enterprise services.  These nine NCES services should have some degree of usefulness for the establishment of new net-centric distributed M&S standards.The NCES requires all of its core services to have a security layer. Until DIS, HLA and TENA have an accredited DoD IA security service layer, simulations using the DIS, HLA and TENA standards will not be sufficiently agile to render distributed M&S services capable of connecting the GIG environment with minimal IA accreditation delays. Unless explicit security services are supported, DT&E (Development Test & Evaluation) and OT&E (Operational Test & Evaluation) efforts to validate new and emerging technologies’ interoperability and compliance with existing weapon systems will remain slow and expensive. This is because operational net-centric system capabilities are likely to be replicated within separate networks, apart from the GIG.  In the following section, a “protection level IA strategy” tuned for classified distributed M&S is discussed to a level of detail consistent with DoD IA policy and the NCOW Reference Model key characteristics used to metric net-centricity. As part of an overall strategy, future distributed M&S frameworks should try to leverage NCES SOA capabilities wherever possible. It is also important that the acquisition, training, DT&E and OT&E communities work together to integrate a shared open standards-based IA-enabled SOA substrate into existing DIS, HLA and TENA implementations.4. 8500 IA Acquisition DocumentsConnectivity to the GIG will require simulation systems to comply with DODD (Department of Defense Directive) 8500 acquisition series documents for IA. The 8500 series lists five legal concepts associated with security: authentication, confidentiality, nonrepudiation, integrity and availability. Authentication is verification of the originator of a transaction request. Confidentiality is the protection of information from unauthorized disclosure when data is either persisted or transacted. Nonrepudiation is establishment of undeniable proof of participation in a transaction. Integrity is the protection of data from unauthorized modification or destruction when it is either persisted or transacted. Availability is the establishment of assured access to transactional resources. This abbreviated set of definitions is not the official set of DoD definitions from the CNSS (Committee of National Security Systems Instructions) Number 4009, but is instead a tailored set of definitions with essentially the same meaning as the CNSS definitions, intended to assist in the development of IA or IA-enabled IT products.[6]Notice, these five definitions all include some form of the word transact. This usage is intentional because a properly implemented transaction capability will record an authenticated party ID (Identity) that requests access to a resource. Also, it is worth noting that DoD non-repudiation services are really trusted accounting services documenting access to named objects held by specific subjects with firmly established identities.DoD defines a number of important acquisition terms governing the minimum set of IA requirements IT systems must meet when the DoD acquisition process is used to procure new IT systems. The funding to develop new technologies/systems is driven by operational capability gaps identified through the JCIDS (Joint Capabilities Integrated Development System) requirements definition portion of the acquisition process. An astute distributed M&S community will pay considerable attention to the subsequent terms that are bolded. DODD 8500.1 uses system integrity and availability requirements to define three different "Mission Assurance Categories" (not be confused with mandatory access controls described later in this paper).  From DODD 8500.1, "the consequences of loss of integrity or availability of a MAC I system are unacceptable and could include the immediate and sustained loss of mission effectiveness.” For MAC II systems, "the consequences of loss of integrity are unacceptable. Loss of availability is difficult to deal with and can only be tolerated for a short time.”  For MAC III systems, "the consequences of loss of integrity or availability can be tolerated or overcome without significant impacts on mission effectiveness or operational readiness.” The DoD distributed M&S acquisition and training community requirements are likely to be for MAC III systems.  AF-ICE is a MAC III system.  Independent of integrity and availability requirements, DODI (Department of Defense Instructions) 8580.1 requires information systems to be identified as "Mission Critical" or "Mission Essential" to satisfy Clinger-Cohen Act requirements. Mission Critical Information Systems must be "national security systems" in which loss of the system would cause stoppage of warfighter operations or direct mission support of warfighter operations. Mission Essential Information Systems are “basic and necessary for the accomplishment of the organizational mission.”[8] Although AF-ICE is a NSS, it should really be treated as a mission essential information system because an occasional loss of the AF-ICE system will not immediately impact front-line warfighters.DODI 8580.1 requires the "Confidentiality Level" of the data processes on a system being acquired to be identified. The three Confidentiality Levels are classified, sensitive and public. Examples of classified are top secret, secret and confidential. DODD 8500.1 list eight different categories of sensitive information, which are not listed in this paper for purposes of brevity. The DoD distributed M&S acquisition and training communities have a strong need for classified systems; therefore, the confidentiality level requirement for AF-ICE is classified."Robustness is a characterization of the strength of a security function, mechanism, service or solution, and the assurance (or confidence) that it is implemented and functioning correctly. The Department of Defense has three levels of robustness.”[9] High robustness systems employ “security services and mechanisms that provide the most stringent protection and rigorous security countermeasures.”[9] Medium robustness systems employ “security services and mechanisms that provide for layering of additional safeguards above good commercial practices.”[9] Basic robustness systems employ “security services and mechanisms that equate to good commercial practices.”[9] Robustness is defined as a requirement in section 4.7 of DODD 8500.1, but robustness is not discretely realizable because of its vagueness in the absence of input from the NSA (National Security Administration).  The NSA maps basic robustness to an ISO/IEC 15408 EAL (Evaluation Assurance Level) rating of 1 or greater, medium robustness to an EAL rating of 3 or greater and high robustness to an EAL rating of 5 or greater.[7] EAL ratings of 4 and below may utilize COTS IA or IA-enabled IT products accredited by Common Criteria Testing Laboratories previously accredited by the NSA/NIST NIAP Evaluation and Validation Program. EAL ratings 5 or greater require NSA certified products. The hope is that the vast majority of distributed M&S simulations on classified systems can be created from components with either basic or medium robustness to minimize IA accreditation delays. AF-ICE is likely to require basic and medium robustness IA controls.From DODD 8500, all DoD information assurance systems must be organized and managed in one or more of the following four categories: 1) AIS Application, 2) Enclaves, 3) Outsourced IT-based Processes and 4) Platform IT Interconnections. AIS Applications are the software applications or possibly services performing clearly defined functions deployed on enclaves. An Enclave is a collection of computing environments connected by one or more internal networks under the control of a single authority and security policy, including personnel and physical security. "Enclaves always assume the highest Mission Assurance Category and security classification of the AIS applications or outsourced IT-based processes they support, and derive their security needs from those systems." An Outsourced IT-based Process refers to “outsourced business processes supported by private sector information systems, outsourced information technologies, or outsourced information services.” A Platform IT Interconnection "refers to computer resources, both hardware and software, that are physically part of, dedicated to, or essential in real time to the mission performance of special purpose systems, such as weapons, training simulators, diagnostic test and maintenance equipment, calibration equipment, equipment used in the research and development of weapon systems, medical technologies, transport vehicles, buildings, and utility distribution systems such as water and electric.”  AIS applications, outsourced IT-based processes and platform IT interconnections all have clearly identifiable security considerations and requirements which must be addressed as part of an acquisition effort.  AF-ICE requires the delivery of collaboration, workflow, simulation event planning management and security services. Hence, AF-ICE has AIS applications.  AF-ICE will have multiple facilities from different enterprises that are interconnected. Hence, AF-ICE is composed of enclaves. Private enterprises will be offering services to access competition sensitive resources and a trusted third party is likely to manage connectivity between enterprises. Hence, AF-ICE is an outsourced IT process. Since AF-ICE will employ training simulators and equipment for the research and development of weapon systems,  it will have platform IT interconnections.  AF-ICE is pushing the envelope for DoD policy-driven distributed M&S security requirements. AF-ICE security needs are sufficient to warrant the development of an Acquisition IA Strategy. To comply with DODD 8500.1 policy, all AIS, outsourced IT-based processes, and platform or weapon systems with connections to the GIG must be certified and accredited in accordance to DODI 5200.40 DIACAP (Defense Information Assurance Certification and Accreditation Process), currently called the DITSCAP (DoD Information Technology Security and Accreditation Process).[10]It will be possible to have legacy DIS, HLA and TENA simulations to operate on the GIG but the time and money required to certify and accredit even a single exercises will be very unsatisfactory, on the order of years for a rich set of interactions using traditional perimeter-centric integration approaches. Additionally, these traditional approaches will lead to one-off solutions not capable of providing the agility required in a persistent networked environment. A better approach, consistent with the NCES, is to provide a set of net-centric security services and to use the accepted Defense-in-Depth Robustness Strategy for IA. With this approach, enclave perimeter border devices are still used but not as extensively. Security accreditation bottlenecks are prevented because many IA responsibilities can more appropriately be addressed within the enclave with core infrastructural protocol services and the applications themselves. With the application of the Defense-in-Depth Strategy, it is possible for many IA security responsibilities to be delegated to edge servers and user agents away from perimeter devices to maximize flexibility and minimize IA accreditation delays. Private enterprises frequently use this approach to allow external parties to access sensitive information, e.g., IP (Intellectual Property), with service-based security Web technologies. U.S. Government regulations define Protection Levels as a means of characterizing the level of confidentiality a network enclave can provide. The root of a major distributed M&S security problem is that the DIS, HLA and TENA standards were designed to operate in what is a PL-1 (Protection Level One) environment. A PL-1 environment does not explicitly support enterprise firewall protection of IP. Furthermore, traditional enterprise firewalls can not adequately secure the enterprise’s network from UDP streams traversing the enterprise’s protected boundaries. Protection levels are explicitly documented by the NISPOM (National Industrial Security Protection Operation Manual) as mandated by Presidential EO (Executive Order) 12829 and the DCID 6/3 (Director Central Intelligence Directive 6/3).[11][12][13][14] All executive agencies and contractors are required to meet the policies established by the NISPOM when holding, processing and creating classified information. Higher protection level network systems subsume the confidentiality services provided by lower protection level network systems. The lower the protection level, the less confidentiality the AIS (Automated Information System) enclave can provide. U.S. clearance levels range from confidential, secret to top secret.  Networks with PL-3 ratings and below operate at a single security classification level by operating at only one of these three clearance levels. Network systems with PL-4 ratings and above have true MLS (Multi-Level Security) capabilities. PL-4 and PL-5 systems allow top secret and secret information to reside on the same network without the "air gap" requiring a “sneaker net.” It is important to realize that the PL rating of a network is not merely a function of the AIS equipment. A system's PL rating is an accreditation of specific AIS equipment, the facilities in which the equipment operates, and the security processes followed by the people who use the system.Networks offering greater protection levels and affording greater confidentiality services are inherently net-centric because they fulfill the four NCO Reference Model value proposition characteristics, i.e. reach, richness, agility and assurance. Networks with higher protection level capabilities provide greater reach because more network enabled objects are accessible to users within the classified environment. Richness is increased because the total set of capabilities that can be brought to bear within a unit of time increases since the size of the network leads to a greater diversity of service resources. Networks with higher protection levels are agile because they are much more likely to be physically persistent and do not require nearly as much reconfiguration and accreditation for new exercise efforts. Newer networks with higher protection level ratings are designed to have greater inherent information assurance. These networks inherently provide more robust layers of IA confidentiality services. In summary, higher protection level networks are more net-centric because they satisfy the four key NCO RM features of net-centricity.  To date, the distributed M&S community has chosen not to address explicitly the operational security requirements imposed by the NISPOM and DCID 6/3 resources. Additionally, DoD funding efforts have tended to rely on centralized monolithic SABI (Secret and Below Interoperability) or TSABI (Top Secret and Below Interoperability) perimeter devices to provide security services, e.g., Radiant Mercury and Distributed Training Network Guard. Is it more appropriate for the classified distributed M&S community to use the newer net-centric service-focused controlled interfaces such as CASPER (Content Aware Stream Processing Engine in Real-time) that supports numerous Web protocols? This approach will require explicit security services to be added to distributed M&S standards, services that are likely to be SOA-based to allow greater reuse of technologies developed for the NCES environment. In summary, future DoD sponsored net-centric M&S standards will be SOA-based to encourage easier interfacing to the GIG.  To foster interoperability with existing DIS, HLA and TENA based simulations, new SOA implementations must act as bridges, gateways or wedges into the previous standards to enable support of newer IA requirements for collaboration, simulation event planning management and workflow services. Multi-channel SOAs are designed to be protocol gateways used to increase reach and will cleanly interface to DIS as either a bridge or gateway. Since HLA is not a wire-level protocol, a SOA wedge approach must be used to provide core services to a HLA interface implementation. Ideally, a SOA wedge will not use proprietary protocols. This will maximize wire-level interoperability between different implementations. 5. Protection Levels I, II, III and Discovery The NSA’s defined Defense-in-Depth Robustness Strategy provides many layers of defense. It directly addresses the five different classes of attacks (passive, active, close-in, insider and distribution) with a “protect, detect and react” paradigm. With this strategy considerable IA protection is designed into the network from day one using technology to provide availability, integrity, authentication, confidentiality and nonrepudiation services to cost effectively counter adversarial attempts to deny, modify or destroy information or services. It is impossible for technology alone to provide complete IA capabilities.  People and operations must complement the technology across the lifecycle of the classified AIS. The roles, responsibilities and operational processes documented in the SSP (System Security Plan) are designed to meet NISPOM requirements. The SSP defines security processes fulfilling NISPOM requirements; the adherence to the SSP’s processes are certified and then accredited by a government DAA (Designated Approving Authority). The minimum set of IA controls required by a classified distributed M&S simulation connecting to the GIG is identified by DODI 8500.2.[15] The mission assurance category and confidentiality levels determine the particular IA controls that must be instituted. The robustness rating is explicit for each DODI 8500.2 defined IA control. DODD 8510 defines the process for accrediting classified information system designs.  The three protection level sections below contain simplified descriptions of the operational requirements that a network-centric distributed M&S “AIS Application” must achieve to meet the intent of the NISPOM security end-state. From these descriptions, it should become evident that there is a serious lack of IA-enabled IT product specifications within the DIS, HLA and TENA standards. This section ends with a short discussion about discovering resources in PL-2 and PL-3 environments.PL-1 rated automated information systems by definition require all system users to have the minimum required clearance, authorization and need-to-know. U.S. citizens have clearances assigned to them after having successfully passed a government sponsored background check. The authorization is completed when the recipient signs an associated non disclosure agreement. Need-to-know is “a determination made by the authorized holder of classified information that a prospective recipient requires access to specific classified information in order to perform or assist in a lawful and authorized governmental function.”[16] On a PL-1 system, users are preauthorized to share everything on the AIS with other system users. Need-to-know is preauthorized across the board for a PL-1 system’s users. Many PL-1 systems do not support the concept of user accounts. These systems often require the use of manual logs to account for when users access the systems. PL-1 systems frequently do not delineate between system administrators and regular users. If the PL-1 AIS computers support user accounts, these accounts are established once the users have read the SSP and signed a legally binding SSP agreement. It is possible to have more than one classified contract effort associated with a PL-1 rated AIS, but this requires all system users to be cross-briefed to the different contractual programs. Cross briefing users does not operationally scale. PL-1 roughly corresponds to what was previously called Dedicated Mode security. In a nutshell, PL-1 systems tend to use facility physical access controls as the primary means to prevent unauthorized information disclosure.  The DAA is responsible for approving the accreditation of an AIS any protection level. For a PL-1 system, if there is a compromise of information, the system’s accounting records can not begin to definitively identify in a court of law which user was responsible for the compromise if multiple users were using the system at the time of the compromise. For this reason, PL-1 enclaves and especially PL-1 wide area networks are frowned upon by the DAA and very rarely implemented today.One very important point to note about PL-1 systems is that since everyone has a need-to-know, it is legitimate to use packet sniffers on PL-1 networks. The use of packet sniffers in PL-2 networks is not allowed typically unless the packet sniffer is limited to system’s communications protocols encrypted in conformance to NSTISSP Number 11 encryption requirements. Additionally, no protocol cleartext passwords are used to authenticate transactions for those protocols within a PL-2 enclave. The use of packet sniffers is and will remain invaluable to distributed M&S software simulation efforts using wire–level protocols.  PL-2 rated systems require all system users to have the prerequisite minimum clearance and authorization but not everyone must have a need-to-know. Similar to PL-1 systems, PL-2 systems innately entrust system users with ensuring the segregation of collateral data associated with multiple contracts. PL-2 systems must provide automated identification, authentication, authorization and accounting services for there to be undeniable proof of non-participation when a security violation occurs. Unlike PL-1 systems, the authorization to access resources, the need-to-know, must be established by end users on a case-by-case basis. To hold users more accountable for their actions, PL-2 systems have stronger non-repudiation services than PL-1 systems. Hence, the DAA always wants AIS systems to have at least PL-2 ratings. With most PL-2 systems implemented today, packet analyzers can not be used by unauthorized personnel. This ensures cleartext passwords are not captured. Such a violation would  potentially lead to questioning the integrity of the auditing system’s content for transactions involving compromised user passwords. This is because many non-GIG PL-2 networks do not meet the protocol criteria identified in the previous paragraph. PL-2 roughly corresponds to what was previously called System High Mode in DoD security community.Partially trusted applications will be coded by regular developers and use accredited IA-enabled IT libraries created by IA developers. Trusted applications are those that have successfully completed a DIACAP certification and accreditation effort and are tightly configuration controlled. PL-2 systems should not allow direct “partially trusted” client-server or P2P (Peer-to-Peer) applications to communicate within an enclave without passing through a trusted intermediary. PL-2 systems shall not allow direct partially trusted client-server or P2P communication to cross enclave boundaries without passing through a trusted accounting intermediary that explicitly logs all transactions. Per DODD 8500.1 terminology, DIS, HLA, and TENA are not “IA-enabled Information Technology Products.”  If DIS, HLA and TENA were “IA-enabled Information Technologies,” they would provide the fundamental service capabilities associated with identification, authentication, authorization and accounting. Identification of subjects using PL-2 “IA-enabled Information Technology” requires unique account identities to be established once a system administrator has ascertained that new users have appropriate clearances and have signed non-disclosure agreements. All server-side identifiers must be protected from any modification at a level commensurate with the accreditation level of the classified AIS. The administrator must also be able to easily suspend and remove any user accounts. As part of an I&A (Identification and Authentication) process when a Web object access is requested, the server always authenticates the user agent sending the request. If a symmetric key I&A mechanism is used, the authentication must be cryptographic in nature and involve a challenge/response exchange. The challenge has a cryptographically generated random number, a nonce. This challenge is embedded in the server’s response to the client’s request. A cnonce (client nonce) may be used by the client’s request to force the server to authenticate itself to the client in the initial request.  A zero knowledge proof mechanism uses a nonce or cnonce to authenticate the remote party without the shared password ever traversing the network. Successful completion of the zero knowledge proof challenge completes the I&A process. For a robustness rating of “basic,” unidirectional authentication using only nonces should be adequate but bi-direction authentication with nonces and cnonces is preferred to minimize man-in-the-middle attacks. RFC 2617 documents a challenge and response zero knowledge proof I&A mechanism used by both HTTP and SIP supporting nonces and cnonces.[1] I&A processes may also utilize NIAP certified public key infrastructures.Authentication in a PL-2 “IA-enabled Information Technology” environment requires users to be able to change their password without compromise. The system automation must ensure that passwords have sufficient policy-driven password complexity and limit the lifespan for the password use. Application passwords may utilize the OS login password, the user agent caching of the explicit user login password or the storage of the password in configuration settings associated with the application. In all cases, the password authenticators at either the client or server-side must be protected at a level commensurate with the accreditation level of the classified AIS. The authentication mechanism does not have to be limited to single factor authentication. Multifactor authentication mechanisms may supplement a single password during the authentication process. Once identification and authentication have occurred, authorization may begin.  If the PL-2 system requires group authentication, either a DAA approval is required or a PKI (Public Key Infrastructure) must be used to uniquely identify specific group users for accounting purposes.Authorization in a PL-2 “IA-enabled Information Technology” environment requires the need-to-know to be determined by the holder of the access controlled object that is to be potentially shared. This implies that end users require the capability to set access privileges associated with named objects (files, sockets associated with URIs) they create, hold or own on the AIS. A privilege is a registered approval of a particular operation to be performed on one or more objects. This is referred to as a DAC (Discretionary Access Control) within the DoD security community. DAC mechanisms allow users holding objects within an AIS to establish privileges. If systems have DAC capabilities, they support at least two classes of users, administrators and regular end users. Subjects are things (users, processes, servers, clients, I/O devices) one authenticates or to which one is authenticated. In general, an access control mechanism restricts which subjects can perform what operations (read, write, append, execute) on which named objects.  Permission is granted for access based upon an operation involving the subject’s identity, a request type and the privileges assigned to the named object. IBAC (Identity Based Access Controls) mechanisms are implemented almost universally by operating systems.[7]  Many Web services can implement DAC capabilities with a basic robustness for use in PL-2 rated enclaves.[7]Accounting in a PL-2 “IA-enabled Information Technology” environment requires an accurate and trusted time source to time stamp transaction hits at servers, routing proxies or other policy enforcement points such as firewalls. The audit identifies the time of the request, the origination IPv4/IPv6 address of the request, the method of the request, the authoritative identity of the requestor, the user agent type sending the request, the referrer of the request (if known) and the success or failure of the request. Additionally, session-oriented transaction logs must be able to record the time a session ends. A user portal log view allows the user to examine both personal incoming and outgoing logs for his account(s). All AIS infrastructural server-side accounting logs must be protected at a level commensurate with the accreditation level of the classified AIS, serving the integrity of the logs should there be a compromise. By policy, if a specific URI transaction request fails a consecutive number of times in a specified period of time a lockout rule is automatically enforced for the IPv4/IPv6 address sending the request. As an authentication countermeasure, the account holder can view his lockouts and unsuccessful requests in a personal account log. PL-3 rated systems by definition require all users to have a minimum clearance, but not everyone has authorization and the associated need-to-know. PL-3 systems do not trust system users because not all of them are authorized to access objects it contains.  (Do not confuse authorization to use an AIS with authorization to access compartmented data on the AIS.) PL-3 systems are used to segregate SAP (Special Access Program) data from each other and from other collateral programs potentially sharing the same NSA Type I encrypted network overlay. PL-3 systems support MSL (Multiple Security Levels) but not MLS. PL-3 systems must not allow partially trusted client-server or P2P applications to communicate directly with each other within or between enclaves without first passing through a trusted enclave intermediary which explicitly gates requests and logs auditable transactions.Unlike PL-1 and PL-2 systems, traditional PL-3 system policies do not support the writing of developmental code, a common practice in distributed M&S simulation efforts. One potential for allowing PL-3 systems to facilitate ongoing agile code development is to categorize at least two different categories of developers, trusted (IA developers) and partially trusted (regular developers). The IA developers develop code for systems that completes the DIACAP certification and accreditation process. Regular developers use the trusted API components but their code is not held to as high a security accreditation standard. PL-3 roughly corresponds to what was previously called Compartmented Mode in DoD security community. Identification and authentication of a PL-3 “IA-enabled Information Technology AIS application” is likely to require a DoD robustness rating of Meduim to High.  Medium robustness I&A requires products using challenge-response identification are required to pass NIST cryptographic authentication access control standards for identification and authentication. High robustness I&A requires NSA Type I mechanisms.[7]  Because authenticated entities are not necessarily authorized to have access to objects on PL-3 systems, the AIS must have the means to automatically enforce the operational separation of subjects from objects the subjects are not authorized to access. This requires authorized users from one compartment to be completely blinded to the existence of object names associated with another compartment they are not authorized to access. To achieve PL-3 certification, labeling of the classification level, classification category and handling caveats are mandatory. The security labels for PL-3 systems require the following: lifecycle integrity including when the system is exported and imported for recovery purposes, a strong binding between the label and the transmitted data, and the enforcement of control features. These lifecycle management requirements tend to force the use of trusted databases to support the labeling needs of PL-3 systems. Authorization in a PL-3 “IA-enabled Information Technology” environment is more complicated than in PL-2 systems.  First, it involves device constraints. No information can be accessed whose compartment is inconsistent with the OS device login session. Consider the following example for why this restriction is required. If a session-based user agent uses a different compartment session login identity from the OS login identity, it is possible for the UA to access and then save information to the local computer’s file system that is not authorized to hold data from the second login session. Hence, compartment consistency is required for multi-session logins from a device. The same holds true for authenticated transactions occurring within a device OS session. Second, labels are required for enterprises to centrally enforce object privileges separate and apart from the holder of an object. MAC (Mandatory Access Controls) policies are administratively set and maintained by the enterprise’s security administrator not the system’s administrator of end users. If systems have MAC capabilities, they can support more than the two classes of users, unlike systems with only discretionary controls. (Do not confuse DAC groups with classes of users, i.e., user, developer, trusted developer and administrator.) As a matter of policy for PL-3 systems, the people performing the roles of security administrator and system administrator must be different. MAC mechanisms must be used to enforce the separation of subjects from objects they are not authorized to access. MAC mechanisms use the administratively assigned labels of the requesting subject and the labels and privileges of the objects to be accessed to determine the MAC permissions of the request. Outside the DoD security community, MAC permissions are frequently called RBAC (Rule/Role Based Access Controls).[7] RBAC mechanisms are often used to translate a user’s membership role to application permissions. Since the permissions are granted at the role-level, permission rules can be queried and changed at the role-level without examining the specific resources. Until recently, commercial and open source operating systems and Web services did not typically support MAC capabilities. Third, no read-up, execute-up, write-down or append-down rules must be enforced. Preventing read-ups prevents accessing subjects from being able to read information that is classified at a higher level (e.g., compartment or classification) than that to which they are authorized. The same reasoning applies to execute-ups. Preventing write-downs ensures no data is written or appended to an object unless the accessing subject’s security classification level is equal to or lower than the object’s being accessed. The same reasoning applies to append-downs. After all of these access constraints are satisfied, system DAC operations are applied before finally granting operational object access to the subject.To ensure confidentiality of compartmented information in PL-3 systems between compartments, additional measures are taken to establish trusted communication pathways.  Much of the trust can be established by using encryption between the networked subjects authorized to communicate with one another. This encrypted pathway does not have to be NSA Type I encrypted if the PL-3 system already resides within a NSA Type I encrypted overlay, but commercial grade encryption must be compliant with NSTISSP number 11 encryption requirements. Scalable confidentiality services will require a public key infrastructure to support TLS or S/MIME confidentiality mechanisms.  Trusted PL-3 systems and applications often require independent verification and validation as a procedural requirement for accreditation in addition to the previous labeling, MAC and confidentiality mechanisms requirements. Vendors must provide a quality product that both supports security features and assists in the correction of discovered flaws. Often, the independent verification and validation includes white hat penetration testing efforts to identify security flaws.The discovery processes for resources in PL-2 and PL-3 systems are interesting because higher protection level confidentiality services are designed to impede discovery. The requirement of a PL-2 system to provide a mechanism to support need-to-know leaves open to the data holder the right to blind other subjects, often people, to the existence of resources that can be discovered by separate subjects. This is problematic to the system’s overall effectiveness if government program managers effectively forbid contractors from sharing data associated with different contracts on a PL-2 network by not explicitly defining a COI (Community Of Interest) allowing contractors on the PL-2 network to share information. Thus, if DoD desires to have a useful repository within a PL-2 environment, contractual blinding constraints should be discouraged on the government contracting side to allow contractors to publish within specified COIs URI resources, e.g., the WSDL (Web Services Description Language) registration process. Finally, government program managers should encourage the utilization of data from other COIs within their programs.   The discovery process for PL-3 resources is definitely different than free world search engines on the Internet. Subjects must be precluded from discovering resources for which they do not have the proper authorization to know about to ensure compartmented resources remain confidential. This will cause one person with multiple accounts associated with different compartments to get different search results from identical UDDI (Universal Description, Discovery and Integration) queries performed while logged into the different accounts. Additionally, if a compartmented URI address were accidentally leaked, the routing requests would be blocked by one or more PEP (Policy Enforcement Point) devices if proper authorization did not exist. PEP devices are proxy servers, ALG (Application Layer Gateway) firewalls, SBCs and guards.6. Intellectual Property and DiscoveryTo protect IP in classified B2B (Business-to-Business) or B2C (Business-to-Consumer) exchanges requires a hybrid of the capabilities identified in PL-2 and PL-3 systems plus the insertion of enterprise grade firewalls at enterprise premise boundaries. Each enterprise’s firewall policies must be separately administered to ensure compliance with their information sharing policies. The PL-2 DAC/IBAC capabilities with accounting logs are a minimum but are not a sufficient entry point for Web enterprise B2B or B2C transactions to occur. PL-3 MAC/RBAC mechanisms can be used to enforce enterprise policies to control access to properly labeled named resources that are enterprise sensitive. PL-3 MAC/IBAC capabilities will ultimately simplify internal authorization compliance processes; however, instituting PL-3 RBAC capabilities is not a hard requirement to protect intellectual property. Additionally, the PL-3 enforcement of labeling control features is more rigid than what is currently performed in most private enterprises. Enterprises tend to use IBAC object naming conventions set by the holder of the object to indicate the sensitivity of the object, i.e., file naming conventions. Solaris already supports full RBAC capabilities.  Secure Edition Linux has the NSA Flask RBAC architecture implemented in the Linux 2.4 kernel and in the Linux 2.6 kernel. Windows server 2003 has limited RBAC capabilities. The confidentiality afforded by NISPOM defined PL-3 systems, or GIG PL-2 systems, will ultimately become a requirement for enterprises transacting intellectual property and unclassified export controlled data with foreign nationals, e.g., ITAR (International Traffic in Arms Regulation) administered by the Department of State or the EAR (Export Administration Regulations) administered by the Department of Commerce.[17] For jurisprudence purposes of protecting the confidentiality of unclassified export controlled data, enterprises will use FIPS 140-2 certified products in compliance with the policy of NSTISSP Number 11 for protecting data regulated by the Departments of State, Energy and Commerce. (Incidentally, FIPS 140-2 accreditation helps to establish compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act for financial services and the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act.)Enterprises must have the capability to control firewalls at their own facilities. A key point is that these private enterprise firewalls must be capable of enforcing access to individual streams of UDP packets. SIP URIs having read and append privileges allow fine grain access controls to be implemented for those associated UDP streams that can be encrypted with FIPS 140-2 AES confidentiality services. Access to named SIP URIs with associated real-time UDP packet streams is controlled by security capabilities engineered into the enterprise’s trusted IA networking fabric. Enterprise contractual commitments trigger tasks that open external access privileges to sensitive enterprise network-enabled objects. Additionally, these contracts and the private enterprise’s internal authorization processes must ensure the information exchanges are not violating statutory or regulatory laws. Instituting the discovery of enterprise IP resources across enterprise boundaries will be complex. Having the ability to securely control or compartmentalize IP on an exchange will be important to participating contracting enterprises. This is the only means to provide an enterprise the assurance it can adequately protect its competitive edge IP critical to winning future contract awards. Within AF-ICE, at least one trusted neutral third party will be required to maximize the ability to discover resources for use in a simulation involving IP from any number of enterprises. 7. ISO 15408 Common CriteriaWhen connected to an operational WAN environment, “enclaves always assume the highest mission assurance category and security classification of the AIS applications or outsourced IT-based processes they support, and derive their security needs from those systems.”[9] For a given enclave, the facility or facilities comprising it and the SSP are certified and accredited to operate at a particular protection level. Unfortunately, protection level ratings by themselves provide no insight into what is required to design systems with a reasonable chance of achieving a given protection level rating when the system is tightly integrated into a larger enclave environment. In the past, this required a thorough understanding of the older NSA TCSEC (Trusted Computer Standards Evaluation Criteria) ratings, also called the Orange Book ratings, when designing systems entering into a DITSCAP certification process.[18]  Some nations did not trust TCSEC and therefore reliance on other standards, e.g., the ITSEC (Information Technology Security Evaluation Criteria) and CTCPEC (Canadian Trusted Computer Product Evaluation Criteria) standards used in Europe and Canada respectively. This led to the development of the CC (Common Criteria).[19] Version 2.0 of the CC was ratified as ISO standard 15408 in 1999. Compliance with treaties forces certain nations to respect CC accreditations performed by treaty member nations. Hence, a product produced by one nation with a recognized EAL (Evaluation Assurance Level) robustness accreditation rating is respected by the other nations party to the same treaty. The list of US accredited CC testing laboratories may be found at  HYPERLINK "http://niap.nist.gov/cc-scheme/testing_labs.html" http://niap.nist.gov/cc-scheme/testing_labs.html. For integration into national security systems, per reference [5], DoD respects the validated products listing with EAL4 ratings and below that appear at  HYPERLINK "http://niap.nist.gov/cc-scheme/vpl/vpl_type.html" http://niap.nist.gov/cc-scheme/vpl/vpl_type.html.The EAL rated product range is from EAL1 to EAL7.  EAL1 rated products provide the least security and EAL7 products the most. However, mutual acceptance of these ratings between nations peaks at EAL4. EAL4 is also the highest level at which it is likely to be economically feasible to retrofit existing products. Considerable security can be added to the classified MAC III DoD distributed M&S communities if distributed M&S standards explicitly define the security services EAL4 and below IA-enabled products must offer.DoD has adopted the Defense-in-Depth Strategy for developing secure architectures, outlined in Chapter 2 of the Information Assurance Technical Framework.[7] Operational details related to Defense-in-Depth can be found at CJCSM (Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff Manual) 6510.10 IA CND (Computer Network Defense).[20] DoDI 8500.2 identifies the required IA controls once a system’s classification level and mission assurance category are defined.[15] Each of the DODI 8500.2 IA controls has an associated robustness rating that maps to a required EAL rating. The DoD DIACAP accreditation process timeline for a system can be minimized by properly utilizing products with sufficient EAL ratings when integrating them into a security conscious Defense-in-Depth architecture.All EAL rated products must be certified independently by nationally accredited labs. The portion of the IA-enabled security product that is under CC evaluation is called the TOE (Target of Evaluation). “The ST (Security Target) contains the IT security objectives and requirements of a specific identified TOE and defines the functional and assurance measures offered by the TOE to meet stated requirements.”[19] The ST may claim conformance to one or more PPs (Protection Profiles) providing the basis for an evaluation.  Protection profiles for products allow backward compatibility with Orange Book B1 and C2 ratings. DoD recognizes the following protection profiles found at  HYPERLINK "http://niap.nist.gov/cc-scheme/pp/index.html" http://niap.nist.gov/cc-scheme/pp/index.html for products to achieve EAL4 ratings and below.Having IA-enabled IT products accredited against PP requirements is not adequate for integrating those products into a larger IA system.  Components must be configured properly to mitigate security risks. For DoD, there are component configuration best security practices called STIGs (Secure Technical Implementation Guide) and checklists to ensure that components are properly configured.[21] STIGs exist for desktops and server operating systems, applications and services.8. Security GuardsAF-ICE will require the utilization of four different types of network controlled interfaces: 1) Anonymizer, 2) Binary Connection Guard, 3) Data Diode Guard and 4) Sanitizer Guard. These are listed in order of increasing implementation complexity. The first one is sufficient for commercial use to protect the confidentiality of IP; the last three are adequate for protecting the confidentiality of classified information. Achieving SABI (DoD) and TSABI (NSA) high robustness accreditation ratings is a very important credential for classifying the capabilities of the later three types of guards.The anonymizer allows a subject to access an object or another subject, with at least one subject blinded to the true identity of the other. Openly acknowledged accounting records are effectively de-correlated to the true identities of who is receiving masqueraded information. In addition to performing unidirectional anonymization, the anonymizer can anonymize all the identities of those within the same conference by acting as an anonymizing conferencing server.  A SBC (Session Border Controller) can be used to build an anonymizer.The binary guard is an extremely robust firewall that does not allow transaction traffic to flow unless clearance, authorization and need-to-know are all confirmed.  With the notable exception of identifying and blocking the spread of viruses & worms, PL-3 guards do not inspect the traffic for the sessions it establishes. Binary guards require more accreditation than anonymizers and are used to enforce mandatory access controls implemented for PL-3, PL-4 and PL-5 systems. A PL-3 binary guard is a MSL IA system. PL-4 and PL-5 binary guards are true MLS IA systems.The data diode guard is somewhat analogous to a NAPT (Network Address and Port Translation) firewall that allows requests from the inside heading out but not in the other direction. Additionally, data diode requests absolutely do not allow data to be pushed outside the controlled network. The data flow is asymmetric in the sense that the request always originates from the high-side and the bulk of the data flows from the network’s low-side into the high-side. The requests from the high-side are thoroughly sanitized to ensure no sensitive high-side data flows to the low-side. Data diodes require even more accreditation than binary guards. Data diodes typically run slightly slower than binary guards.The sanitizing guard is the most complex device.  Requests, can originate on both sides of the sanitizer, unlike data diodes. This requires deep packet inspection of labeled data and the institution of sanitization rules. Sanitizers typically run significantly slower than data diodes, especially when there are significant volumes of high-to-low traffic. It is worth mentioning that SBC technologies, discussed in 05F-SIW-076 appear to have the architectural sophistication to implement the behaviors of a sanitizer for VoIP technologies, but lack any formal government agency accreditation.[2] Both Sanitizers and SBCs can be designed to fulfill the role of an intellectual property anonymizer.     9. AF-ICE Security End-StatePacket sniffing will be common within the AF-ICE environment to facilitate the integration of software and general purpose trouble shooting. This requires FIPS 140-2 encrypted pathways to ensure that the need-to-know confidentiality of information is strictly maintained. The AF-ICE network-enabled software used by regular developers within a PL-2 network will ultimately be IA-enabled IT approved by a DAA. For the near-term, GIG-capable PL-2 accredited enclaves operating at contractor facilities approved for use with packet sniffers and augmented with contractor controlled firewalls should be more than adequate to protect IP. For the long-term, labeling capabilities associated with PL-3 rated operating systems and the use of IA-enabled applications on the AF-ICE network will provide better means for protecting IP and unclassified export controlled data. In addition to accommodating network sniffing, two other important security related challenges must be solved in order for the AF-ICE environment to become successful. First, the major DoD Primes and the Air Force must agree upon a common AF-ICE SIP-enabled firewall solution to facilitate real-time collaboration and the sharing of sensitive real-time simulation resources. Firewalls act as border PEP chokepoints. The Air Force (i.e., AFCA and ESC) and Industry (i.e., Boeing, Gestalt, Lockheed Martin, Northrop Grumman, Raytheon and SAIC) will jointly down-select a common set of SIP-enabled COTS ALG and SBC devices for use within the AF-ICE environment. The ALG and SBC firewall products will allow private enterprises to adequately protect the IP that is to be shared in a competitive real-time environment. These products ultimately require EAL4 ratings and will be added to the Air Force’s i-TRM (Infostructure Technology Reference Model) preferred product listing. Similarly, the Air Force will ensure that SABI/TSABI guard technologies support SIP-related real-time streaming technologies when ever possible. This will help ensure both IP and classified information can be adequately protected when using open standards designed for controlling real-time communication. Second, AF-ICE requires an operational solution to facilitate the active development of software in a PL-3 environment. A network supporting active software development inherently has more security risks than one that does not. As a matter of policy, the interfacing of systems to the GIG is not likely to allow active software development. The key will be to use a Defense-in-Depth Strategy combined with the judicious use of guard technologies and tailored IA development processes to enable software development during the concept refinement and technology development and integration acquisition phases. This software can then be leveraged by later acquisition program phases (i.e., system development and integration, production and deployment and operations and support) to tightly interface specific AF-ICE resources to the GIG.     10. ConclusionThe AF-ICE program is pushing the limit of providing distributed M&S IA. There is a pressing need for distributed M&S frameworks to move from the PL-1 “perimeter-based security model” to an “application-based security model” operating in net-centric enclaves with PL-2 or PL-3 ratings that can easily be connected to the GIG. It is critical for AF-ICE to be responsive to the U.S. security policy mandating how Common Criteria products should be utilized within NSS distributed M&S architectural solutions. With EAL4 rated IA-enabled IT products, it should be possible to use Web infrastructure to design systems with a medium level of robustness to create PL-3 networks that can easily support compartmented programs. When needed, AF-ICE will use SABI and TSABI perimeter-based IA products to achieve PL-4 and/or PL-5 rated connectivity.SOA products used by NCES should support both discretionary and mandatory access controls for Web URI resources to operate in a PL-3 environment. The discretionary access controls are set by the end user and the mandatory access control rules are defined by the security administrator. In order for SOAs to flourish in environments supporting IA, protection profiles involving labeling will have to be defined for the various Web protocols, e.g., SMTP, HTTP and SIP. Proxy servers and other PEPs must filter, forward or route information based upon URI transaction labels and the system access controls associated with those URIs. COTS firewalls, guards, and SOA products must support URI-based Web protocols.   All AF-ICE enterprises must adopt the next generation operating systems (Linux SE, Solaris and possibly Windows) natively supporting a comprehensive set of rule and role-based access controls. The use of resource labels and rule-based access controls (i.e., mandatory access controls) enables enterprise-level access controls to be enforced unilaterally by enterprises. Role-based access controls should be used to determine which users can execute what category of programs. The application of the Defense-in-Depth Strategy and the universal adoption of RBAC and MAC controls will allow regular software developers to compile code in a COI established within a PL-3 environment with a low to medium IA robustness rating. 11. References[1] Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M. and Schooler, E., Network Working Group, Request for Comments: 3261, “SIP: Session Initiation Protocol,”  HYPERLINK "http://www.potaroo.net/ietf/idref/rfc3261/" www.potaroo.net/ietf/idref/rfc3261/.  The Internet Society, June 2002.[2] Scott Holben, “Enterprise UDP Firewall Traversal Using SIP,” 05F-SIW-076, SISO, September 2005.[3] Defense Acquisition University, “Guidebook”, Chapter 7 “Acquiring Information Technology and National Security Systems”, HYPERLINK "http://www.iatf.net/framework_docs/version-3_1/index.cfm" asks.dau.mil/DAG/GuideBook/PDFs/GBNov2004.pdf,November 2004.[4] National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-59, “Guideline for Identifying an Information System as a National Security System”, August 2003   HYPERLINK "http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-59/SP800-59.pdf" csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-59/SP800-59.pdf [5] The Committee of National Security Systems, “National Security Telecommunications and Information Systems Security Policy Number 11”, July 2003,  HYPERLINK "http://www.cnss.gov/policies.html" www.cnss.gov/policies.html[6] The Committee of National Security Systems, Instructions 4009, “National Information Assurance Glossary”, May 2003 HYPERLINK "http://www.cnss.gov/instructions.html" www.cnss.gov/instructions.html[7] Information Assurance Technical Framework Release 3.1 – September 2002, HYPERLINK "http://www.iatf.net/framework_docs/version-3_1/index.cfm"www.iatf.net/framework_docs/version-3_1/index.cfm[8] Department of Defense Instruction 8580.1, “Information Assurance (IA) in the Defense Acquisition System”, July 2004 HYPERLINK "http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/html/85801.htm" www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/html/85801.htm [9] Department of Defense Directive 8500.1, “Information Assurance (IA)”, October 2002  HYPERLINK "http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/html/85001.htm" www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/html/85001.htm[10] Department of Defense Instruction 5200.40, “DoD Information Technology Security Certification and Accreditation Process (DITSCAP)”, December 1997 HYPERLINK "http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/i520040_123097/i520040p.pdf" www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/i520040_123097/i520040p.pdf    [11] Executive Branch, “National Industrial Security Protection Operation Manual”, 1995/1997/2001,  HYPERLINK "http://www.dss.mil/isec/nispom.htm" www.dss.mil/isec/nispom.htm[12] Department of Defense 5220.22-M, “National Industrial Security Protection Operation Manual Supplement”, February 1995 HYPERLINK "http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/html/522022ms.htm" www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/html/522022ms.htm[13] Executive Order 12829, “National Industrial Security Program”, January 1993 HYPERLINK "http://www.fas.org/irp/offdocs/eo12829.htm" www.fas.org/irp/offdocs/eo12829.htm [14] Director of Central Intelligence Directive 6/3, HYPERLINK "http://www.fas.org/irp/offdocs/DCID_6-3_20Manual.htm" www.fas.org/irp/offdocs/DCID_6-3_20Manual.htm [15] Department of Defense Instruction 8500.2, "Information Assurance (IA) Implementation", February 2003 HYPERLINK "http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/html/85002.htm" www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/html/85002.htm[16] Executive Order 12968, “Access to Classified Information”, August 1995HYPERLINK "http://www.dss.mil/seclib/eo12968.htm"www.dss.mil/seclib/eo12968.htm[17]  HYPERLINK "http://portal.research.colostate.edu/itar/" portal.research.colostate.edu/itar/[18]  HYPERLINK "http://www.radium.ncsc.mil/tpep/library/rainbow/index.html" www.radium.ncsc.mil/tpep/library/rainbow/index.html[19]  HYPERLINK "http://niap.nist.gov/cc-scheme/cc_docs/cc_introduction-v2.pdf" niap.nist.gov/cc-scheme/cc_docs/cc_introduction-v2.pdf[20] HYPERLINK "http://www.dtic.mil/cjcs_directives/cdata/unlimit/6510_01.pdf"www.dtic.mil/cjcs_directives/cdata/unlimit/6510_01.pdf[21] HYPERLINK "http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/stig/index.html"iase.disa.mil/stigs/stig/index.htmlAuthor BiographiesScott Holben is a Technical Architect participating in the AF-ICE Security, Network and SOA Work Groups. He has almost 20 years of experience working in distributed M&S environments..PAGE  PAGE  1