Distributed Test Event 5 in Support of the Army Cross Command Collaborative Effort and Future Combat System Integrated Test and EvaluationRalph LiebertUS Army Electronic Proving Ground Ft. LewisCSTE-DTC-EP-TMFt. Lewis, WA 98433253-967-8106 HYPERLINK "Ralph.liebert@epglewis.dtc.army.mil" Ralph.liebert@epglewis.dtc.army.milMichael J. O'ConnorITT Industries6767 Old Madison Pike, Suite 160Huntsville, AL 35806256-964-1470 HYPERLINK "Michael.oconnor@itt.com" Michael.oconnor@itt.comKey Words:Joint Test and Evaluation, Distributed Testing, Live, Virtual, and Constructive Capabilities, Classified Networking, Southwest Asia TerrainABSTRACT: The Distributed Test Event 5 (DTE 5) was the continuation of the Army Test and Evaluation Command (ATEC)-sponsored program to develop a distributed test capability for Army Test and Evaluation (T&E).  DTE 5 built upon capabilities developed in DTE 4 and was executed between 23 August and 02 September 2005.  The Army Cross Command Collaborative Effort (3CE) leveraged the DTE 5 event to support its mission supporting the acquisition of the Future Combat System (FCS) and to further develop capabilities and satisfy objectives for the 3CE program delineated in the 3CE MOA and Concept of Operations (CONOPS).  The 3CE program is integrating Army modeling and simulation (M&S) capabilities, tools, and processes from the ATEC, Research Development and Engineering Command (RDECOM), Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC), and the Program Manager FCS Brigade Combat Team (PM FBCT) / FCS Lead Systems Integrator (LSI).The DTE 5 was also a “feeder experiment” for the Experiment One phase of experimentation in the FCS program designed to inform the initial phase and activities of the LSI integrated testing and extends from now until early summer of calendar year 2007 (CY07).  A primary emphasis of DTE 5 is to support process and methodology development for the FCS LSI Experiment 1.1 (Exp 1.1) and the initial FCS integrated testing.  Exp1.1 is designed to provide knowledge, insight, and understanding to address issues and concerns identified in support of the execution of the FCS and the Spin-Out 1 Capability.This paper discusses how integrating capabilities from the three Army commands to emulate FCS Exp 1.1 enables DTE 5 to serve as an appropriate mechanism to further define and develop 3CE capabilities and satisfy objectives for both the 3CE program and FCS Experiment One.  Specifically, the paper provides an overview of the 3CE program and the technical, operational, event execution, and data management implemented in DTE 5 and describes the how the results from DTE 5 support objectives of the 3CE, Experiment One, and ATEC distributed testing.1. IntroductionThe requirement to assess emerging complex system of system (SoS) network enabled Army materiel and evolving operational concepts is witnessed most notably by the current Future Combat System (FCS) program.  The complexities involved in the acquisition of new systems like FCS require novel approaches in acquisition strategies from cradle to birth.  In particular test and evaluation is a challenge due a number of complicating factors.  Only limited numbers of FCS test systems are likely to be available and are likely to be dispersed among test sites when available.  In addition representing the myriad of FCS SoS materiel solutions complementing the new forces operating in the current and emerging asymmetric environments that are required for assessment is also a daunting challenge.  One solution the Army Test and Evaluation Command (ATEC) is exploring is the use of distributed test capabilities which link geographically dispersed test sites and takes advantage of the integration of simulated and live test systems and environments.  The Distributed Test Event 5 (DTE 5) is a continuation of the ATEC program to explore and develop distributed test capabilities and is described in this paper.The DTE 5 was conceived, planned, integrated, executed, analyzed and reported from August 2004 to December 2005, the event was conducted between 23 August and 02 September 2005.  The impetus for DTE 5 was three fold to emulate the FCS Experiment 1.1, support the objectives for the US Army Cross Command Collaborative Effort (3CE), and support the objectives for the Joint Multi-Service Distributed Environment (MSDE).  The foundation for DTE 5 was the ATEC distributed test capability demonstrated in DTE 4, which was the pivotal capability that tied 3CE and MSDE programs together.The DTE 5 used a mix of simulated and live capabilities integrated in a mixed protocol architecture in a classified environment with capabilities from the three services and supporting commands in a Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC)-approved FCS BCT mission integrated with several Joint Forces Command (JFCOM)-approved Joint Tasks (JT).  This construct enabled ATEC to assess distributed test capabilities to support FCS testing, enabled 3CE and FCS a venue to assess capabilities, methodologies, and processes to support FCS acquisition aspects, while enabling MSDE to assess JT&E aspects.The 3CE program integrates Army M&S capabilities, tools, and processes from the ATEC, Research Development and Engineering Command (RDECOM), TRADOC, and the Program Manager FCS Brigade Combat Team (PM FCS BCT) / FCS Lead Systems Integrator (LSI).  3CE management structure is changing from a dual path, near-term and long-term program, to a single path program with six functional areas.  The 3CE program is aligning itself to support the acquisition of FCS, in so doing the 3CE leverages the fact that DTE 5 emulated the FCS Exp 1.1.The DTE 5 leadership chose to emulate the FCS Exp 1.1 to assess the ability of ATEC to use distributed test capabilities to support Test and Evaluation (T&E) of a SoS network enabled force using an actual FCS BCT scenario and evaluation criteria established by the FCS LSI.  Exp 1.1 is one of several “core” experiments in the Experiment One (Exp One) phase of the FCS program, while DTE 5 is a “feeder” experiment in the Exp One phase.The MSDE applies the interaction among the Multi-Service Partners to investigate a Joint Test and Evaluation (JT&E) environment for use across the acquisition life cycle in support of the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) “Testing in a Joint Environment Roadmap”.  MSDE sponsorship/entry for United States Air Force (USAF) is through the Air Force-Integrated Collaborative Environment (AF-ICE). Sponsorship/entry for the United States Army (USA) is based on the Distributed Test Event (DTE) program with the ATEC as lead organization. The United States Navy (USN) and United States Marine Corps (USMC) sponsorship/entry into MSDE is based on the Navy Distributed Engineering Plant (DEP) and the Naval Sea Systems Command (NAVSEA) 62 is the lead for Navy integration.  The Joint Interoperability Test Command (JITC) assisted the MSDE event by coordinating the Network Memoranda of Agreement (MOA) required to enable the classified secret environment and assisted with network monitoring.This paper is a summary for DTE 5 that describes how the DTE 5 supports the objectives for 3CE, the FCS Integrated Testing and Experimentation, and ATEC distributed test capability but does not focus on the JT&E aspects of MSDE.  In addition, this paper only provides a general overview of the technical, operational, event execution, and data management implemented in DTE 5, which are documented in more detail in a number of papers in this SIW, see SIW-06S-061 and a number of reports.  Table 1.1 provided a summary of of the technical, operational and programmatic aspects of DTE 5.  The following complimentary reports provide details for DTE 5.Distributed Test Event 5 Final  Report, January 2006Distributed Test Event 5 Operational Environment Report, January 2006Distributed Test Event 5 Network Report, January 2006Distributed Test Event 5 Terrain Report, January 2006Distributed Test Event 5 Data Management Report, January 2006Distributed Test Event 5 Distributed Test Control Document, January 2006Distributed Test Event 5 Observations and Lessons, January 2006Statistic3CEMSDE1.  Duration of scenario:120 minutes150 minutes2.  Tactical Missions:FCS Exp 1.1JSEAD, JAEA, JFIRES, JCAS, JCSAR3.  Number of sites participating / networked:13 / 8USA = 11 / 6, USN = 4, USAF = 84.  Number of different time zones for sites:5 times zones5 time zones5.  Number of entities:6006506.  Number of simulations and tools: total / unique130 / 65189 / 1007.  Number of Warfighters / threat players:RTTC = 33, ATC = 28,UAMBL = 6USA = 61, USAF = 12 , USN = 88.  Number of integration events (spirals)10 10 9.  Network Bandwidth Utilization:Never more than 25%Never more than 25%10.  Command / Service Site Accreditation:RDECOM = FEB – JULTRADOC = Already Est.ATEC = FEB – MAYUSN = FEB – JULUSA = FEB – JULUSAF = Already Est.11.  Tasks in Time Ordered Events List:24163473Table 1.1 Some statistics on the technical, operational, and programmatic aspects of the Distributed Test Event 51.1 System Overview and ParticipantsThe DTE 5 used Live, Virtual, and Constructive (LVC) capabilities to emulate FCS and Joint systems required for the Exp 1.1 FBCT and JT scenarios, respectively.  The LVC capabilities represented the requisite platforms, sensors, weapons systems, battle command, and users and supporting environments for an Army urban ground scenario integrated with joint service close air support and fires.  The USAF also conducted an aerial electronic attack scenario, which is separate from other service participation.LVC capabilities were integrated in a mixed protocol architecture and a classified network.  A mixed protocol environment was necessary to facilitate the rapid integration of multiple service and command capabilities as required for 3CE and MSDE with little or no modifications to the capabilities.  Existing architecture elements were optimized and gateways used to enable the mixed protocol environment.The selected network, common to the majority of the participating services and commands, used an Internet Protocol (IP)-based classified Defense Research and Engineering Network (DREN) and a number of Memoranda of Agreement (MOA) among services and commands to facilitate classified connectivity.  A common Terrain Data Base (TDB) supported DTE 5 and was used by the majority of participants.  Figure 1.1 depicts the location of the MSDE service hubs and lists the MSDE participating sites and Figure 1.2 depicts the locations of the USA 3CE participating sites and the figures show the high level network topologies.  The following sites participated in the DTE 5.1.1.1 US Army – 3CE Sites1.1.1.1 ATECAberdeen Test Center (ATC), Aberdeen Proving Ground (APG), MarylandAviation Technical Test Facility (ATTC), Fort Rucker, AL*Developmental Test Command (DTC) Headquarters, Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD**Electronic Proving Ground Fort Lewis (EPG FL), Fort Lewis, WashingtonElectronic Proving Ground Fort Huachuca (EPG FH), Fort Huachuca, ArizonaRedstone Technical Test Center (RTTC), Redstone Arsenal, Huntsville, AlabamaWest Desert Test Center (WDTC), Dugway Proving Ground (DPG), Dugway, Utah***White Sands Test Center (WSTC), White Sands Missile Range (WSMR), New MexicoYuma Test Center (YTC), Yuma Proving Ground (YPG), Yuma, Arizona****1.1.1.2 RDECOMNight Vision and Electronic Sensor Directorate (NVESD), Fort Belvoir, VirginiaTopographic Engineering Center (TEC), Fort Belvoir, VirginiaAviation and Missile Research, Development, and Engineering Center (AMRDEC), Huntsville, Alabama1.1.1.3 TRADOCFort Gordon, GeorgiaUnit of Action Maneuver Battle Lab (UAMBL), Fort Knox, Kentucky1.2.2 US NavyNaval Surface Weapons Center (NSWC), Dahlgren, VANaval Air Weapons Center – Air Division (NAWC AD), Patuxent River, MDNaval Air Weapons Center – Weapons Division (NAWC WD), China Lake, CASpace and Naval Warfare Systems Center, San Diego, CA1.2.3 US Air ForceDistributed Mission Operations Center (DMOC), Kirtland AFB, NMSimulation and Analysis Facility (SiMAF), Wright-Patterson AFB, OH46th Test Wing, Eglin AFBAgency for Modeling and Simulation – C4ISR Visualization Center (AFAMS-CVC), Pentagon**Command and Control Enterprise Integration Facility (CEIF), Hanscom AFB, MACombined Air Operations Center (CAOC), Langley AFB, VAEdwards AFB, CA* This site did not have an accredited network.  Therefore, they participated by moving their equipment stacks to RTTC.  RTTC’s network was accredited with ATTC’s equipment stack included.** Viewing portal*** This site did not have an accredited network.  Therefore, they participated by moving their equipment stacks to EPG-FL.  EPG-FL’s network was accredited with DPG’s equipment stack included.**** This site was connected to the network but did not participate in the event. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 1.1 Depiction of the Multi-Service Distributed Environment service network hubs and list of the networked sites for the Distributed Test Event 5. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 1.2 Depiction of the US Army Cross Command Collaborative Effort networked sites for the Distributed Test Event 5.1.3 Scenario OverviewThe DTE 5 scenario was derived and optimized from the TRADOC-approved FCS Exp 1.1 scenario and from JFCOM-approved JTs.  Since the actual FCS and Joint systems and environments were not available for DTE 5, LVC representations and emulations were used.The scenario supporting 3CE and FCS objectives was a tactical vignette (V3–Urban Operations) from the TRADOC-approved Caspian Sea 2.0 scenario. The developers mapped the scenario to a portion of the SWA terrain, in which the cantonment area from WSMR and the RTTC Hazardous Devices School (HDS) Military Operations on Urban Terrain  (MOUT) site was virtually integrated or “stitched in”. The integrated MOUT sites supported the urban operations from the FCS Exp 1.1 scenario and enabled virtual integration of live elements participating at the MOUT sites with simulated elements. The FBCT and higher missions from this scenario also enabled the Joint tasks.The DTE 5 / MSDE scenario design was based on three joint tasks; Joint Suppression Enemy Air Defense (JSEAD), JFIRES and Joint Close Air Support (JCAS).  The event started with the JSEAD scenario to prepare the battlefield.  Once the JSEAD mission prepared the EW battlefield, the JFIRES portion of the event was executed.  JFIRES exercised the integration of USAF and USN forces to take out targets using Naval fires.  Once the JSEAD/JFIRES threads were completed, the USA ground forces moved into the territory and proceeded to the area required to accomplish the Exp 1.1 FBCT mission.  When the FBCT elements were in place, enemy reinforcements were identified moving toward the ground forces location.  The JCAS portion of the event was then initiated to protect the FBCT elements using the USN and USAF to take out targets with Joint Tactical Air Controller (JTAC) voice and data calls.2. Program DescriptionsThis section provides descriptions of the programs supported in DTE 5, sans the MSDE, as it is not relevant to the overall purpose of this paper and is covered in the MSDE Final Report, January 2006 and in a complimentary paper at this workshop SIW-06S-061.2.1 ATEC Distributed TestingThe ATEC is investigating the use of distributed test capabilities to support T&E of complex systems being developed for the warfighter like FCS.  Distributed testing is supported by several programs across ATEC that are adding to the development and are demonstrated in the DTE program.  The foundation for the DTE series of distributed events is two fold, the ATEC Test and Integration Network (ATIN) and the Synthetic Environment Integrated Testbed (SEIT) programs.  The DTE series of events enhanced and implemented capabilities developed in these two programs as well as providing a venue to exercise and determine the required elements for distributed testing to be a viable tool to support T&E.The ATIN is an ATEC program designed to implement a common classified network and develop common infrastructure at ATEC test sites to facilitate distributed activities.  The ATIN is using the DREN, which is a robust, high-capacity, low-latency nation-wide network that provides connectivity among geographically dispersed High Performance Computing (HPC) user sites, HPC Centers, and other networks.  Also, the ATIN is developing Distributed Test Control Centers (DTCC) at each test site and is developing the Inter-Range Control Center (IRCC) at WSMR, NM to facilitate large or high priority test missions. Each DTCC and the IRCC are outfitted with similar infrastructure and capabilities facilitating distributed activities among test sites.  The IRCC is the primary portal for ATEC sites to the FCS Distributed Network (FDN) that enables connectivity to the FCS SoS Integrated Laboratory (SoSIL) environment.  This connection was developed in part to support DTE 5 but the FCS LSI did not have classified laboratory facilities online in time to support the event.The SEIT is a program started in the ATEC Developmental Test Command (DTC) Virtual Proving Ground (VPG) to support the development and integration of natural and man made environmental representations to support ATEC testing.  The program integrates environmental “threads” or federates that are end to end implementations of environmental aspects of a tactical operationally correct element supporting testing.  The SEIT evolves into the DTE program, which merges with the ATIN and other activities to support development of distributed testing and capability demonstration in the DTE events.The DTE series of events was used to mature and demonstrate distributed test capabilities.  The DTE 4 in AUG 2004, employed nine FCS LSI test cases with requisite Information Exchange Requirements (IERs) represented with ATEC LVC capabilities in a TRADOC-approved scenario transferred onto WSMR terrain.  Many of the capabilities developed in the DTE 4 support DTE 5 and the DTE 4 is the foundation event for MSDE and is leveraged to support objectives for FCS, 3CE, and MSDE programs.  DTE 4 is well documented with numerous Spring 05 SIW papers and the DTE 4 Demonstration Control Document, March 05. 2.2 Future Combat SystemFuture combat systems are comprised of a family of advanced, networked air-and ground-based maneuver, maneuver support, and sustainment systems that will include manned and unmanned platforms.  Future combat systems are networked via a Command and Control, Communication, Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance  (C4ISR) architecture, including networked communications, network operations, sensors, battle command systems, training and both manned and unmanned reconnaissance and surveillance capabilities that enable improved situational understanding operations at a level of synchronization heretofore unachievable.The FCS network allows the FCS Family-of-Systems (FoS) to operate as a cohesive SoS where the whole of its capabilities is greater than the sum of its parts. As the key to the Army's transformation, the network, and its logistics and Embedded Training (ET) systems, enable the Future Force to employ revolutionary operational and organizational concepts. The network enables Soldiers to perceive, comprehend, shape, and dominate the future battlefield at unprecedented levels as defined by the FCS Operational Requirements Document (ORD).  The FCS FoS synergistically interact enabling the Future Force to see first, understand first, act first and finish decisively. The FCS acquisition strategy includes the use of a LSI to facilitate fielding of the FCS.  The team of Boeing and Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC) is the FCS LSI, as of March 2002.  As the LSI, Boeing and SAIC, partner with the Government and have total systems integration responsibility for designing, developing, producing, fielding, and supporting the FCS Systems of Systems (SoS).The experimentation process is implemented in the program to reduce FCS program risk.  The three goals of the experimentation process are:Risk MitigationCore SystemsSystems/Network IntegrationSpiral Out SystemsFCS SoS DevelopmentNetwork maturationSystem Design AssessmentTechnology Development/InsertionCurrent Force Capability GapsThe DTE 5 is a “feeder experiment” for the Exp One phase of experimentation in the FCS program, which is designed to inform the initial activities of the LSI integrated testing and extends to early summer of calendar year 2007 (CY07).  As noted, a primary emphasis of DTE 5 is to support process and methodology development for the FCS Exp 1.1 and the initial FCS integrated testing.  Exp1.1 is designed to provide knowledge, insight, and understanding to address issues and concerns identified in support of the execution of the FCS and the Spin-Out 1 Capability. It is scheduled for the later part of CY06 and early CY07.  This paper attempts to show how integrating capabilities from the three Army commands to support emulation of FCS Exp 1.1 enables DTE 5 to serve as an appropriate mechanism to further define and develop 3CE capabilities and satisfy objectives for both the 3CE program and FCS Experiment One.2.2.1 FCS Experiment OneThe objective of Exp One is to mitigate risk for the FCS Core Program and FCS Spin Out 1 (SO1) Doctrine, Organization, Training, Materiel, Leaders, Policy, and Fielding (DOTMLPF) in the following areas:Network systems/network communicationsJoint and Army interoperabilitySensor data managementRobotics (e.g., Autonomous Navigation System, Small Unmanned Ground Vehicle, and Unmanned Air Vehicle)FCS BCT Doctrine, Organization, Training and Tactics, Techniques and Procedures (TTP) for FCS BCT Brigade and belowThe desired end state is to provide information required to support program risk mitigation steps, provide information leading to improved and more rapid program development, and show progress/maturity of the FCS SoS and Network in an operational environment.The Exp One will satisfy these objectives through support to SoS Engineering Iterations with risk mitigation opportunities.  The experiment phase will provide a means of discovery to build knowledge, inform decision points, supply input to hardware and software implementations, assess capabilities and products rolled forward to Spin Out, provide a precursor for integration and verification testing, support Warfighter practice and training opportunities for Limited User Tests (LUT), and facilitate DoD experimentation.  The FCS LSI recognizes the value of planned DoD experimentation and will observe, participate, and influence this experimentation.Exp One includes several core experiments and feeder experiments designed to help satisfy the stated objectives.  The DTE 5 is identified as a feeder experiment in the Exp One phase.2.2.2 FCS Experiment 1.1The LSI will conduct Exp 1.1 in phases.  The laboratory/simulation phase is scheduled for August through November 2006, and the field trial phase is scheduled for November 2006 through January 2007.  Exp 1.1 provides an early opportunity to assess development progress on a limited set of the available FCS Network and sensor products (hardware and software) integrated for use in an operational environment.  The experiment is to provide knowledge, insight, and understanding to address issues and concerns identified in support of the execution of the FCS and the Spin-Out 1 Capability.Experimentation will be used to evaluate the vulnerability of specific systems against expected battlefield threats.  It will draw from the operational objectives that define the FCS mission capabilities.  In Exp. 1.1 laboratory and field experiments will be conducted in a company-sized force to develop qualitative and quantitative findings through the analysis of data collected by both automated systems and manual observation.  The successful Exp. 1.1 execution of company-sized FCS BCT missions in a realistic operating environment will inform the program of progress in risk mitigation, preparation for spin out, and needed technology identification.The experiment will concentrate on answering technical questions to provide the data required to support program risk mitigation needs.  At the same time, the experiment will provide a venue to show the progress and maturity of the FCS Network and sensors in an operational environment as the system is being developed, designed, and integrated.2.3 Cross Command Collaborative Effort The 3CE program is integrating Army modeling and simulation (M&S) capabilities, tools, and processes from the ATEC, RDECOM, TRADOC and the PM FCS BCT / FCS LSI.  Initially the plan for 3CE involved a dual path approach, near-term and long-term efforts.  Near-term efforts focused on leveraging the integration of existing capabilities among the three commands and long-term efforts focused on a systems engineering approach to develop Full Operational Capability (FOC).  The near-term effort was segmented into three phases:Phase 1 Objectives:   (13-24 June2005)Establish persistent, secure communications capability across commands.Measure distributed performance (Latency, Packet Loss, etc)Phase 2 Objectives:  (5 July – 8 July 2005)Assess secure communications capability across commandAssess each command’s ability to send/receive sim data and maintain situational awarenessTest voice, video and data transfer to create a baselineCharacterization of 3CE NetworkPhase 3 Objectives:  (11 July – 2 September 2005)Side-by-side comparison of 3CE M&S for purpose of establishing a notional M&S tool box across domainsUse information from this phase to refine 3CE CONOPSRefine characterization of 3CE NetworkVerification of Simulation ComponentsDemonstrate ability to integrate 3CE with LSI SoSILReplicate FCS Experiment 1.1 simulation and data environment to greatest extent possible as part of DTE5 to provide information regarding the experimentation and test processes required to perform the experimentTo facilitate management and development of the program, five Configuration Control Groups (CCGs) were implemented that were responsible for determining overall requirements, planning, and implementing their respective areas for 3CE initial phases.Operational CCG is responsible for developing scenarios and required operational aspects.Network CCG is responsible for establishing a classified network and requisite MOAs required for that network.Terrain CCG is responsible for obtaining source terrain data, processing, and providing terrain data base (TDB) products to all users in DTE 5.Data, Analysis, and Test CCG is responsible for supporting data management to support analysis.Integration and Implementation CCG is responsible for overall environment development and process monitoring.The program management and implementation evolved into a single 3CE program with six functional areas.  This revised program structure is not described in detail in this paper.  Each functional area is populated with representatives from the participating organizations or commands and each area has a lead from one of the organizations or commands.  The CCGs remain intact and are supporting the functional areas.  3. Program: Objectives and SupportThis section describes the DTE 5 support for program objectives.  Specifically, this section describes the objectives and resulting requirements from the 3CE and FCS programs relevant to and supported by the DTE 5.  3CE objectives are a distillate from the 3CE MOA and CONOPS and the overarching FCS experimentation and specific Exp 1.1 objectives are derivatives from the FCS LSI Exp1.1 Plan.  A detailed description of the DTE 5 support is in the Observations and Lesson and Analysis Reports and detailed description of the environment in use is in the Operational Environment, DTCD, Terrain, Network and Data Management reports.3.1 FCS and DTE 5 SupportThis section describes how the FCS program leverages the DTE 5 to support Exp One phase.  Specifically, it provides a description of Exp One and a mapping of the DTE 5 capabilities to potentially support requirements in initial phases of FCS experimentation and integrated testing.  The FCS LSI has not fully indicated all of the benefits that it could gain from the DTE 5 in support of Exp One phase other than supporting investigation of the processes and methodologies for data collection and analysis in experimentation and integrated testing.  The hope is that the FCS LSI uses the reports and papers describing DTE 5 and experience gained by support staff to support ongoing experimentation and integrated testing.3.1.1 FCS Experiment One Objectives and DTE 5 SupportThere are numerous opportunities in DTE 5 to support objectives for Exp One for both FCS experimentation and integrated testing.  The following are examples of areas were the PM FCS BCT and FCS LSI should explore to gain benefit from DTE 5.  The DTE 5 team could work with representatives from the FCS LSI experimentation and test groups to determine specific benefits as well as gleaning information from the numerous reports.Data Collection and Analysis Process and Methods: Inform on data collection and analysis processes and methodologies. Provide information regarding the required types and sources of data needed to satisfy evaluation criteria and the proper application of data collection and analysis tools.  Refine the process for collection of analogue user data. Present an opportunity to exercise analytical activities. FCS integrated testing plans to use the same tools that the DTE 5 will use to support data collection and analysis.  Details supporting data collection processes and capabilities are in the “Distributed Test Event 5 Data Management Report”, January 2006.Refine Evaluation Criteria: Help refine evaluation criteria, Essential Elements of Assessment (EEA), Measures of Effectiveness (MOE), and Measures of Performance (MOP) for FCS platforms, sensors and weapon systems emulated in DTE 5 to help shape experimentation and testing.  Specifically investigate operational evaluation criteria in a Joint service and FCS BCT mission context. Details supporting the evaluation criteria refinement are in the DTE 5 analysis reports and experience gained through DTE 5 by the evaluators supporting the event.Refine Scenario: Help refine scenario development and implementation for Exp 1.1 and Integration and Verification Testing.  Specifically examine areas in the application of sensor technologies and unmanned platforms in urban environments and the use of the Southwest Asia (SWA) terrain.  Details supporting scenario refinement are in the "Distributed Test Event 5 Operational Environment Report", January 2006.Performance Data on Developing FCS Prototypes: A first look at live and virtual FCS prototypes and emulations offers an opportunity to baseline performance and work out integration details with other FCS and current force systems and data collection assets. This event generates and enables the collection of performance data on maturing technologies and prototypes of FCS systems in an operational context to support development activities.  Specifically the FCS SOS Common Operating System (SoSCOE) and Joint Enhanced Battle Command and Control (JEBC2) systems integrate with the current force lower echelon digital battle command system, Force XXI Battle Command Brigade and Below (FBCB2).  This integration and implementation are providing valuable information about the status of these FCS prototypes assisting development and employment for future events.  The integration and implementation of SoSCOE and JEBC2 with FBCB2 is described in the Operational Environment report.Identify and Develop Battlefield Environmental Stimuli: Simulated and real battlefield environmental representations are assessed and implemented in DTE 5 to support stimuli of FCS emulated and simulated representations. These environmental representations provide the basis for the test and experimentation environment required for the FCS program and in many cases are being considered by the program for integration into the FCS Simulation Environment (FSE). DTE 5 provides validation data for these environmental representations as well as implementation information for integration with FCS prototypes in an operational context.  The simulated and physical environments in use in DTE 5 are described in the “Distributed Test Event 5 Distributed Test Control Document”, January 2006.Test Planning and Execution: Provide information on the decomposition of tasks for the chosen scenario, map evaluation criteria to tasks to drive test execution, and help refine processes for observational and digital data collection. Help to refine processes and the implementation of test monitoring and execution tools particularly for distributed testing. FCS integrated testing is using the same tools that DTE 5 uses to support test planning and execution.  Test planning and execution are covered in several reports but element are covered in "Distributed Test Event 5 Final Report", “Distributed Test Event 5 Distributed Test Control Document” and the "Distributed Test Event 5 Operational Environment Report", January 2006.Operational Wargame Symposium (OWS) Support: The OWS 2 is an FCS LSI wargaming event scheduled to support the development of the Master Scenario Event List (MSEL) for Exp 1.1, which will be used to develop the Time Ordered Event List (TOEL) for Exp 1.1.  ATEC subject matter experts (SME) are tasked to accomplish this work using the same tool for both DTE 5 and FCS integrated testing and should be used for Exp 1.1.  Information pertaining to the relevant process is provided in the "Distributed Test Event 5 Operational Environment Report", January 2006.Refine TTP for Interactions Between Current and Future Forces: Given the use of a TRADOC-approved scenario that includes a mix of current and future force technologies and platforms, there is an opportunity to assess TTP among these force elements.  Information supporting this area is provided in a number of analytical reports as well as the experience gained by supporting staff at various relevant locations.Classified Distributed Environment Support: The classified distributed environment developed among Army commands to support 3CE and the similar environment established among services to support MSDE can be used directly to support FCS integrated testing and experimentation. At a minimum the wealth of experience garnered by DTE 5 participants developing these classified networks should be capitalized upon as the FDN is implemented and operated for integrated testing and experimentation.  The details for developing a relevant classified environment are provided in the “Distributed Test Event 5 Network Report”, January 2006.Joint Interactions: The DTE 5 is also integrated with the MSDE that is investigating the development of a Joint Mission space to support JT&E. This may be the first time that emulations of FCS systems are interacting with Air Force, Navy, and Marine systems, although this is an initial step in developing a JT&E environment.  Details for Joint interactions are provided in the “Multi-Service Distributed Environment Final Report”, January 2006FCS Exp One team may not realize all of these benefits from DTE 5, but the potential exists, given sufficient resources, to capitalize on these aspects of DTE 5 for FCS experimentation and integrated testing.3.1.2 FCS Exp1.1 General Objectives and DTE 5 SupportThe following are the general goals for Exp 1.1 and experimentation in general the potential support from DTE 5 is described.Build knowledge: The knowledge and experience gained by the supporting staff in DTE 5 many of which are supporting FCS integrated testing and experimentation is not measurable, this is already being witnessed in the current integrated test phase, IMT 0, conducted November 2005 to January 2006, and will continue to be apparent as we proceed with experimentation and integrated testing.Inform decision points: Data generated in DTE 5 supports the evaluation required in the entire acquisition process required to inform materiel development decisions.Evaluate Spiral Out capabilities and products: As noted SoSCOE and JEBC2 integrated with FBCB2 is one example of implementing SO 1 technologies in a mission oriented test context, in addition several emulated FCS systems and actual Army Battle Command Systems (ABCS) integrated in the environment are examples of this as well.Provide operational feedback input to hardware and software development: In DTE 5 actual soldiers, two squads from the 10th Mountain Division, employed emulated FCS technologies, i.e. Small Unattended Ground Vehicle (SUGV), Unattended Ground Sensors (UGS), and Target Acquisition Sensor Suit (TASS), in an urban site at RTTC.  The data generated from this operational use supports technical and tactical development of these systems.Checkout and update of support tools: As noted many of the data collection and test planning and execution tools supporting DTE 5 are in use for current integrated FCS testing and are planned for use to support the OWS, Exp 1.1, other experimentation and integrated testing.  DTE 5 provides an opportunity to check out and improve many of these tools.  The use and performance of these tools are described in the “Distributed Test Event 5 Distributed Test Control Document”, January 2006.Feed forward information to Integration and Verification (I&V) events: The data generated in DTE 5 pertaining to the underlying system performance supports the overall I&V process.Act as precursors for Technical Field Tests: Again many of the assets, capabilities, and personnel supporting the TFT supported the DTE 5.  Much of the experience gained, especially at WSMR with live aspect of the scenario, was directly applicable to the TFT, which will be conducted at WSMR.Support warfighter practice and training opportunities for LUTs: Many of the live elements of the scenario directly lend themselves to warfighter practice and training with emulated FCS systems that can also support Operational Test (OT).Facilitate Joint Experimentation: The integration of DTE 5 into MSDE enables a direct conduit to support Joint interactions throughout the development cycle.3.1.3 FCS Exp1.1 Specific Objectives and DTE 5 SupportThe experiment hypothesis is that integration of selected FCS assets with the selected current force vehicles, Tactical Internet, and selected ABCS elements will reduce risk of connecting and interoperating the FCS assets.  DTE 5 emulates these elements of Exp 1.1 with both live and simulated capabilities at varying levels of resolution and fidelity.This hypothesis is supported by various objectives with their EEA and associated MOE and MOP.  DTE 5 uses the stated evaluation criteria for Exp 1.1 as the basis for its data collection and analysis plan.In support of the Exp 1.1 Hypothesis, the following Exp 1.1 objectives are approved.  The objective is a statement that starts to narrow the hypothesis to a point where the planners can create detailed objectives.  Outcomes from DTE 5 could be studied to assist with the process of further refining specific evaluation criteria from these higher level objectives.  The planners of Exp 1.1 continue updating these objectives as detailed planning progresses and the schedule details get finalized, the DTE 5 team locked on this set evaluation criteria to facilitate planning and development of the DTE 5.  The recommended technical objectives for Exp 1.1 based on the Exp 1.1 plan dated March 2005 are:In support of JROC ORD KPPs, Program Risk 55, and Spiral Out 1, assess ability of SoSCOE message translation to enable interoperability between Current Force ABCS systems and Future Force FCS Battle Command with focus on: FBCB2, AFATDS, ASAS-L/DCGS-A, IMS, CDA (DBCS), and UGS.In support of JROC ORD KPPs, Program Risk 284, 150, 57, 114, and Spiral Out 1, asses the capability of the Network and communication infrastructure to provide effective Quality of Service, Scalability, and Performance with focus on JTRS1 or surrogate; JTRS5 or surrogate; SINCGARS; EPLRS, CRP, WIN-T or surrogate Satcom link.In support of JROC ORD KPP1 (Network Ready), and Spiral Out 1, assess the capability of the Network to use internal and external interfaces, services, data correctness, data processing, information assurance and availability in the integrated architecture at the company and platoon level.In support of JROC ORD KPPs, 2 and 3, Program Risk 128, and Spiral Out 1, assess the effectiveness of DFM utilizing sensing assets at the platoon and company echelon.Technology Development (Internal and External) – assess technology candidates (approved through the FCS LSI Experimentation Process) for the network in the context of Experiment 1.1 which may satisfy one of the FCS Critical Technology Candidates and /or which might satisfy one or more of the Army’s Priority Capabilities needs focused at the company and platoon echelons.The recommended operational objectives are:Assess the contribution of the FCS assets to the leader’s decision-making cycle. (Relates to technical objectives 1 through 4.)Assess capabilities of the system to provide surveillance and enable reconnaissance at the company and below. (Relates to technical objectives 3 and 4.)Assess the contribution of FCS sensors to situation awareness (SA) and situational understanding (SU) to conduct mounted and dismounted operations at the company level and below. (Relates to technical objectives 3 and 4.)Assess interoperability among the selected experimental FCS network assets and selected Current Force network assets. (Relates to technical objectives 1 and 2.)DTE 5 assessed the following Exp 1.1 objectives and a description of the support is provided.  In many cases the DTE 5 data collection and evaluation teams “plow unturned ground” in their efforts.  Many of the FCS emulated systems supporting these objectives are new and have never been assessed particularly in an integrated environment.  Detailed analysis of the specific evaluation criteria associated with these objectives is provided in the DTE 5 analysis reports.Objective #1 SoSCOE Maturity: “Assess ability of SoSCOE message translation to enable interoperability between Current Force ABCS systems and Future Force FCS Battle Command with focus on:  FBCB2; AFATDS; ASAS-L/DCGS-A; IMS; and UGS.”General Support: DTE 5 support for this objective centers on the activities at ATC in the Current to Future Force Testbed (CFFTB).  The CFFTB is a test capability being implemented at ATC to support the integration of current and future force systems.  In DTE 5 live current force platforms hosted current force battle command systems, FBCB2s, integrated with the future force, FCS, SoSCOE and JEBC2 on simulated future force platforms.  Data and implementation from this integration is detailed in the DTE 5 DTCD and the Operational Environment reports, January 2006.Objective #4 Distributed Sensor Fusion management: “Assess the effectiveness of utilizing sensing assets at the platoon and company echelon.”	General Support: DTE 5 support for this objective centers on the activities at the RTTC Hazard Devices School (HDS) Military Operations in Urban Terrain (MOUT) Site with the 10th Mountain Division soldiers using a variety of emulated and some simulated sensor technologies.  Data and implementation from these activities is detailed in the DTE 5 DTCD and the analysis reports.Objective #5 Technology Development (Internal and External): “Assess technology candidates (approved through the FCS LSI Experimentation Process) for the network in the context of Experiment 1.1 which may satisfy one of the FCS Critical Technology Candidates and/or which might satisfy one or more of the Army’s Priority Capabilities needs focused at the company and platoon echelons.”General Support: DTE 5 support for this objective spanned multiple areas and throughout the environment because multiple FCS capabilities emulated throughout environment provide supporting data.  Analysis supporting this objective is in numerous DTE 5 reports and the analysis reports.The DTE 5 team felt that the FCS network emulations available did not satisfy minimum fidelity requirements to support an analysis of Objective #2 or #3. The operational requirements were not assessed in DTE 5 due to their late development, they are provided for completeness.These objectives are being modified and optimized as the FCS program and the goals of Exp1.1 evolve, although the DTE 5 team locked onto a version of the Exp 1.1 plan in March 2005 to facilitate development and implementation.  Many of the goals for DTE 5 are not necessarily tied to the specific evaluation metrics defined for the emulated FCS systems under test (SUTs), in addition defining distributed environment and test processes and methodologies is agnostic of the specific evaluation criteria.3.2 3CE Objectives and DTE 5 SupportThis section describes how the 3CE leverages the DTE 5 to support the program objectives, operating principles, capability development, and processes identified in the 3CE MOA and CONOPS.  The following points condense primary overarching objectives for the 3CE program distilled from the MOA and CONOPS and indicate how the DTE 5 supports these objectives.Objective: Establish a disciplined M&S collaboration effort among PM FCS BCT / FCS LSI, TRADOC, RDECOM, and ATEC for the purpose of developing cross command Army M&S and data environments for use in SoS design, development, integration, and test of the FCS FoS components, systems, and prototypes within a realistic FCS BCT context [MOA] and to reduce costs and time for FCS BCT development. [CONOPS]Support: The DTE 5 provides the venue for experts from the three Army commands to come together in CCGs to build cross command relationships, define requirements, and develop needed processes and capabilities for the 3CE.  The CCGs are legacies of the initial management and are being carried over to the revised management which benefits from the experience gained in DTE 5.  The M&S capabilities in DTE 5 support acquisition requirements for the FCS by emulating and stimulating FCS systems in a TRADOC approved FCS BCT scenario.Objective: Provide a set of consistent M&S tools, data, and business processes used by RDECOM, ATEC, TRADOC, and PM FCS BCT that will enable the Army to develop concepts, prototypes, and test and evaluation methodologies.[MOA]Support: The DTE 5 was part of the initial step in the 3CE enabling the three commands and PM to work together to develop processes for comparison of capabilities that could be used throughout the FCS and other Army program acquisitions.  Examples of initial capabilities which 3CE can build on include common environmental representations, battle command emulators, and data collection systems and methodologies.Objective: The initial scope of the 3CE is focused on supporting FCS.  Plans are to expand this capability in the out years to support other Army and Joint programs.  [MOA and CONOPS]Support: The DTE 5 supports the maturing process to assess FCS systems, the assessment of emulated FCS systems, and provides insights on several complimentary FCS systems, including current Battle Command Systems and sensor capabilities.  The construct could easily support the evolving FCS network and layers or new sensing capabilities acquisition activities in a doctrinally correct tactical environment.  Additionally, integration with the MSDE, which is helping to develop a joint mission space to support JT&E, supports joint interactions.  The lessons and observations from integrating with the USN and the USAF are extremely important and relevant to the future of the 3CE specifically regarding the required testing and analysis for FCS.Objective: In the initial management structure the near term focus is on integrating existing capabilities.  The near term lens reveals the work currently being supported by the TRADOC Battle Lab Collaborative Simulation Environment (BLCSE), the ATEC DTE, and the RDECOM Modeling Architecture for Technology, Requirements, and Experimentation (MATREX) and how to leverage these developments for the 3CE.  The effort in 2005 and 2006 will provide initial capability based on existing capabilities and lay the framework for the evolving 3CE.  [MOA and CONOPS]Support: The DTE 5 leveraged existing network, architecture, and M&S capabilities developed in the three command programs.  The current network established in the BLCSE served as the overall network model for DTE 5.  The High Level Architecture (HLA)-based architecture in both MATREX and DTE was the basis for interactions among RDECOM and ATEC M&S for DTE 5.  The DTE 5 used the optimal elements from each command program.Objective: Generate meaningful, credible, and replicable analytical results from data loggers, analyzers, and other tools used to capture key information with a high degree of confidence for use in the FCS BCT development.  [CONOPS]Support: The DTE 5 develops and uses a credible plan certified by the ATEC Army Evaluation Center (AEC) to support data collection of relevant data for the evaluation criteria defined for the FCS Exp 1.1.  Analyses of these data are ongoing and are described in complimentary reports detailing specific system analysis and evaluation.   A number of data collection avenues both digital and analogue are implemented.  The 3CE can use this approach as the basis for a model to support future data collection and analysis requirements for FCS experimentation and integrated testing as well as future Army acquisitions.Objective: Establish connectivity among TRADOC, ATEC, RDECOM, and PM FCS BCT/LSI to include secure/classified operations (develop MOAs and accreditation).  [CONOPS]Support: The DTE 5 enables the development and implementation of a secure DREN communications capability for the three commands and the LSI that includes a persistent common infrastructure and required certification, accreditation, and MOAs supporting classified networking.4. SummaryThe DTE 5 integrated existing capabilities from ATEC, RDECOM, and TRADOC to satisfy goals and objectives for ATEC distributed test capability, 3CE program, and FCS integrated testing and experimentation.  The solutions developed in DTE 5 were not always ideal due in many cases to shorten schedule resulting in rapid development times and insufficient resources for all of the program objectives it was attempting to satisfy.  Although the capabilities developed in DTE 5 serve as an excellent foundation and baseline for ATEC, 3CE, and FCS objectives.Classified DRENBLCSE Hub – FT Gordon, GARTTC/ATTC/AMRDEC - Huntsville, ALUAMBL – FT Knox, KYATIN Hub - IRCC WSTC - WSMR, NMEPG - FT HUACHUCA, AZ EPG / DPG - FT LEWIS, WAATC / HQ DTC - APG, MDJPSD JPO / NVESD – FT Belvoir, VA a       NSWC - DahlgrenWSMR - ArmyDMOC - AFClassifiedDRENARMY - IRCCWSTC - WSMR, NMATC / DTC - APG, MDEPG / DPG - FT LEWIS, WAEPG - FT HUACHUCA, AZ RTTC/AMRDEC - Huntsville, ALJPSD JPO / NVESD – FT Belvoir, VAAIR FORCE - DMOCDMOC - Kirtland AFB, NMSIMAF – Wright-Patterson AFB, OH46thTW – Eglin AFB, FL19 SOS - Hurlburt Field, FLCAOC-X – Langley AFB, VACEIF – Hanscom AFB, MAAFAMS-CVC – PentagonSWC – Los Angeles  AFB, CASWC – Schriver AFB, CO aJITC – Joint  a        NAVY - NSWC DahlgrenNSWC – Dahlgren, VANAWCAD – Patuxent River, MDSPAWAR – San Diego, CANAWCWD – China Lake, CA                       