C4I and ISTAR Interoperability issues within the UK’s proposed Network Enabled Training CapabilityMr John KentQinetiQRoom G030, Building A50Cody Technology ParkIvely Road,Farnborough,GU14 0LXUNITED KINGDOM+44(0) 1252 392952jrkent@qinetiq.comDr Richard RandelQinetiQDarenth House, 84 Main RoadSundridge, Nr. SevenoaksKent, TN14 6ERUnited Kingdom+44(0) 1959 547439rrandel@qinetiq.comKeywords:C4I, ISTAR, Command and Control, Interoperability, Simulation, Collective TrainingABSTRACT: Many complex factors will impact the conduct of future military operations, including new types of threat, the emergence of new equipments and doctrine, and changes to military structures and processes. In order to maintain the ability to ‘train as you operate’ in the face of these changes, the UK MoD is currently developing a concept for future land forces collective training known as the Network Enabled Training Capability (Land) – NETC(L)).  NETC(L) will deliver improved representation of the future battlespace, support for training across the full spectrum of operations, and much more flexible training delivery (e.g. faster exercise set-up, training precisely tailored to specific training needs, distributed training, etc).Some NETC(L) aspirations pose significant challenges. For example, because NETC(L) must provide collective training for a wide variety of command levels, missions and roles, the set of C4I and ISTAR systems involved will often vary on an exercise-by-exercise basis. Different training events will therefore involve a varying mix of real equipment, emulations, simulations, and role-play. If inclusion of C4I and ISTAR systems into collective training is not handled coherently, the result will be a proliferation of individual ‘point-to-point’ interoperability solutions. These could increase the overall cost and complexity of procurement and the number of distinct systems and processes that must be managed by training staff on a day-to-day basis. Credible approaches must therefore address programme-level coherence challenges in addition to purely technical concerns.This paper examines some of the issues involved, and describes their impact on a range of different stakeholders. It outlines several technical approaches that provide different aspects of the overall solution. Recognising that no one technical approach solves the entire problem, it also recommends the use of an Interoperability Coherence Framework (ICF) that provides guiding principles for when and where particular approaches should be applied. The paper is intended to support an ongoing dialogue between NETC(L) stakeholders and potential solution providers.IntroductionMany complex factors will impact the conduct of future military operations, including the emergence of new equipments and doctrine, changes to military structures and processes, and new types of threat. In order to maintain the ability to ‘train as you operate’ in the face of these changes, the United Kingdom (UK) Ministry of Defence (MoD) is currently developing a concept for future Army collective training known as the Network Enabled Training Capability (Land) – NETC(L)). NETC(L) will deliver improved representation of the future battlespace, support training across the full spectrum of operations, and provide much more flexible training delivery (e.g. faster exercise set-up, training precisely tailored to specific training needs, distributed training, etc).This paper is based on research conducted by QinetiQ on behalf of the UK MoD.  It describes some of the issues associated with the representation and use of emerging Command, Control, Communications, Computers and Information (C4I) and Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance (ISTAR) systems within the NETC(L) environment. C4I representation and interoperability requirements will be used to illustrate some of the more challenging problems involved. The paper will outline some of the types of solution required. Future Collective Training2.1 The NETC(L) ConceptThe UK Army’s collective training capability is currently supported by a variety of systems employing Live, Virtual, and Constructive simulation. Although these provide a comprehensive, stable and robust training environment, they do not provide the training richness and flexibility that will be required in the future.NETC(L) seeks to create the capability needed to support the types of training required in the future. Compared with the current baseline, it will allow:Training at dispersed locations via a variety of means, including, where necessary, being embedded in operational systems;The flexibility to accommodate changing doctrine and operational capabilities;An overarching and coherent training management capability, independent of specific training systems; Interoperability with other training systems (including those of Allies and other Services);Enhancements to efficiency and effectiveness of training to improve responsiveness and manpower overheads, especially when deployed;‘Composability’ i.e. a family of systems using consistent standards;Support for the integrity and security requirements of operations and operational systems.The overall NETC(L) concept is illustrated in Figure 2.1. EMBED PBrush  Figure  STYLEREF 1 \s 2 SEQ Figure \* ARABIC \s 1 1. The NETC(L) concept.NETC(L) will include traditional approaches such as live, virtual and constructive simulation. However, these different elements can also be combined in novel ways to support diverse and evolving training needs, and they will be aligned within a common approach to training management. 2.3 Delivery of NETC(L)NETC(L) will be delivered incrementally by a process of migration from the current capability, partly by making changes to existing and planned systems, and, in some cases, by developing new capability. This clearly has implications for the introduction of C4I and ISTAR systems, as will be described below.NETC(L) will be set within a defence-wide context known as NETC(Defence). This will address the collective training requirements of the Air, Maritime, and Joint communities. It is currently anticipated that some NETC(L) components will support NETC(D), and vice versa.C4I and ISTAR within NETC(L)3.1. C4I and ISTAR systemsOne of the most significant changes to UK operational practice is the introduction of several new C4I and ISTAR systems. Their use must be reflected in training if the need to ‘train as you operate’ is to be maintained in the future.The terms ‘C4I’ and ‘ISTAR’ cover two very different categories of system, which have their own distinct impacts on collective training. The two distinct domains are illustrated in Figure 3-1, which shows how they map onto typical land force structures and interact with the external environment. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure  STYLEREF 1 \s 3 SEQ Figure \* ARABIC \s 1 1. The C4I and ISTAR domains.C4I systems support Command and Control (C2) processes conducted by the commander and his staff, such as exchange of information with subordinate forces, coordination and battlespace deconfliction. ISTAR systems collect raw data about other forces and factions, exploit this data to generate information, and pass the results to the supported HQ.The C4I domain is the more extensive of the two in terms of the range of processes, systems and users involved, and, therefore, has the greatest impact on collective training. The extent of the diversity can be seen by examining the ‘four Cs’ within ‘C4I’:Communication Systems: infrastructures such as BOWMAN, FALCON and CORMORANT;Command and Control Systems: battle management system, and the many emerging information systems used at the operational and strategic level;Computer Systems: the physical systems that support C2 software applications.In contrast to the C4I systems, ISTAR systems are much more similar in overall function and purpose. They include:Imagery Intelligence (IMINT) systems (manned and unmanned);Electronic Intelligence (ELINT) systems;Surveillance and Target Acquisition (STA) systems, such as weapon locating radars.3.2 Benefits of Emerging C4I and ISTAR systemsCurrent battlefield information networks bear little or no resemblance to the complex technical infrastructures that will result from the introduction of C4I and ISTAR systems. It is, therefore, not possible to determine how future systems will be used simply by extrapolating from current procedures and processes.In the UK, the overall rationale for the use of C4I and ISTAR systems is termed Network Enabled Capability (NEC). This concerns the coherent integration of sensors, decision makers, weapon systems and support capabilities. The NEC literature [1] refers to a ‘benefits chain’ that states in high-level terms how the emerging systems will be used, and which identifies the associated operational impacts. The benefits chain provides a framework for analysing some of the key functions and activities associated with C4I and ISTAR systems, and their relevance to collective training, as illustrated in Figure 3-2. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure  STYLEREF 1 \s 3 SEQ Figure \* ARABIC \s 1 2. NEC benefits and collective trainingThe right hand side of the diagram shows the key elements of the chain. The benefits range from lower-level improvements such as ‘better networks’ to the overarching high-level aspiration to achieve ‘better effects’ on the battlefield.The left hand side shows high-level categories of staff that support, use or depend on C4I and ISTAR systems, and who are important from a collective training perspective. Their roles are expressed in NEC terms (e.g. Information Management (IM) and Information Exploitation (IX)). These staff categories are overlaid on the NEC dimensions (people, information, networks) to give a broad indication of their areas of responsibility.3.3. Changes to Collective Training NeedEach step in the NEC benefits chain has been considered to identify possible changes in the overall collective training needs caused by the introduction of C4I and ISTAR systems. Five high-level change areas have been identified as a result. These are summarised in Table 3.1 in an order that approximately follows the three NEC dimensions (i.e. from the lower physical network levels, via information, to higher-level people-centric cognitive functions).Change areaBrief explanationNetwork creationCreation of extensive, robust and heterogeneous networks to support the commander’s information needs.Network controlMaking dynamic changes to network behaviour to ensure that it meets operational demands, for example as operational tempo changes, or as the commander’s information needs change.Network evolutionDynamically reconfiguring network structure as force elements join and leave. This is essential to ensure that C4I systems can be used within agile forces.IM and IXConducting Information Management (IM) and Information Exploitation (IX) tasks to ensure that information is timely, relevant, accurate, etc, and in a way that is consistent across various staff processes so as to ensure that information is inherently shareable.Managing information boundariesSupporting the flow of information across system boundaries. This is very important when multiple systems participate in end-to-end system military processes (such as sensor-to-shooter links), and information must be synchronised across of all of them.Table 3.1. Changes to collective training needThe names of the change areas correspond approximately to the stated NEC benefits. For example, as shown in the table, ‘better networks’ will involve creating networks, controlling them dynamically and evolving them in response to changing operational demand.The most important deduction here is that the fundamental building blocks at the base of the NEC benefit chain rely heavily on functions that themselves depend on successful collective use of C4I and ISTAR systems. If these functions are not well represented in collective training, the readiness of the staff involved will be reduced, posing a risk to any operations in which C4I and ISTAR system are involved. It therefore follows that the ability to support the collective training of a C4I and ISTAR equipped force is critical to the basic aspirations of NEC. If appropriate collective training is not provided, the aspirations of NEC itself are likely to be compromised.3.4. Meeting the Training NeedsTo meet the future training needs, the relevant physical aspects of future C4I and ISTAR systems will need to be represented within collective training environments.  Depending on the level of representation required, this may involve the use of real hardware and software, or sufficiently realistic emulations. It will also be necessary to provide appropriate stimulation via the represented C4I and ISTAR systems. ‘Stimulation’ here refers to the reports, returns, orders, requests, etc, that are passed to the training audience. The stimulation requirements ultimately define the level of interoperability that will be required.3.5 Representation and StimulationThe fundamental question concerning representation and stimulation is ‘What level of fidelity of representation and stimulation is required to efficiently and effectively meet the training need?’In general, it is important to represent the parts of the overall C4I and ISTAR system of systems that are visible to the training audience and which allow them to ‘train as they operate’ (or ‘would want to operate’ in the future). If the level of fidelity of representation and stimulation is set too high, then the cost of representation may be massively increased with little additional benefit to the trainees. Conversely, if it is too low, the value of training will be reduced. Unfortunately, several factors make it hard to determine the ‘ideal’ level.The first is that fidelity depends on the command level being trained and on the type of collective training. In live training, for example, live firing of weapons may occur and their platform-level C4I applications may also need to be represented, as well as the C4I systems used within an HQ. Similarly, it is conceivable that in some training exercises, a particular ISTAR ground station should be included in the training audience. The representation issue is also complicated by the need to provide training support staff with some representation of operational C4I and ISTAR systems. Because the support staff are not themselves being ‘trained as they operate’, it is often acceptable to provide them with a lower fidelity representation than that required by the training audience, as long as they can support credible interactions with the training audience.Similar issues apply to the fidelity of information used to stimulate the training audience. It may often be sufficient to provide voice or text summaries of notional observations, rather than the imagery that might be available in practice. However, high fidelity products may sometimes be necessary to train key decision making tasks, such as collateral damage evaluation. Whether such products must be dynamically generated during an exercise (which is more technically challenging), or prepared in advance (which limits training audience free play and exercise flexibility), is highly dependent on specific training needs.The obvious conclusion here is that there is no ‘one size fits all’ solution to meeting the training need. One of the challenges for NETC(L) will be to support the wide range of variations required.C4I and ISTAR ChallengesOverviewThere are numerous challenges to the inclusion of C4I and ISTAR systems into collective training. 4.2 Technical Variations Between SystemsThere are significant technical variations between the overall set of C4I and ISTAR systems that must be represented in the training environment. There can even be major technical differences between C4I applications that run on the same underlying infrastructure. Some possible differences are:Quantity and type of ‘start-data’ that must be loaded, e.g. deployment-specific call-signs, equipment counts, etc.;Approaches used to interact with external sensor systems and weapons platforms (ranging from dedicated hardware to the manual ‘swivel chair’);Data formats for communication between different nodes on the overall network (ranging from ‘open’ to ‘proprietary’).Extent of data logging during normal use of the system. This may vary from ‘extensive’ for some systems (e.g. fire control systems) to ‘minimal’ for others;Because of these variations, it is harder to find a single technical solution to a common requirement. For example, if all systems logged data in a consistent way, it might in principle be possible to extract standard AAR products from the logged data. However, because different C4I and ISTAR systems log data in different ways, developers of AAR and monitoring tools may need to view each new system as a special case.4.3 Programme-Level VariationsIn the UK, each of the C4I and ISTAR systems that must be included into collective training is typically being procured by a separate equipment programme. Apart from the obvious functional differences between the systems, this means that they exhibit a wide diversity of programme-level variations. For example, each system will have its own unique lifecycle and upgrade route, e.g. in terms of additional components or functions that will be added as the system evolves toward Full Operational Capability (FOC), and which must therefore be integrated into collective training at a later date.If inclusion into collective training is not handled coherently across these systems, the result will be a proliferation of individual ‘point-to-point’ interoperability solutions (e.g. where an individual C4I or ISTAR equipment programme develops a solution for each distinct type of collective training capability). These could increase the overall cost and complexity of procurement and the number of distinct point-to-point solutions that must be managed by training staff on a day-to-day basis. Credible approaches must therefore address programme-level coherence challenges in addition to purely technical concerns.4.4 Compatibility with Exercise ProcessesAll types of collective training typically follow an ‘exercise process’ that includes planning, design, set-up, execution (sometimes in multiple phases) and review. From the perspective of the C4I and ISTAR systems, each of these activities requires some training-specific processes to be carried out. For example, exercise set-up involves ensuring consistency between the data held within individual operational systems and simulations. During the execution phase, the exercise staff may change the scenario clock (e.g. to jump forward through the scenario, or even to restart a phase in the event of a serious problem), or apply exercise ‘magic’ (i.e. to instantaneously change the location of a simulated unit).Clearly, if a C4I and ISTAR system is to be incorporated into training, it should be compatible with these exercise processes. Problems are likely to arise if ‘routine’ exercise tasks (such as resetting scenario time or extracting data for AAR) are disallowed by a particular system.4.5 Permitting Future Evolution of Collective TrainingThe operational and training systems discussed here will evolve for a variety of reasons, ranging from local procedural or technical ‘fixes’ to more fundamental changes (such as the complete replacement of an underlying simulation in the case of a training system). Such changes will often be outside the control of NETC(L), and may create new interoperability challenges.For this reason, C4I and ISTAR representation approaches must, wherever possible, strive toward flexibility, extensibility and openness. Great care must be taken to avoid introducing barriers either to future integration of C4I and ISTAR systems, or future evolution of training.Technical approaches5.1 Available Technical Approaches and MechanismsSystem interoperability and integration problems are not unique to collective training. For example, the following tools, techniques, technologies, processes and standards (referred to here as approaches) have been developed by the UK, US and NATO to support interoperability between operational systems:Architectural frameworks (e.g. US DoD Architectural Framework (DoDAF), [2] and MOD Architectural Framework (MODAF), [3], etc.);Common data models (e.g. Command, Control Information Exchange Data Model (C2IEDM) [4]);Interoperability standards ranging from structured messages through to automated data exchange;The Modelling and Simulation (M&S) community has also developed several of its own approaches:Standardised representations (e.g. Battle Management Language (BML) [5]);Standardised architectures and technologies (e.g. High Level Architecture (HLA) [6], Extensible Modelling & Simulation Framework (XMSF) [7]);Development processes (e.g. such as the Federation Development & Execution Process (FEDEP) [8] associated with HLA);Common data models (e.g. Synthetic Environment Data Representation and Interchange Specification (SEDRIS) [9]);Although the maturity and uptake of these approaches varies, most have already been used in a variety of operational, industrial and research contexts.5.2 The Need for an Interoperability Coherence FrameworkNone of these individual approaches ‘solves’ the overall integration problem. It is necessary to choose a relevant subset and use them in a complementary way. The key challenge is therefore to create an Interoperability Coherence Framework (ICF) that provides guiding principles for when and where particular approaches should be applied. A secondary challenge is to recognise when there is no suitably mature ‘off-the-shelf’ approach in a particular area, and identify the need for refinement of an existing approach, or development of a new one.An existing US approach to coherence between training and operational systems was identified and adapted to form the basis of the NETC(L) ICF. The selected coherence approach was originally developed by the US C4ISR Simulation Technical Reference Model (TRM) Study Group [10]. The study group has usefully visualised their model in the form of the so-called ‘House’ diagram, which is shown in slightly modified form in Figure 5.1. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure  STYLEREF 1 \s 5 SEQ Figure \* ARABIC \s 1 1. The adapted C4ISR-Sim TRM Study Group ‘House’ diagram.The ‘House’ diagram implies that the development of shared solutions to the interoperability of legacy and future operational and training systems rests on a number of fundamental building blocks. Full descriptions of these building blocks can be found in the reference, but, in summary:The roof of the ‘House’ (‘shared solutions’) indicates that the need for the supporting building blocks must be equally recognised and supported by all stakeholders;Processes for alignment and migration refers to the need to adopt styles of system development and programme management that explicitly address the need to enable coherent interoperability;Alignment of architectures refers to the need to reconcile operational architectures with those used by simulations, for example to provide routes for data to travel from one to the other;Common Data / Object models refers to the need to align the data structures used by operational and training systems respectively. Examples of such data include the content of messages, descriptions of force elements (e.g. equipment counts, combat status), etc. Use of common data standards reduces the need to translate data between simulation and C4I and ISTAR formats prior to or during an exercise; Common processes and tools are the complement to common data and refers to the need to ensure that, wherever possible, system processes and behaviours are aligned or at least compatible. For example, it would often be convenient if the detailed SOPs that govern use of C4I software (start-up, archive, etc.) could be used without change in the training environment;Reusable component interfaces is a concept that has emerged from the world of software engineering. It involves the creation of system components that are designed with re-use in mind, such that each component has a ‘clean’ interface that offers a clearly defined set of services to the outside world, and guarantees a given quality of service. Such components are necessary (but not sufficient!) for achieving safe and flexible ‘plug and play’ system composition.The following paragraphs explore the technical aspects of these building blocks in greater detail.5.3 Processes for Alignment and MigrationAn Architectural Framework (AF) is a standard way of describing systems and their components such that their functionality can be understood and characteristics of importance compared (e.g. their ability to interoperate). In other words, an Architecture Framework is not a run-time environment similar to HLA or BOWMAN, but is a theoretical way of describing actual architectures from a variety of ‘business’ and technical perspectives (‘views’). The MoD is exploring the use of an MOD Architecture Framework (MODAF).  MODAF takes account of the experience gained in the US with DoDAF and the differing needs of MOD, including MOD's procurement policies.The value of an AF to collective training is that it allows the systems that must be integrated (e.g. simulations, C4I software) to be compared in a like-with-like way, for example, to assess the degree to which they could interoperate at the business and technical level. It could support direct comparison and assessment of the systems, for example when determining how to implement particular levels of representation and stimulation, and the specific differences between two systems that require additional development activity.5.4 Alignment of ArchitecturesThe operational and training communities have adopted very different system architectures. Given the significant existing investment in operational and training architectures, and the difficulty of re-hosting systems between them, it is virtually guaranteed that there will always be a heterogeneous mix of system architectures in use.It is therefore impractical to strive for the ‘nirvana’ of a single unified architecture. Instead, at the architectural level, the goal must be to develop approaches that facilitate interoperability between systems that run on different architectures.  Two relevant techniques under development are Adaptive Middleware and the Extensible Modelling and Simulation Framework (XMSF).Adaptive Middleware refers to a complementary set of interoperability techniques, including web-based technologies and services, applied within an extensible framework that allows modelling and simulation applications to interoperate with operational systems. The technique also addresses the need to support flexible and potentially dynamic composition of systems from components that were not necessarily designed with this requirement in mind. As such, Adaptive Middleware provides a key element of an agile exercise management infrastructure.XMSF is a similar concept based on some of the same underlying technologies, but focused in the first instance on modelling and simulation systems. However, the form and direction of XMSF development means that it will be equally applicable to operational systems.Both of these approaches support the requirements for ‘plug-and-play’ interoperability and (re)composition of systems-of-systems. An Adaptive Middleware prototype is currently being developed by the MoD. 5.5 Reusable Component InterfacesReusable component interfaces are important to simplify technical interoperability between independent system components. In procurement terms, it is important to ensure wherever possible that:System developers appreciate the need for interfaces to be open and re-usable;Technical information concerning interfaces is available to other equipment programmes (e.g. in the form of a contractually accessible Interface Control Document);Open standards are used in preference to proprietary formats.These steps help to avoid the creation of barriers to future interoperability activities, even if the precise details of these activities are not defined. 5.6 Common Data / Object ModelsThe inclusion of C4I and ISTAR systems into collective training requires the capability to exchange information between training systems and C4I and ISTAR systems, either to stimulate the training audience, or to facilitate exercise set-up, review, etc. The need for data translation tools can be significantly reduced if different systems adopt consistent ways of describing data. Two such representations of information are C2IEDM and BML.C2IEDM originated as a data exchange model to support international interoperability between Land Forces, but has since been extended to cover some Air and Navy requirements. C2IEDM as it stands is relatively mature, and is widely used by NATO nations in national C4I systems as a basis for data/information exchange. Prior research [11] has demonstrated that some translation between C2IEDM and simulation data is feasible. C2IEDM is therefore an obvious choice for data exchange between training and C4I and ISTAR systems, in particular for well structured reports and returns. It will be particularly important to support interoperability with coalition C4I systems.BML operates at a higher level than C2IEDM, and, in theory at least, can be used to communicate overall command intent as opposed to formatted and structured data. Although BML is less mature than C2IEDM, and is currently not used by operational systems, it provide a promising approach to the translation of complex operational orders into tasking for simulated forces. This would reduce training support staff workloads during exercise set-up and execution.5.7 Common Processes and ToolsIt is important to consider the whole of the exercise lifecycle when determining the degree of interoperability required between training and C4I and ISTAR systems. This includes the need to load exercise-specific start data, extract data for AAR, etc, and to dynamically monitor and control operational systems as exercise phases unfold (e.g. pause, restart).Ideally, the tools that support these processes would be common between the operational and training environments, for example, so that operational system management tools could also be used to configure systems within the exercise (e.g. to define call signs, network topologies, etc). However, this has rarely been achieved to date. There may also be situations where constraints built into operational tools (e.g. to enforce security or range safety) complicate or preclude standard exercise processes (such as changing the scenario clock).The best way to overcome problems such as these is to ensure that designers of operational systems are aware of exercise processes and wherever possible take account of them during system design.Implications and conclusions6.1 The Need for an Integration-Centric ApproachAlthough improvements to underlying simulations are essential to provide better representation of the future strategic environment within training, such improvements alone are not sufficient to facilitate successful delivery of training. The fundamental principle here is that many of the key problems associated with the integration into collective training of C4I and ISTAR systems must be overcome by seeking increased coherence and interoperability between current, planned and future training systems. This can be characterised as an integration-centric approach (as opposed to a simulation-centric approach).An integration-centric perspective also facilitates improvements to representation and stimulation, in that it supports the development of federations of heterogeneous simulations that together provide inputs needed by the training audience. A (purely illustrative) example here is improving the representation of the future strategic environment by integrating a new ‘politics simulator’, not trying to enhance a traditional combat resolution model to include credible political entities. For operational systems, the need for integration is widely understood (as is evidenced by the creation of an Integration Authority to support MoD C4I and ISTAR procurement). Training systems should be viewed in a similar light, so that in the long term, it should be possible to view simulations as just one more category of component to be integrated.6.2 Modifications to Current and Planned SystemsThe whole emphasis of the overall approach outlined here is on alignment between, rather than replacement of systems, so that legacy systems are inherently catered for. The overall approach does not require all of the systems to form a level playing field (e.g. all equally interoperable), although clearly it would be more convenient if they did. However, it will often be necessary to make some modifications to bring the least capable systems up to ‘entry standard’. In this context, the least capable systems are those with the least ability to interoperate with others.The degree of modification necessary for any individual system will depend on the extent to which the system is already technically open and the specific interoperability requirement that is being addressed; hence it is virtually impossible to recommend specific modifications here. Clearly, the greatest pressure to change will be on the training systems, since technical changes to these will have the least operational impact (they have less stringent requirements for security, health and safety etc).As in many situations, cost effectiveness will be a key influence on the levels of interoperability required. This may preclude some technically feasible interoperability approaches, for example if the work will only benefit a small subset of the overall forces to be trained.6.3 Implications for RepresentationIn the short term, it is more important to create a reasonable representation of the overall C4I and ISTAR system of systems than to generate detailed representations of the individual systems or their products. In most cases it would be more important to represent the factors that contribute to collaborative mission planning and deconfliction decisions than to generate several thousand entity-level objects, merely because this number would be within the footprint of the various sensors associated with an HQ.In the longer term, however, more detailed representation of specific C4I and ISTAR aspects will be required in order to reflect:The increased levels of interoperability that should be achieved operationally (which will increase the flow of ‘raw’ data across the network);The increased expectation and sophistication of C4I and ISTAR ‘customers’, e.g. those who know how to precisely exploit the systems to achieve specific effects, or to acquire particular information.Adoption of the overall integration approach outlined in this paper will also help to ensure that any improvements to representation can themselves be integrated in due course.6.4 Implications for Operational SystemsThe most significant implication for operational systems is that their designers must consider at an early stage of their development how they will be used across the overall training lifecycle. In particular, they must consider exercise-specific requirements for:Data loading;Control of interactions (e.g. time management, pause and restart) during exercise execution;Supply of data for AAR.These concerns will get harder to address the later they are left in system design.6.5 ConclusionsThe fundamental conclusion from this work is that integration and interoperability must be approached coherently across multiple equipment programmes.The integration of C4I and ISTAR systems into training is just one aspect of the larger defence-wide integration challenge. This paper has identified some approaches that will facilitate integration of operational systems into collective training and that are consistent with emerging defence-wide approaches. However, the integration of C4I and ISTAR systems into collective training will only succeed if there is top-down recognition of its importance. If integration proceeds in a piecemeal fashion, it is likely that future collective training needs will not be fully met. This will limit the readiness of the UK armed forces as whole to operate effectively in the complex future strategic environment, and thus increase the risk to future operations.AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to thank Allan Cox, Corinne Jeffery and Brenda Stroud for support in the development of this paper.References[1]	“Network Enabled Capability”, DCBM/J6, Ministry of Defence, JSP 777 Edn 1.[2]	“DoD Architecture Framework”, Version 1.0, August 2003, http://www.software.org/pub/architecture/dodaf.asp[3]	http://www.modaf.com/[4]	http://www.mip-site.org/[5]	Galvin, K., Allan Cox, A., “Does the United Kingdom need a Battlespace Management Language?” Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Fall 2004, 04F-SIW-051[6]	Dahmann, J. S., Fujimoto, R. M., Weatherly, R. M., “The Department of Defense High Level Architecture”, Winter Simulation Conference, Nov 1997[7]	Tolk, A., and Pullen, M.  “Ideas for a Common Framework for Military M&S and C3I Systems”, Euro Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Jun 2003[8]	“High Level Architecture: Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) Model”, Version 1.4, DMSO 1999, pp iv - v[9]	http://www.sedris.org/[10]	Griffin A, Lacetera J, Tolk A, “C4ISR/Sim Technical Reference Model Study Group Final Report”, Sep 2002.[11] Tolk A, Turnitsa C, Kovurri S, DeMasi L, Dobbs V, Sudnikovich, “Lessons Learnt from C2IEDM mappings within XBML”, 04F – SIW-111, September 2004 Author BiographiesJohn Kent is a senior training researcher within QinetiQ. He has approximately 20 years experience working within the UK defence industry. He originally trained as a software engineer focussing on the pragmatic application of novel computational concepts. More recently, he has specialised in interoperability between C4I and ISTAR systems in the collective training environment, and has also contributed to the developments of strategies for C4I and ISTAR collective training.Richard Randel M.Phys is a research scientist in QinetiQ and has 10 years experience developing computational models and simulations.  He has explored a wide range of research interests within the defence sector that range from training and experimentation with C4I and ISTAR capabilities, to the aerodynamics of kinetic anti-tank weapons.  During this time he has developed numerous system architectures and computational models in support of his research.  Richard is currently supporting the architectural development of Network Enabled Training for the Land environment.  He earned his doctoral degree from the University of Wales, Cardiff in Physics in 2003.  During his time in academia he has collaborated on numerous of papers for internal scientific journals. This paper focuses on NETC(L) from a C4I and ISTAR perspective. The overall NETC(L) concept will be described to industry in a presentation currently scheduled to occur in the UK in May 2006. Information typically recorded includes the supporting standards and documents, system architecture information (interfaces, data specifications, protocols, etc.), and operational context (organisations, locations, processes, and information flows). For example, simulations protocols cannot easily be adapted to run over battlefield communication bearers. E.g. to provide data exchange gateways, or standardised ‘wrappers’ that facilitate interoperability. It is hoped that other aspects of this work will be reported in future SIW.