Technical Challenges for a Seamless, Distributed, Live-Virtual-Constructive Environment for Testing Human PerformancePaul TennantUS Army Aberdeen Test Center400 Colleran RoadAberdeen Proving Ground, MD 21005-5059410-278-8642paul.tennant@atc.army.milKevin P. RoneyScience Applications International Corp1100 North Glebe RdArlington, VA  22201703-907-2598kevin.p.roney@saic.comAlbert A.SciarrettaOrganization: CNS Technologies, Inc.Address: 7201 Hidden Ridge CourtSpringfield, VA 22152703-517-2143asciarretta@cnsti.comKeywords:Testing, Joint Mission Environment, Distributed, Live-Virtual-Constructive, Technical Issues, Human PerformanceABSTRACT: Today’s developmental and operational test and evaluation (T&E) of tactical and operational forces will require the ability to assess both individual and team physical and cognitive performance in Joint systems-of-systems operational environments.  Joint operations commanders and staffs normally command and control large formations, multiple types of forces, and almost unlimited fires -- consider recent Operation al-Fajr in Fallujah as a case in point of Joint Urban Operations (JUO).  The three dimensional area of operation was roughly twenty square kilometers in size – approximately 1,000 city blocks – and had about 70,000 to 90,000 of the estimated population of 300,000 remaining in residence.  Combat operations included combat and combat support forces from the US Army, US Marine Corps, US Air Force, the Iraqi Army, Iraqi Security units, and US Government agencies.  Replicating a similar amount of combat power and the battlespace in a live test event would require vast numbers of subordinate units and range capabilities which would exceed the current capacity of today’s testing and training environment.  The Services have limited training and testing facilities (especially for JUO); safety and environmental protection constraints; limited JUO tactics, techniques, and procedures; unknown issues with systems-of-systems interoperability; situation awareness data collection challenges; and inadequate data to validate models and simulations of human performance in Joint environments (operational through tactical).  Additionally, current operational commitments drastically reduce the number of military forces available for T&E.  Since the US military is increasingly likely to conduct operations on urban terrain with Joint systems-of-systems forces, these deficiencies must be addressed.  The paper will discuss the technical challenges in establishing such a comprehensive systems-of-systems JUO testing capability.  The paper will discuss recent Aberdeen Test Center (ATC) efforts as well as previous experiences of the authors to establish a seamless, distributed, live-virtual-constructive (LVC) simulation-enabled range capability for urban operations.  Distributed LVC models and simulations facilitated the ability to conduct JUO on complex urban terrain and to conduct more complex operations on existing small facilities/ranges by augmenting live forces and urban terrain with distributed LVC forces and urban terrain.  To properly assess human performance in this distributed LVC environment, the ATC established a testing methodology designed to allow leaders and Warfighters to make independent decisions based on their individual situational understanding (SU) – and not by a pre-determined script. 1. BackgroundThe intent of this paper is to discuss some of the technical issues involved in using live, virtual, and constructive distributed simulations to create complex test conditions for system of systems (SoS) testing in a Joint Urban Operations (JUO) environment.  The observations discussed in this paper are derived from the authors experienced in attempting to create such capabilities. The authors draw upon knowledge gained from:Army Aberdeen Test Center (ATC)-sponsored Joint Distributed Freeplay Event (JDFE) which occurred concurrently and as a subset of the Multi-Service Distributed Event / Distributed Test Event-5 (MSDE/DTE-5) in August 2005.Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO)-sponsored demonstration, entitled Joint Operations on Urban Synthetic Terrain (JOUST).  This 2003 demonstration focused on linking together many diverse LVC components (at Fort Benning, GA; Kirtland AFB, NM; Eglin AFB, FL; Naval Surface Warfare Center, Dahlgren, VA; Pentagon; virtual B2 bomber in El Segundo, CA; and linkage to the USAF DMOC Virtual Flag exercise) in a JUO environment. [1]OSD-sponsored experiment, entitled Smart Sensor Web.  This 2002 experiment focused on integrating live and constructive dismounted soldiers and equipment at Fort Benning, GA, with constructive Low Cost Autonomous Attack System (LOCAAS) air munitions at Eglin AFB, FL for Joint fires attacks of motorized enemy forces. [2]IntroductionWhy should the T&E community be concerned about the need for a distributed live-virtual-constructive (LVC) SoS test environment for JUO?  The reasons are varied and many, but in essence it is because this is the way the US military conducts warfare, as distributed teams relying upon SoS technologies.  Because we conduct warfare as distributed operations using SoS capabilities, our materiel solutions are also designed in this manner.  Some argue that beyond the system-under-test (SUT) it is training.  Such an argument may be considered to be myopic because it does not realize the tight coupling between the SUT, the systems it connects to, and the Warfighters that complete the total weapons system.  Our Warfighters are an integral part of the distributed SoS capabilities used to overwhelm and defeat the enemy.  This is today’s as well as tomorrow’s military operations vision.    In today’s combat environment, Joint operational level commanders and staffs normally command and control large formations, multiple types of forces, and almost unlimited firepower.  A great challenge to our warfighting capability is Joint operations in complex environments across the full spectrum of warfare.  As an example, consider Operation al-Fajr in Fallujah, Iraq.Operation al-Fajr was conducted in November 2004.  It characterized the complexity that Joint/Service leaders and the Services face on the contemporary urban battlefield.  Day and night operations involved combat and combat support forces from the U.S. Army, U.S. Marine Corps, U.S. Air Force, the Iraqi Army, Iraqi Security units, and U.S. Government agencies.  Combat operations were focused in a three-dimensional urban area that was roughly twenty square kilometers in size – approximately 1,000 city blocks.  About 70,000 to 90,000 of the estimated population of 300,000 remained in residence during the operation.Using al-Fajr as a use case would require vast amounts of live Joint and Coalition combat power, many square kilometers of urban battlespace, thousands of noncombatants, and realistic weapons effects in a live test exercise.  To conduct such a test would require vast numbers of personnel, subordinate units, and range capabilities which far exceed the current capacity of today’s testing and training ranges.  However this is the reality of how we conduct warfare and therefore what must be tested.  The problem is further exacerbated by the fact that investments in weapons systems designed for Joint systems-of-systems operations are on the increase.  Full spectrum, capabilities-based testing is severely constrained in the Department of Defense (DoD) when it involves Joint systems-of-systems testing.Joint T&E ConstraintsCurrent constraints on a Joint mission environment suitable for testing of an Operation al-Fajr scenario include:Current operational commitments drastically reduce availability of military forces for conducting a live T&E event of the appropriate scaleLimited availability of testing and training facilities which are dominated by facilities created for cold war era threatsInsufficient large-scale complex urban sites, and extreme difficulty in representing a large-scale complex cityscapes as a distributed urban rangeInadequate data and data collection methods to validate models and simulations of complex environments used in augmenting testing, training, analysis, and experimentationSignificant “seams” created among the distributed players and environments because of technical issues, spatial/temporal differences, weather differences, data/voice interoperability issues, safety and environmental constraints, limited urban day/night environmental conditions (e.g., sound, light, heat, electromagnetic), etc.Insufficient conditions for systems-of-systems interoperability, tactical to operational (e.g., disruption of services caused by systems competing in similar or near electromagnetic spectrum)Situation awareness challenges – physical/technical measurement of when awareness is available versus when a Warfighter recognizes awarenessEvolving Joint tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs), especially at the tactical level3. Addressing Joint T&E ConstraintsTo address constraints as listed above and support a Joint mission environment suitable for testing at the appropriate magnitude and complexity, one could replicate an Operation Al Fajr with advanced distributed LVC simulations, integrated in a seamless environment.  To make the test environment as realistic as possible, many technical, programmatic, and cultural issues must be addressed.  4. Technical Challenges Associated with Distributed Joint LVC EnvironmentsThere are many technical challenges associated with the development of a seamless, distributed, Joint LVC testing environment.  The following is a discussion of some of the more critical challenges.4.1 ComposabilityIn M&S, composability is the capability to dynamically select and assemble M&S components in various combinations to satisfy specific user requirements in a meaningful manner.  Normally, composability focuses on constructive and virtual M&S components.  In a Joint mission environment suitable for testing, composability must also include the dynamic linkage to live components -- players, weapon systems, C4ISR systems, databases, etc.  Achieving complete composibility may not be feasible in the near or even mid term.  Past DoD efforts to achieve it have had mixed success despite the many technological and architectural developments that have occurred over recent years.  Some of the reasons for this difficulty may be attributed to:Difficulty in linking the LVC components together in a simple manner because of architectural differences, including HLA vs. DIS, DISv6 vs. DISv5, legacy vs. new models and simulations, and differences in live systems vs. constructive models (e.g., communications)Challenges in setting up a seamless, real-time, realistic communications infrastructure for operational communications, while at the same time having a highly reliable communications network for virtual/constructive simulations and test control (white cell, data collection, safety, and others).Difficulty in allowing complete free play of live assets – which can get out of synchronization with the simulated world. [3]In addition to the above issues, many of the technical areas listed below (e.g., aggregation/disaggregation) also impact the ability to compose a distributed LVC simulations environment.Assuming automated composability will not be a near or mid term capability, a Joint test methodology should include efforts to reduce the amount of effort (resources and time) needed to compose a distributed LVC environment.4.2 Aggregation/DisaggregationModels have been built at different levels of resolution to take into account processing speed and data considerations of simulation platforms and simulators.  In an LVC environment, the live environment is often close to the highest resolution (actual war with real weapons effects would be the highest resolution).  Advances in computer processing speeds, new rendering techniques, and ultra-high density storage devices are making it more feasible to incorporate more high resolution virtual-constructive components.  However, limitations still persist (e.g., in bandwidth) which force the use of multiple resolutions in real-time distributed testing.It is believed (though perhaps not a fact) that testing requires the highest resolution of models and simulations.  However, for relatively simple platform-oriented testing, there may be merit in having a high resolution engineering model for the platform under test, while not necessarily having high resolution models for all elements of the supporting test environment.  Gateways can provide the mapping of data to link a high resolution platform to the rest of its environment.  However, an SoS, Joint mission environment suitable for testing will be comprised of numerous, complex, multi-resolution components and the complexity may be too much for a simple gateway approach.  This required use of multiple models with different levels of resolution creates the aggregation/disaggreation (A/D) problem. [3]Military modelers have not resolved this A/D problem, which is made more difficult by a lack of commonality of LVC components.  There is no A/D problem if all models and their data are defined at the lowest level, including capabilities like:A single set of data for all modelsOne set of algorithms for adjudicating actions among/within all modelsSeamless connections for passing state data. [3]In reality, this isn’t feasible for a distributed, large scale, high resolution, Joint test – the processing power, storage, and bandwidth rates just aren’t there for real-time testing.  So an approach for multi-resolution LVC simulations has been to use A/D algorithms which aggregate or disaggregate components at appropriate times.  There have been successes in these efforts, but the critical problem is that data details are often lost when going from higher to lower and back to higher resolutions.  For example, resources that were unevenly distributed at the individual (high resolution) level may get evenly or even fractionally distributed after being aggregated to a unit level and then disaggregated back to individuals.   Another problem is that the probability of kill data for aggregated entities may not necessarily be a simple aggregation of the data for platforms.  The aggregated data must match the algorithms (models) contained in the aggregated simulations.  Producing such aggregated data is so difficult that dedicated simulations are often used for the purpose of creating aggregated data for higher level (lower resolution) simulations. [3]The A/D problem can’t be ignored and probably won’t be easily fixed.  So the LVC development efforts need to consider the development of approaches for addressing the A/D problem.4.2.1 ResolutionPicking the right resolution for all participants is critical in a Joint test.  In a JUO simulation, all participants may need to be at DTED V (see Figure 1) in order to provide a common operating picture, as well as ensure “fair fights” between air and ground components.  Figure 1.Comparing Digital Terrain Elevation Data (DTED) Levels for Urban Environments [4]This may cause huge problems among some participants.  Many legacy systems (especially air platform virtual simulators) may not be able to handle a DTED V database of a large city.4.3 Linking M&S to Live C4ISR systemsAnother composability issue is the linking of models and simulations to C4ISR systems, which is necessary to support Joint, distributed LVC testing.  This linking is required toSupport seamless interactions among all LVC playersSupport the real-time (during the test) automated update of models and simulations with live data – i.e., to get all LVC databases in syncReduce preparation time Currently, C4ISR to M&S interoperability is supported by software interfaces/gateways established between specific systems. The development of C4ISR to M&S interfaces has not been considered as one of the primary design requirements for either type of system. This has led to systemic problems in using M&S systems to support C4ISR system testing, training, experimentation, and analysis. Some data cannot be easily stored in advance in the LVC databases, especially transient data types, such as own force locations and plans, and intelligence data on other entities.  These data must be captured from the operational systems.  The concept is simple; however, on-going efforts have proved that capturing such supposedly simple data such as own force unit locations for use in simulations is difficult.  The data in operational C4ISR systems may often have one or more of the following failings:Self-inconsistent (e.g., unit naming conventions vary across the distributed LVC environment – 1st Armored Division, 1st AD, 1AD, 1st Armd Div)Anomalous data (e.g., containing control characters)Bad data (e.g., wrong data)Complex data, such as the commander's intentTranslating commander’s intent into actionable information within the LVC infrastructure is a significant issue when conducting C4ISR testing.  Attempts to capture such complex data from operational systems and the commander’s mind have had little success.  This is an extremely difficult problem.   [3]Test development effort should address the problem of commonality among M&S and C4ISR data models, which include descriptions of the data structures, flows, etc., for the relevant C4ISR simulations and live systems.  These models are required to ensure composability and linking efforts can succeed.4.4 DataIt is often difficult to have a realistic, two-way common representation of the operational data of live forces to that of virtual/constructive forces.  Examples include weapons effects, environmental data, weather data, and human performance data.  Data concerns have to be considered in Joint distributed LVC testing.  Data concerns are numerous and are probably the biggest drivers in widening the “seams” of what would hope to be a seamless LVC environment.   When LVC simulations are used together for a Joint mission environment suitable for testing, they must have data inputs to support and be able to present a common and consistent model of reality. These data may be peculiar to the simulations being used, butsome of the data may be used over all scenarios,some data have broad application over many scenario sets, and some data are unique to a single scenario.In support of Joint distributed LVC testing, there needs to be a useful system for integrating data across the LVC simulations. [3]Unless all of the simulation needs of a Joint mission environment are met with a single simulation (e.g., one constructive simulation), there will be a problem of data storage and conversion.  Current simulations have large set-up times (usually ranging from days to months) due, in part, to the need for acquiring and converting available data into the inputs needed for the simulation.  Data will need to be stored in the proper formats wherever possible.  When common formats are not possible, gateways will have to include data mapping algorithms to enhance commonality.  Efforts should be made to conduct data mapping efforts among rather than within simulation components, so as to minimize technical conflicts within a particular simulation component. [3]Data will have multi-level security problems.  Data from national systems may be classified above the secret level while some live players in the Joint LVC network may have no security clearance.  Some method is required to support Joint distributed LVC testing while protecting highly classified data.4.4.1 Data FusionBy means of fusion, different sources of information are combined to improve the performances of an M&S federation. The data fusion can be decomposed into various levels.Lower levels of fusion are mostly automated, while mid to high levels are not. In general, models and simulations need algorithms which realistically represent (in an automated fashion) the data fusion currently being done by humans.  This is especially important for the use of simulated humans in C4ISR tests.  This effort is closely related to the aggregation/disaggregation problem.4.5 RepresentationSome capabilities exist in live environment which are not adequately represented, if at all, in the virtual/constructive environment.  “Information operations” is a prime example.  It is in its infancy in the virtual/constructive environment.There are also many inconsistencies in the live versus virtual versus constructive worlds. A good example is the coordinated attack of LVC dismounted forces on a single objective – especially in urban environments.  When viewed in a stealth mode, one may see the following:Live forces attack in a realistic, tactically correct manner (assuming they have been trained well)Virtual forces do not tire.  They run across open ground, up and down stairs, in and out of windows like supermenConstructive forces exhibit primitive movesSimilar inconsistencies can be seen in comparing views of live systems (e.g., UAV mounted camera) versus simulated view.4.5.1 Human Behavior RepresentationThe problems with human behavior representation (HBR) are well known in the M&S community.  When testing constructive information systems it is essential to have a constructive human entity which interacts with the system in an appropriate manner.  Much work needs to be done to achieve such a capability.  In the meantime, the Joint mission environment for testing must take this into consideration when integrating Joint distributed LVC simulations.4.5.2 Natural and Manmade Environmental RepresentationThe adequate representation of terrain, natural and manmade features, atmosphere, ocean, littoral regions, and weather is critical to the Joint distributed LVC test environment. This is especially important when integrating live environments and dissimilar simulations.  For example, in real operations, terrain restrictions mean that time and distance greatly affect the conduct of engagements and narrow the gap between operational and tactical actions.  This live need creates a need for closely synchronizing LVC testing on conditions that force operational and tactical command and control (C2) to integrate and interoperate as realistically as possible.  [1]4.5.2.1 Need for Dynamic Environmental DatabasesCultural (building) features are embedded in each terrain database. If you change a cultural feature, you must recompile the database. If you move to a different geographical location, a new database is needed.  Synchronizing cultural features could become very expensive, especially if a multitude of simulations are used to simulate a wide range of Joint problems.  If there is to be a truly “seamless” LVC test environment, then the environmental databases must allow for flexible, dynamic changes in real time – i.e., changes due to weapons effects, weather, etc.4.5.3 Representation of Communications and Sensor NetworksSimulation is an indispensable tool for studying the behavior of communications and sensor networks. However, there is a lack of integrated network-of-network representations for adequately testing large scale communications networks in operational environments.  Current M&S capabilities cannot address the large scale, complex communications and sensor networks needed for a Joint mission environment suitable for testing.  Most communications network simulations examine up to a few thousand nodes, while sensor networks may be much smaller.  Additionally, current propagation and performance models account for digitized terrain, natural features, and weather effects; but they are severely limited in capability to assess the impact of manmade feature data, especially urban structures.  Given today’s computational capabilities, there is a need to develop computationally efficient models of large scale communications and sensor networks which take into account the physics-based characteristics (e.g., multi-spectral emissions) and constraints (e.g., impedance to RF propagation) of natural and man-made (especially urban) environments. These simulations must be capable of running in real time and faster. [3]There may be a need to characterize natural and manmade structures for their interaction with RF propagation waves in a similar manner as we characterize them for interaction with mobile ground entities.  In other words, consider RF propagation movement as entities moving through the natural and manmade environment.  The characterization could leverage efforts on current terrain mobility models; for example:Explicit grid (e.g., storing structure data according to materials, thickness of materials, design pattern)Explicit patch (e.g., grouping grids for a specific category type of structure)Implicit mobility model (e.g., RF propagation coefficient for a group of walls, buildings)Network (e.g., polygons to represent RF propagation corridors)4.5.4 Representation of Information OperationsThe representation of Information Operations (IO) will have to take into account inter-related sub-missions. These include: Computer Network Attack (CNA)Computer Network Defense (CND)Electronic warfare (EW)Psychological operations (PSYOP)Operations security (OPSEC)Military deception (MILDEC)In addition, IO is supported by a number of related sub-missions, including public affairs and civil affairs. [5]   M&S of IO is very immature.  It will be necessary and very difficult to include IO in Joint mission environments suitable for testing.It should also be noted that the appropriate representation of constructive communications networks, constructive information systems, and constructive IO will depend heavily on HBR – of significant importance for SoS/C4ISR testing.4.5.5 Linking Live to Virtual-Constructive RepresentationsThere may be difficulty in emulating the performance of live systems in virtual-constructive environments.  Weapons effects (discussed below) is an easy example.  Another example is the flight of low-altitude UAVs.  A small UAV flying a somewhat circular pattern around an urban site will bank on every turn and will twist its fuselage when even slight winds hit the UAV from the side.  These movements significantly degrade the view of an on-board camera – changing the direction/angle of view with every twist of the fuselage and every turn of the UAV.    Meanwhile, the emulation of the same UAV in a constructive simulation may give a view that provides a circular (or elliptical) view of the ground that tracks consistently with the flight path of the UAV – with little variation. 4.6 Weapons EffectsWeapons effects are extremely difficult to represent in live environments – especially in urban areas.  It is tough enough to show weapons effects on buildings in a virtual-constructive environment, though it is not easy to resolve complex blast analysis algorithms in real time.  But even if accomplished, it is next to impossible to portray weapons effects on live buildings to live participants.  Additional difficulties in live environment include the inability of laser tag systems to work properly in smoke/fog, to shoot through thin doors/walls, to have bullets breaking window glass, and to represent ricochets.4.7 VerisimilitudeIn a distributed exercise, differences in time, geography, and weather negatively impact the ability to create a seamless Joint distributed LVC environment.  A simulation scenario could be conducted at 1200 (simulation time) on a bright sunny day in January in the simulated Korean area of operations with terrain being mountainous and forested.  In the real Korean area of operations, there may snow on the ground and the foliage is off of deciduous trees.  Meanwhile the following conditions could be occurring:It is dark in the Atlantic Ocean (1730 local time) for a naval force off the east coast of the U.S.It is 1630 in Dahlgren, VA and mist/rain limits visibility, it is relatively dark since clouds block what little sunlight is available prior to sunset at 1710It is 1630 in Fort Benning, GA, clear with sunset at 1710.  Terrain slightly hilly and forestedIt is 1530 in Eglin AFB, and terrain is open and flat, and there is clear with the sun out and foliage on treesIt is 1430 in Kirtland AFB, but all constructive simulations and simulators are inside and independent of the weather4.8 Position and Orientation TranslationPosition and orientation translation was a problem in the MSDE/DTE-5/JDFE, JOUST, and SSW events.  Entities where not well synchronized in terms of position and orientation at the test location (Korea, SWA, etc.).  Also, noise and the use of multiple positioning systems added to the incongruence.  Much work was done in the JOUST exercise [1] to address this problem and follow-on papers were presented at I/ITSEC on this topic [6].  There must be a methodology/standard set for position and orientation translation.  This is critical for achieving a realistic test environment. Figure 2. Appearance of a “Flying Armored Vehicle” Caused by Inaccurate Position and Orientation [7]The problem in simulation orientation and translation of interacting entities spans issues both in terrain and algorithms.  It seems most of the community still focuses the solution on terrain databases.  “If we could just build a better more uniform simulation terrain database” is often the conversation.  In JOUST we chose a different solution path and focused on algorithms in the entity state message.  We did this for three reasons; (1) the inclusion of a live range and (2) the belief that there is no holy grail terrain database solution, and (3) we operated in a “come as your are” mode, which involved 9 different simulation systems.  A live range was a fixed terrain location that was not going to be physically changed.  The data source of entity state messages was derived from GPS data correlated to that physical location.  Therefore, to integrate the live range into an event not located at that exact location was going to require a focus on an algorithm solution for an entity state message.  Additionally, after years of building terrain database and chasing the holy grail of heterogeneous simulation synchronized terrain databases it was realized that the fundamental problem was not in the terrain database construction, but in the precision of simulation algorithms.  This was further emphasized because of the focus on urban terrain.  At the level of interaction in urban landscapes, even little correlation issues have big effects.  In the past when events were on more open rolling terrain, such correlation issues were often solved by terrain clamping (as with clamping the flying armored vehicle in Figure 2).  This doesn’t work in urban because clamping can have bad unintended effects such as clamping an entity to a building roof when it should be on the first floor.  Therefore, no matter how precise the source material for a simulation terrain database, the ultimate weakness is in the algorithm that simulation engines use in working with the terrain.  So again, to develop an effective solution leads to the focus on algorithms.  JOUST did prove that by focusing on an algorithm solution at the message level, and not on the terrain database, would provide a working solution.  What was also learned from JOUST is that more work needs to be done in the area of standardizing internal simulation algorithms to gain the full benefit of synchronized orientation and translation with highly detailed terrain databases.4.9 ScaleIt is much easier to scale up in a virtual-constructive world than in the live world (e.g., conducting Operation Al Fajr in Fallujah, Iraq).  Most live urban training/testing sites in the U.S. are relatively small and can’t change the urban venue – e.g., difficult to change urban site representing a small German village into large, complex “Fallujah” landscape.Weapons effects are also not to scale.  The dropping of a constructive JDAM on a C2 node in a village will most likely be represented by an artillery simulator and a follow-on smoke grenade in the live environment.  The scale of effects is significantly different.4.10 Instrumentation for Data Collection and Presentation Current instrumentation, especially for dismounted players (e.g., MILES gear), is often cumbersome and not well integrated into current combat equipment.  Bulky components may inhibit normal motion – thus generating less-than-realistic actions.It is very difficult to portray virtual-constructive views in a non-intrusive, synchronized, and safe manner to some live players in a way that it is seamlessly integrated into live environment.  This is especially a problem for dismounted infantry and pilots of aircraft.4.11 Multi-Level Security (MLS)In a Joint distributed LVC event there will be multiple entities with varying levels of security clearances.  Some Service simulation events (e.g., training higher echelon staffs) routinely operate at a high security level.  This will not be true when composing a cross-Service, multi-resolution, distributed LVC test event.  Often, lower ranking soldiers do not have security clearances.  This creates a problem in a SoS test when all players are linked into a network of communications networks.   There are also problems with connecting local unclassified wireless communications of the live environment to the classified distributed network.There is a real, significant need for dealing with the MLS problem in a Joint mission environment suitable for testing.4.12 Real-World Technical Constraints4.12.1 Computational CapabilitiesComputational capabilities describe the capabilities of the platform on which an M&S application is hosted on and how it connects to other M&S applications and live and virtual components.  Although the development of computers, operating systems, and communications networks will continue to be enhanced at unprecedented rates in the commercial sector, the Joint distributed LVC testing community must take into account current and future computational capabilities.  Efficient M&S algorithms and modeling methodologies are needed to deal with the constraints being imposed by these computational systems.  4.12.2 Bandwidth RatesIn Joint Forces Command’s (JFCOM’s) recent Urban Resolve experiment, early network measurements showed that 5,000 clutter entities (civilian humans and vehicles) generated approximately 7.5 Mbps (Megabits/sec) of network traffic. Since Urban Resolve was using 100,000 clutter entities, there existed a network bandwidth requirement of 150 Mbps just for clutter updates alone. However, the available wide area network links were only capable of supporting around 50 Mbps, so not all the clutter traffic could go out on the network and there was no room for the normal simulation entity traffic.  So JFCOM had to develop many work-arounds. Likewise, the computational and storage requirements to deal with 100,000 clutter entities, 1.8 million buildings, red forces, blue forces, and numerous blue force sensors, forced the use of distributed computation, utilizing supercomputers at Maui, Wright Patterson AFB, and JFCOM. [8]Test items will not have the luxury of on-board supercomputers or compact terabyte storage devices, nor will they have sole use of high bandwidth rate communication networks.  Joint distributed LVC testers must understand the commercial trends in computer processing speed, data storage and retrieval, high speed data transfer, and massive parallel processing; know the availability of computing, communications, and operating systems in future military systems; and develop models and simulations to operate efficiently within the bounds of these systems.4.12.3 Network Latency and Drop-OffMethodologies for distributed Joint LVC simulations must take into account inherent network latencies and potential drop-offs.  In addition to latencies caused by the processing of massive amount of entity interactions, there is also the fact that the speed of electrons and radio waves cannot exceed the laws of physics.  We often see the latency in response times on television between a newscaster in the U.S. and one stationed in Iraq.  This same effect will occur with distributed LVC components.Drop-offs within a network may occur for numerous reasons.  The test methodology needs to address how to react to these drop-offs – stop the test or possibly activate shadow representations of the entities which have dropped off.  The latter would require a parallel constructive simulation running at the same time which as the ability to plug its entities into the test simulation on a moments notice.5. SummaryAs discussed in this paper, there are many technical challenges associated with the establishment of seamless, distributed LVC simulations to support testing in a Joint mission environment.  The larger the seams, the more unrealistic will be the environment viewed by live participants, the more invalid will be the behavior of simulated humans, and the more inconclusive will be the test data collected.6. References[1]   Joint Operations on Urban Synthetic Terrain (JOUST) Final Report, Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, November 23, 2004[2]   Smart Sensor Web (SSW) Final Report, Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, June 2002[3]	William S. Murphy Jr., Joe Foreman, Dean S. Hartley III, Albert A. Sciarretta, Stuart H. Starr, “High Priority Areas for Battle Command (BC)-Related Modeling & Simulation (M&S) Science and Technology (S&T)” SPIE Conference, Spring 2006[4]	U.S. Army Joint Precision Strike Demonstration (JPSD) Office, Fort Belvoir, VA[5]	Joint Information Operations Munitions Effectiveness Manuals (IO JMEM) Working Group (WG) Meeting, 16-17 November 2005, http://iac.dtic.mil/iatac/JMEMmanual.htm[6]	Matthew Olson, Dr. Ben Wise, Dr. Wes Braudaway, and Edward Ronan; “Real-time translation of simulation data across multiple complex terrain models” Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation, and Education Conference (I/ITSEC) 2004[7]	U.S. Army Aberdeen Test Center (ATC)-participation in the Multi-Service Distributed Event/Distributed Test Event-5 (MSDE/DTE-5), August 2005[8]   Andy Ceranowicz and Mark Tropey, “Adapting to Urban Warfare,” I/ITSEC 2004Author BiographiesPAUL TENNANT is Deputy Director, Test Technology Directorate, and Chief, Transformation Division, within the US Army Aberdeen Test Center.  He has 17 years of Test & Evaluation experience, primarily in the development of advanced test technologies, instrumentation, M&S and ranges.  His experience includes human systems integration (HSI), distributed testing, software testing, unmanned ground systems, modeling & simulation, and survivability/lethality.  Paul holds a B.S. degree in Mechanical Engineering from Clarkson University, a M.S. degree in Mechanical Engineering from Purdue University, and is a member of the Army Acquisition Workforce.KEVIN RONEY is a Senior Manager with Science Applications International Corporation involved in projects to develop solution for testing and training in Joint Urban operations. He has 22 years of Systems and Software engineering experience. Kevin has worked in the distributed computing and simulation business for more than thirteen years. His experience includes Lead Analyst for Future Force Warrior ATD Lead Technical Integrator, Project Manager for the US Army’s Warfighting Analysis & Integration Center and as Senior Systems Engineer on DARPA WarBreaker program. Kevin holds a B.S. degree in Nuclear Engineering from the University of Missouri-Rolla, a M.S. degree in Engineering Management from the University of Maryland, and is a Project Management Professional (PMP).AL SCIARRETTA is president of CNS Technologies, Inc. and has over 20 years of experience in assessing advanced military technologies, developing science and technology investment strategies, and designing and executing tactical through operational demonstrations and experiments which include the use of integrated live-virtual-constructive simulations.  Subject matter expert on improvised explosive devices, counter-terrorism efforts, modeling and simulation, human-system interfaces, and the design of Army combat weapon systems.  Al holds a B.S. degree in General Engineering from the U.S. Military Academy, a M.S. degree in Operations Research from Stanford University, a M.S. degree in Mechanical Engineering from Stanford University, and is a Certified Professional Engineer in the state of Virginia. C4ISR = command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance PAGE  