Implementation of a Prototype C4I FOM: Continued ProgressWilliam SudnikovichU.S. Army Communications-Electronics Command (CECOM)Command and Control Directorate (C2D)Fort Monmouth, NJ 07703sudnikow@mail1.monmouth.army.milJohn D. RobertsAtlantic Consulting Services (ACS), Inc.167 Avenue at the Commons, Suite 4Shrewsbury, NJ 07702 HYPERLINK mailto:johnr@mitre.org jroberts@acsinc-nj.comKeywords: C4I, Communication Effects, FOM, RTI, Tactical Internet Model (TIM)ABSTRACT: The U.S. Army has the responsibility to oversee the prioritization and integration of Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I) models to facilitate trade-off analysis and validation of the Army Enterprise Architecture, to include the Operational, Technical, and Systems Architectures.  In doing so, Department of Defense (DoD)-compliant tools and methodologies are to be used, including the High Level Architecture (HLA).  The U.S. Army Communications-Electronics Command (CECOM) is sponsoring research in this area through a Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program.  Currently well into Phase II of this work, Atlantic Consulting Services Inc. (ACS), is developing a prototype C4I Federation Object Model (FOM) to serve as a starting point for the establishing a more general C4I Reference FOM that would evolve to become a Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) standard.Phase I of the SBIR project yielded an initial version of the prototype C4I FOM primarily based on the Army’s Tactical Internet (TI) for battalion and below.  During Phase II, work is focussed on demonstration of the C4I FOM and its evolution based on lessons learned and expansion of the scope considered during Phase I.  Demonstration of the C4I FOM is being performed within the context of CECOM’s Tactical Internet Model (TIM).  The TIM is a high fidelity real-time model of the Army’s TI for echelons of battalion and below providing realistic digital communications to the simulation and training communities.  Originally developed under the Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) protocol, this effort involves transitioning the TIM to HLA based on the C4I FOM.  In addition to the prototyping effort, work is moving forward to expand the content of C4I FOM by considering sensors, intelligence, Information Warfare (IF), and joint services.  The paper will provide a summary of the project status in terms of progress on the demonstration prototyping effort and the current state of the C4I FOM, including coordination with other agencies.IntroductionThe U.S. Army has the responsibility to oversee the prioritization and integration of Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I) models to facilitate trade-off analysis and validation of the Army Enterprise Architecture, to include the Operational, Technical, and Systems Architectures.  In doing so, Department of Defense (DoD)-compliant tools and methodologies are to be used, including the High Level Architecture (HLA).  The U.S. Army Communications-Electronics Command (CECOM) is sponsoring research in this area through a Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program.  Phase I, which was a six-month effort, yielded an initial version of a prototype C4I Federation Object Model (FOM) primarily based on the Army’s lower Tactical Internet (TI) (i.e. maneuver forces at battalion and below).  Currently in the midst of Phase II, Atlantic Consulting Services Inc. (ACS) is expanding on the Phase I results by developing a prototype to demonstrate the C4I FOM and serve as a starting point to establishing a more general C4I Reference FOM.  This paper provides an update on the status of this work and is a follow-on to an earlier paper presented at the Spring 1999 Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW) [1].CECOM is sponsoring this effort in support of The Army Enterprise Implementation Plan, Task 9 Action Plan which calls for a common environment to support the evolution of Army C4I Modeling and Simulation (M&S) efforts.  This type of objective environment will support the evaluation of C4I systems in the research, development, and acquisition (RDA), advanced concepts requirements (ACR), and training, exercises, and military operations (TEMO) domains in a timely manner for virtual, constructive, and live simulations, as appropriate. It will also provide flexibility, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, while promoting hardware and software reuse between organizations, through interfaces to prototype/operational C4I systems.Demonstration of the prototype C4I FOM is being done within the context of the Tactical Internet Model (TIM).  The TIM is a real-time entity based simulation environment built to model realistic communication effects for the Army’s lower TI at the echelons of battalion and below.  Originally implemented using Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) Protocol Data Units (PDU) and Internet Protocol (IP) multicast sockets for the exchange of information among components, Phase II seeks to migrate this environment to the HLA based on the prototype C4I FOM.The overarching long-term objective of this project is to lay the foundation for a Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) approved C4I Reference FOM.  There have been many C4I experiments executed in DIS, HLA or mixed environments.  However, these experiments had specific requirements and objectives and, therefore, do not approach the C4I issue in a comprehensive manner.  The key to true C4I HLA simulation interoperability is the development of common representations of C4I data and interactions.  That is, the nomenclature used for the classes, attributes, parameters, services, etc., as well the definition of the data structures, need to be defined and standardized.  A C4I Reference FOM provides a basis for the standardization needed. The purpose of this paper is provide an update on the SBIR Phase II prototyping effort to date and to discuss the current status of the C4I FOM.  Section 2 provides a summary of the Phase I work and an overview Phase II, currently in progress.  Section 3 presents an in-depth discussion of the prototype effort including a description of the TIM environment, identification of a demonstration scenario, and the status of the prototype development.  Section 4 discusses the current state of the C4I FOM in terms of updates made, the basis for these updates, and other factors being considered to influence its evolution.  Section 5 provides a summary and conclusions and section 6 identifies the references used in the generation of this paper. BackgroundPhase I WorkPhase I of the SBIR contract was a six month effort executed during the first half of Fiscal Year 1998 (FY98).  The intent was to initiate development of a plan for transitioning the Army’s C4I M&S products and tools to the objective M&S environment identified in section 1.  Phase I featured the use of the DoD-mandated HLA as the key enabling technology for the objective C4I M&S environment.  A survey of existing CECOM models and M&S requirements for the TEMO and RDA domains was performed to determine the applicability to an objective environment, and the feasibility of transitioning these models to this kind of environment.  The primary result of Phase I was an initial prototype C4I FOM establishing a starting point for HLA-compliant federates to establish a “contract” describing the types of data and interactions to be shared through the Run-time Infrastructure (RTI) during a federation execution.  A secondary result of Phase I was the notion that the HLA lends itself well to meeting the requirements of the Army’s objective C4I M&S architecture through a common underlying framework applicable to a wide range of M&S systems.  The HLA facilitates interoperability among the systems and their components while drawing upon previous DoD M&S experience, most notably DIS and the Aggregate Level Simulation Protocol (ALSP).In developing the initial version of the C4I FOM, object-oriented techniques were used to gather requirements, synthesize the results, and map this information into a HLA FOM representation.  An object-oriented analysis (OOA) and design (OOD) methodology was used to generate successive layers of increasing detail allowing for the capture of many of the details of the problem domain. The information was specified in a manner prescribed by the HLA Object Model Template (OMT), a tabular format that includes an object-class structure, interactions, attributes, and a data dictionary.  Through this process certain key areas were identified, including C4I Systems, Communications Device, Communications Network, Communications Effects, and Messages.  These areas formed the basis for deriving the object classes, attributes, and interactions of the FOM. The Phase I version of the prototype C4I FOM can be found in [2].  The remainder of this document focuses on the work being performed under Phase II and provides the current status of the prototype C4I FOM. Phase II OverviewPhase II of the SBIR contract is a two-year effort that began in late September 1998.  The objective of Phase II is to demonstrate the feasibility of the C4I FOM to facilitate development of an objective M&S environment for C4I systems.  An existing simulation environment, the TIM, is being transitioned from DIS to the HLA based on the prototype C4I FOM.  In addition to the prototyping work, further analysis is underway to expand the scope of the operational environment being considered for the C4I FOM by considering other factors such as sensor systems, IW systems, intelligence systems, higher echelon operations, and interoperability with joint services. The ultimate goal is to evolve to a more robust and general purpose C4I Reference FOM applicable to a wide range of echelons and other services.  The simulation environment being used to demonstrate the prototype C4I FOM is the TIM.  Originally developed in FY96 for Task Force XXI training to model the Army’s TI, it provided an interface to the battalion and below Command and Control (C2) system, the Appliqué [3].  Since that time, the TI has evolved to a more robust network implementation and is now targeted for the Army’s First Digitized Division (FDD) scheduled for fielding in FY01.  Likewise, the Appliqué has been replaced by the Force XXI Battle Command Brigade and Below (FBCB2) system.  To keep pace, the TIM has also evolved to accommodate the changes to the TI and provide an interface to FBCB2 as required to support the Simulation Testing, Operations Rehearsal Model (STORM) project. STORM is intended to provide a seamless, synthetic battlefield environment and is being used to prepare for the Initial Operational Test and Evaluation (IOT&E) of the FBCB2 system.  STORM will significantly reduce troop requirements and thus the cost of operational test as well as contribute to an environment that can provide benefit to the training community.The TIM provides realistic digital, voice, and data communications to the simulation and training environment.  It computes message delays and losses in communications based on terrain, network traffic, and radio characteristics.  Figure 2.1 illustrates the TIM environment as it is being used for the STORM project.Figure 2.1 TIM EnvironmentThe FBCB2 is the real world C2 system under development by the Army for use within the TI at the echelons of Battalion and below.  It provides a live user the ability to send and receive SA messages and command level messages.  The TIM provides a realistic interface to the virtual world for the FBCB2.  The Internet Controller (INC)-PC node models the functionality of the real world INC component and is the interface between the FBCB2 and the simulation environment.  It is responsible for routing information to and from FBCB2 in the same manner as the real INC.  The environment can be configured to accommodate one or more INC-PC/FBCB2 nodes.  The Simulation Converter (SIMCON) is responsible for providing SA information for the simulated entities not associated with a real FBCB2 device.  It acts as a virtual FBCB2 server by generating actual formatted SA messages that can be received and processed by the real FBCB2 devices participating in the environment. The Global Positioning System (GPS) Server provides a centralized high fidelity navigation capability.  It is based on the CECOM GPS Navigation Model (CIGNM) providing the Precision Lightweight GPS Receiver (PLGR) interface to the FBCB2 systems.   The Communication Effects Server provides realistic communications effects through computation of message signal degradation and other losses based on radio performance, terrain contour, and unit location.  In addition, it accounts for channel access and message delivery delays due to network loading and routing.  The ModSAF/Janus component is a DIS-based entity level constructive simulation system capable of modeling certain behaviors of land, sea, and air units.  It is primarily used as the driver for the simulation environment. Demonstration PrototypeOne of the primary objectives of the Phase II work is to demonstrate the feasibility of the prototype C4I FOM.  This is being achieved through transition of the TIM simulation environment to HLA based on the prototype C4I FOM.  The FOM is the basis for establishing the information exchange among the various components of the TIM within the federation.  Initially in Phase II, a number of updates were made to the original Phase I version of the prototype C4I FOM.  Further updates are in progress to accommodate specific information exchange requirements dictated by the TIM environment.  A federation is being developed that provides the same component level interaction as the DIS-based version of the STORM-TIM.  The objective is to develop the federation in such a way as to provide an environment to easily allow for future integration of other C4I related M&S systems (e.g., collection system simulations or sensor models).  The demonstration environment being developed as part of this effort is herein referred to as the C4I Modeling and Simulation Environment (CMSE).The remainder of this section discusses the prototyping effort in further detail including identification of a set of scenarios for demonstrating the CMSE, the progress made during FY99, and the plans for continued development in FY00. Demonstration ScenariosThree levels of scenarios have been developed for effectively demonstrating the CMSE prototype.  The scenarios target the various levels of message passing that occurs within the Army lower TI.   The first scenario involves the exchange of SA messages within a platoon network. Figure 3.1 shows the configuration of the platoon network.  Figure 3.1 Platoon NetworkThe platoon network consists of four nodes; each equipped with a FBCB2 system, an INC, and a SINCGARS radio.  Information is transmitted among the FBCB2 systems via SINCGARS radios.  The INC acts as a router to ensure the messages are forwarded to the proper address based on a pre-established network configuration.  SA messages are automatically generated by the FBCB2 systems based on time and movement thresholds.  Within the platoon network, SA messages are sent broadcast, meaning the messages are not directed to a specific node or user, but sent to all members of network simultaneously.  This is the simplest of the scenarios and is intended to demonstrate basic connectivity among the TIM components configured as a platoon network.The level 2 scenario involves the exchange of C2 and SA messages within a battalion network using SINCGARS and EPLRS radios. The typical battalion consists of three or four companies each containing 3 platoons.  At the company level there are also a number of supporting units connected via the company command network.  Similarly, at the battalion level there are certain supporting units that make up the battalion command network.  Figure 3.2 illustrates the battalion network.Within each platoon and command network SA information is communicated using SINCGARS.  SA messages are passed among these networks through use of an EPLRS Carrier Sense Multiple Access (CMSA) needline.  Each SINCGARS network has a designated position server that is equipped with an EPLRS radio in addition to his SINCGARS radio.  The position servers participates on an EPLRS CSMA needline and are responsible for communicating the positions of all their local units to the CSMA needline.  These messages are referred to as SA rollups.  The rollup messages are broadcast to the CSMA network allowing all other position servers on the needline to receive this information.  Upon receipt of these messages, each position server pushes the information down to the units within their respective SINCGARS networks based on geographical filters.Figure 3.2 Battalion Network C2 messages are treated somewhat differently and are directed to individual units or groups of units.  They are sent using either unicast or multicast depending on the size of the message.  For messages greater than 576 bytes or directed to a single recipient, unicast is used to forward the message to the node serving as the gateway for the local SINCGARS network.  For unicast messages TCP serves as the transport mechanism.  Using Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) the gateway establishes a Switched Virtual Circuit (SVC) via a EPLRS CSMA with the destination gateway node and passes the message through this circuit.  The receiving gateway then forwards the message to the intended recipient locally within the SINCGARS network. For messages less than 576 bytes directed to multiple destinations, the originator sends the message to its local gateway node using a multicast routing.  The gateway node broadcasts the message over the EPLRS CSMA using a pre-established multicast group corresponding to the set of recipients.  In this case all other nodes on the EPLRS CSMA receive the message and filter based on their interest in the multicast group.  The message is the locally forwarded to the intended receiver via the SINCGARS network.The level 3 scenario expands on the level 2 scenario by adding a connection to the battalion Tactical Operations Center (TOC).  The purpose of the level 3 scenario is provide an interface to higher level Army Battle Command Systems (ABCS) accessible from the battalion TOC local area network (LAN).  Examples of these ABCS systems are the Maneuver Control Systems (MCS), the Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data System (AFATDS), and the All Source Analysis System (ASAS).  In this scenario, exchange of C2 and SA messages with ABCS systems will be demonstrated. Figure 3.3 shows the battalion network including the connection to the battalion TOC.Figure 3.3 Battalion Network with TOC ConnectionCMSE Build 1The CMSE prototype is being developed in two builds.  Build 1 has been implemented during FY99.  Build 1 involves a small-scale demonstration based on the FY98 version of the STORM-TIM software, released in August 1998.  This version of the TIM was used for the FBCB2 Limited User Test (LUT).  Due to limited funding and schedule constraints the FY98 version of the TIM did not include the Communication Effects Server component and focused on the exchange of SA messages.  For Build 1, ModSAF is being used rather than the Janus simulation because it is readily available to ACS and somewhat easier to setup and work with.  Build 1also does not include the GPS Server component, as it required additional hardware not budgeted for in FY99.  Figure 3.4 shows the configuration of the CMSE Build 1.The purpose of Build 1 is to transition the FY98 version of the STORM-TIM to the HLA based on the prototype C4I FOM.  The level 1 scenario defined in section 3.1 is being used for demonstrating Build 1.  SA messages are exchanged between a single FBCB2 attached to the INC-PC and the SIMCON component using HLA interactions as specified in the prototype C4I FOM.  ModSAF provides entity position information translated via the HLA Gateway in the form of attribute updates for the X, Y, and Z coordinates.  The HLA Gateway is a software product developed by the Institute for Simulation and Training (IST) at the University of Central Florida (UCF) for translating DIS PDUs to the HLA.  It provides a convenient way to use ModSAF within an HLA federation without having to develop a customized HLA interface to it.  The implementation of the HLA Gateway is based on the Real-time Platform Reference (RPR) FOM, which is an object-oriented representation of DIS PDUs.  Use of the HLA Gateway required that the entire RPR FOM be included within CMSE federation FOM (i.e., all class, attributes, and interactions from the RPR FOM were included in the CMSE fed file).Figure 3.4 CMSE Build 1The first step performed in transitioning the TIM environment to the HLA was replacing the DIS interface to the SIMCON.  The SIMCON source code was updated to include an HLA interface.  The portions of the code that receive and process Entity State (ES) PDUs were commented out and replaced by handlers that are called from the discoverObject and reflectAttributeValue callbacks functions located in the HLA federate ambassador code.  A new set of objects representing the ModSAF entities were instantiated as MilitaryLandPlatform objects within the HLA interface to the SIMCON.  The MilitaryLandPlatform objects are defined by RPR FOM and represent ground-based entities from ModSAF.  The newly created objects were associated with the internal objects created and maintained by the SIMCON to represent these entities.  The objects are associated using the entity_id and marking fields obtained from the ModSAF entities via the HLA Gateway.  The entity location information is received by the SIMCON via the RTI as updates to the Position attribute of the MilitaryLandPlatform class.The next step for transitioning the STORM-TIM to the HLA involved replacing the mechanism for sending and receiving SA messages.  The FY98 version of the STORM-TIM was implemented using IP multicast sockets as the technique for routing SA messages.  In the real TI, units communicate within networks, which are configured according to operational function and echelon.  This is done so messages are routed in a manner consistent with the normal command hierarchy of the units.  Selected units participate on multiple networks and serve to route information among the networks.  The STORM-TIM implementation uses IP multicast groups to model these various networks.  Each multicast group number represents a different network.  Subscription to a particular multicast group implies membership in the corresponding network.This technique for controlling the distribution of information through membership within a multicast group is analogous to the publication and subscription mechanism of HLA interactions.   Subscribing to a particular interaction class could be used to imply membership in a network represented by that interaction class.  The exchange of SA messages through the HLA was therefore implemented using interaction classes in this manner.  A single class of interaction was created to represent all SA message interactions.  The parameters are used to distinguish among the different multicast groups.  Implementation of this mechanism was accomplished through modification of the SIMCON and INC-PC components source code to replace the IP multicast socket interface with an HLA interface for exchanging interactions.   A handler for processing the receipt of interactions was created and integrated within the receiveInteraction callback located in the HLA federate ambassador code.CMSE Build 2Build 2 of the CMSE will be developed during FY00 and involve the latest version of the STORM-TIM.  The STORM-TIM program is currently working to implement an updated version of the TIM based on the description provided in section 2.2.  The new version of the STORM-TIM is expected to be available by late summer FY99.  The purpose of Build 2 will be to establish a path for transitioning this new version of the STORM-TIM toward HLA compliance.  Although the exact timeframe for HLA compliance of the TIM has not been determined, the Build 2 prototype is intended to serve as the first step toward this end.Figure 3.5 depicts the CMSE Build 2 configuration. Included in Build 2 will be the GPS Server and the Communication Effects Server.  The GPS Server will provide location data to the FBCB2 via the serial port.  The purpose of the Communication Effects Server is to model the real world effects of propagation, the environment, network delays, and the characteristics of the radios.  In addition a second INC-PC/FBCB2 node will be included to provide for the exchange of messages between systems.  Build 2 will again use ModSAF via the HLA Gateway as the simulation driver and focus on demonstrating the CMSE based on the level 2 and level 3 scenarios defined in section 3.1. Figure 3.5 CMSE Build 2Integration of the GPS Server to the CMSE federation will be performed in conjunction with CIGNM contractor.  Based on discussions with the developers from Computer Sciences Corporation (CSC), the GPS server has been implemented using a client-server approach.  The server exists on a separate platform and is responsible for maintaining location and other information about the various entities involved in the scenario.  A separate client component corresponding to the host platform for each real FBCB2 has been hosted on the INC-PC as a separate process.  The client communicates with the server to obtain position information for the entity it represents.  This information is then forwarded to the FBCB2 through a separate serial interface.  An HLA interface will be established for the server to receive entity state information from ModSAF via the HLA Gateway.  In addition an HLA interface will be established between each client and the server to allow the position information to flow through the RTI.The Communications Effects Server processes transmitted messages to determine losses and delays based on the environment, characteristics of the radio, and status of the network.  On-going discussions have also taken place with the developers of the Communication Effects Server, MITRE.  The implementation of the Communications Effects Server involves an approach where all messages pass through the server en-route to the intended destination.  The server computes and applies the communication effects based on the current status of the modeled environment.  Under this approach the operation of the Communication Effects Server is analogous to that of the routing federate implemented as part of CMSE Build 1.  Interfacing the Communications Effects Server with the HLA will attempt to exploit this design and leverage work done on Build 1.C4I FOM StatusAs stated, an important objective of this work is to develop the C4I FOM in such a way that it can be used as a starting point for establishing a C4I Reference FOM. The Phase I C4I FOM has been expanded in a number of ways during Phase II work.  Figure 4.1 shows the overall class structure of the current version of the prototype C4I FOM using a Unified Modeling Language (UML) representation.UML is a popular modeling language based on object-oriented methodologies used to depict the design of an application in terms of objects, their attributes and relationships.  In figure 4.1, each box represents a separate class, where the class name is displayed in the top portion of the box.  The middle section of the box contains the attributes that describe the characteristics of the object.  The lower portion identifies the methods or functions that act upon objects of the class.  Lines connecting these classes that include a triangle symbol denote a hierarchical relationship.  The Class on top is considered the base class and classes connected through the triangle are subclasses inheriting all attributes and methods from the base class.  For example, in figure 4.1, the Message class is a base class and VoiceMessage and TextMessage are subclasses that inherit from Message class.  Lines connecting classes that include a diamond symbol represent an aggregate relationship indicating a part-of relationship between the classes.  In figure 4.l, an aggregation relationship is shown between the CommLink class and the C4IDevice class such that a CommLink object (i.e., a network) is made up of C4IDevice objects (i.e., C2 system, router, radio, etc).  A simple line connecting two classes identifies a basic association relationship where one class is in someway associated with the other class.  In figure 4.1 an association relationship exists between the C4IDevice class and the Message class representing the fact that a C4IDevice object sends and receives Message objects.  Further information regarding UML is found in [4]. A number of factors have influenced updates to the prototype C4I FOM including incorporation of the HLA Gateway, characteristics of the TIM environment, coordination with the Navy, and other considerations.  Sections 4.1 through 4.4 describe each in further detail.RPR FOM ConsiderationsOne aspect missing from the Phase I FOM was the notion of associating a communications device with a host platform.  The scenarios defined in section 3.1 require that entities be defined within the simulated environment to provide location and movement information.  These entities modeled by ModSAF represent the host platforms for C4I devices involved in scenarios depicting communication oriented operational scenarios.  The HLA Gateway was selected as the means of incorporating the ModSAF entities within the CMSE federation.  It serves to translate the entity information from DIS PDUs to HLA attributes and interactions.  Use of the HLA Gateway requires incorporation of the complete RPR FOM into the federation being executed. The structure of the RPR FOM has been defined primarily based on the fields of the DIS PDUs.  These fields correspond to the attributes found within the RPR FOM classes.  The Entity State (ES) PDU is represented through a class structure that is organized according to categories of entity types.  Inheritance is used to abstract attributes to highest common level.  The RPR FOM also includes classes that correspond to the Transmitter, Signal, and Emitter PDUs.  Although these classes are intended to represent communication information, they do not provide the level of detailed required for realistic modeling of communications within the TIM.  They are included within the FOM for the CMSE prototype, however, are considered part of the C4I FOM. Further details regarding the RPR FOM can be found in [5].Military ground-based entities simulated by ModSAF (e.g., tanks, Bradleys, and HUMMVs) correspond to the MilitaryLandPlatform class defined by the RPR-FOM.  This class is a leaf class within the BaseEntity class hierarchy (i.e., represents the lowest level class with no subclasses).  To associate these objects with C4IDevice objects, a C4IDeviceObjs attribute of type C4IDevice was added to this class.  When the SIMCON federate discovers a new entity object by way of the HLA Gateway, a MilitaryLandPlatform object is created.  It is assign the corresponding identifier and location of that entity.  Any C4Idevice objects that are associated with the entity are then linked to it via the C4IDeviceObjs attribute.  As work on the CMSE prototype continues, other attributes may be added as required.  In addition, as other types of ModSAF entities become involved in the demonstration scenarios (such as amphibious, aircraft, or ships), these attributes will likely be abstracted to a higher level class common to each type of entity, such as the MilitaryPlatformEntity class to take advantage of inheritance.TIM Environment ConsiderationsFor Build 1 of the CMSE prototype, certain modifications were been made to the prototype C4I FOM based on the TIM environment. The TIM components model a number of different devices including C2 systems, network routing devices, and two types of radios.  These devices are used for certain purposes and perform different functions.  C2 devices are used for sending messages and displaying status information.  Network devices are used to maintain the configuration of the networks and route data.  Radios are the means to transmit messages through RF.  To better account for the distinctions among these devices, the CommDevice class was abstracted into a more general C4IDevice class with a common set of attributes defined for all types of C4I devices.  Specific categories of these devices were then defined as subclasses corresponding to the functions they perform as shown in figure 4.1.The Phase I FOM treated communication effects as a single class with an association link to the CommNetwork class.  Within the TIM environment, effects on the transmitted signal are computed based on several factors including the environment, characteristics of the radio, and the state of the network.  Because these effects are computed using different methods, the CommEffects class was further broken out into a series of subclasses representing the unique characteristics of the different effects.  The specific subclasses defined include PathLoss, NetworkDelay, Interference, and Jamming.  Characteristics of the radios are captured within RadioDevice class and can be used by these subclasses during their computations.  Because TIM version currently being used in Build 1 does not involve communication effects computations, the attributes and functions of these subclasses have not yet been fully fleshed out.  As the updated version of the TIM becomes available for CMSE Build 2, further analysis and specification will be required in this area.  By using a hierarchical approach, the addition of new communication effects classes (e.g., for satellite links) can be easily accommodated through implementation as a new subclass without requiring modification to the existing classes. Coordination with the NavyThere has been some initial coordination with the Space and Naval Warfare Command (SPAWAR) regarding the prototype C4I FOM.  SPAWAR is the lead development agency for the Network Warfare Simulation (NETWARS) program.  One of the outputs from NETWARS has been a model of network communication as part of a standardization effort to promote reusability and interoperability.  The NETWARS model consists of a set of classes depicting relevant objects and their attributes.  Recent work on this program has involved specification of this model in the form of an HLA FOM.  Personnel from ACS as well as the CECOM sponsor have met with NETWARS personnel on several occasions to discuss the similarities and differences between the prototype C4I FOM and the NETWARS communications FOM.  Based on these meetings, a number of updates have been made to the prototype C4I FOM in an attempt to better align the two related FOMs.  Further information regarding the NETWARS program FOM can be found in [6].The updates resulting from the NETWARS work have focussed on attribute alignment and class naming convention.  Several attributes common to NETWARS device classes were added to the C4IDevice class.  A number of these attributes serve to link to other classes, such as CommUser, CommLink, BaseEntity, and Message.  The deviceAddress attribute was re-positioned within the C4IDevice class so that it now applies to all the subclasses.  Certain class names were changed based on the naming convention of the related classes found in the NETWARS FOM.  CommNetwork was changed to CommLink and CommDevice was updated to RadioDevice.  A NetworkDevice class was added as a subclass to C4IDevice.  An EndUserDevice class was inserted into the C4IDevice class hierarchy to represent the idea of a workstation device (i.e., an end user system).   The C2Device class was moved to a subclass of EndUserDevice.  An IWDevice class was added under EndUserDevice providing a means to initiate Internet based attacks.  In this configuration, NetworkDevice class is meant to account for devices such as routers, gateways, hubs, switches, etc.  In the same manner the RadioDevice class accounts for navigation devices, satellites, and jamming devices as well as basic radios.  The class naming conventions of the prototype C4I FOM and the NETWARS FOM are aligned according to table 4.1.Table 4.  SEQ Table_4. \* ARABIC 1 FOM Class Name AlignmentC4I FOMNETWARS FOMNetworkDeviceNetworking_EquipmentRadioDeviceRadioAntennaAntennaSatelliteDeviceSatelliteEndUserDeviceEnd_SystemCommLinkCommunications_LinkOther ConsiderationsInitially, the Phase I FOM focused on the needs of the U.S. Army’s TI for the echelons of battalion and below.  The Phase II effort has begun steps to expand the scope of the analysis for evolution of the C4I FOM.  The objective is to consider other aspects of the operational environment including sensor systems, intelligence systems, Information Warfare (IW), higher echelons (i.e., the FDD architecture), and joint services.ACS has begun work to gather and synthesize IW related information.  IW is the term used by the DoD and the joint staff to describe a range of actions taken during conflict to achieve information superiority over an adversary [7].  It is specifically defined in CJCSI 3210.01 as: “Action taken to achieve information superiority by affecting adversary information, information-based processes, information systems, and computer-based networks while defending one’s own information, information-based processes, information systems and computer-based networks [8].”  The concept of IW has been introduced into the C4I FOM as another means of affecting the exchange of information among C4I systems.  It is intended to be distinctly different from the notion of communications effects captured by the CommEffects class hierarchy.  The subclasses of the CommEffects class target transmitted signal between C4I systems resulting in some sort of degradation in performance.  While IW attacks may also result in degraded performance, they target the computer-based systems themselves exploiting certain vulnerabilities.  Therefore, a new base class, IWEffects has been added to the C4I FOM as shown in figure 4.1.  Initial analysis in this area has identified three general types of IW attacks including Denial of Service (DoS), Unauthorized Access, and Spoofing.   The attacks are represented as subclasses of the IWEffects class.   The classes are distinguishable based on the actions required to execute them and the resulting effects on the systems.  However, it should be noted that the attack categories are not mutually exclusive since there can be significant overlap.   Only a hand-full of attributes have been identified for these attack classes based on certain parameters involved in their execution requiring additional work in this area.Some preliminary work has begun relating to considerations for sensor and intelligence systems.  Information has been obtained from a number of CECOM-based sources regarding certain types of sensor systems.  In addition, ACS has met with subject matter experts (SME) to initiate discussions regarding these areas.  A number of high-level sensor categories have been identified based on the type and form of information they gather.  These categories include radar, visual (including video), acoustic, seismic, thermal, and motion.  Within each of these major categories are a variety of types of sensors, such as Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) and Forward Looking Infrared Radar (FLIR) that will likely form the basis for subclasses. Further refinement of this information is required prior to identifying class structures and their potential relationships to the existing C4I FOM classes.Related to sensor systems is the notion of intelligence (or collection) systems.  Intelligence systems generally make use of one or more sensor systems to gather information about the environment.  The intelligence system then gathers, organizes, and presents this information to a military intelligence analyst for use in identifying enemy units, their behaviors and intentions.   Some examples of collection systems include the Joint STARS (JSTARS) Common Ground Station (CGS), GUARDRAIL, and the Army’s ASAS.  The configuration of these systems can involve a series of sensors distributed on the battlefield providing data back to a centralized collection system through some sort of communication channel or mechanism.  Therefore accurate representation of these systems involves a combination of sensor, communication devices, and the characteristics of the collection systems themselves.  Information regarding intelligence systems will be gathered and analyzed in parallel with sensor system information.In addition to the areas identified, further evolution of the C4I FOM must also consider higher echelons and joint services.  During FY00, the Phase II effort will focus on the Army’s FDD architecture and the various C4I systems associated with it.  This will include at a minimum analysis of the ABCS that consist of certain C2 systems including MCS, AFATDS, ASAS, the Combat Service Support Command System (CSSCS), and the Forward Area Air Defense Command and Control (FAADC2) system.  Communication systems at this level include the Mobile Subscriber System (MSE), Near Term Data Radio (NTDR), and Global Command and Control System (GCCS).  For joint service considerations, information will be gathered regarding how the Army systems communicate with the other services at echelons of brigade and division to coordination their operations within the FDD architecture.Summary and ConclusionsThe Army has the need to develop an objective M&S environment for C4I systems to support interoperability and reuse of components.   The purpose of the effort described herein is to initiate work in this area through the development of standard approach for data exchange among C4I systems and the M&S environment within the context of the HLA.  A prototype C4I FOM has been developed and is being evolved based on existing military systems and their interactions in an operational environment.  Initial research during Phase I focussed on the Army lower echelons involving C2 systems exchanging command level and SA messages.  Ongoing work as part of Phase II is attempting to expand the scope of the C4I FOM to consider other types of C4I systems, higher echelons and joint services.  Through this effort, CECOM hopes to initiate action within the community to develop an overarching Reference C4I FOM that will be embraced by SISO as a standard.Based on the work accomplished to date, the HLA appears to lend itself well to this problem by providing a common architectural framework for interfacing C4I systems with M&S environments.   Prototyping to demonstrate the initial version of the C4I FOM has provided certain insights regarding the viability of this approach.  Existing HLA-based products such as the HLA Gateway and the RPR FOM have been successfully applied to the prototyping effort for transitioning an existing DIS-based environment, the TIM, to the HLA using a standardized approach.  Based on the design and operation of the TIM environment, the prototype C4I FOM was updated in several areas to include further detailing of certain classes and relationships in order to accommodate certain information exchange requirements.  The work performed to date provides evidence that a Reference C4I FOM should not be defined such that it is considered the complete solution for every federation involving C4I systems.  It should be defined at a somewhat abstract level to serve as a common starting point and then customized according to the individual requirements and objectives of a particular federation.References[1] W. Sudnikovich, J. Roberts, J. Lacetera:  “Implementation of a prototype C4I FOM,” Spring 1999 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, paper number 99S-SIW-061.[2] B. Shen, W. Sudnikovich, L. Kennedy: “Transition to The Objective C4I Modeling and Simulation Environment,”  ITSEC98, December 1998.[3] S. Manoski, J. McConnell, M. Riehl, W. Sudnikovich T. Tafoni, J. Vogel: “The Tactical Internet Model (TIM) Provides Realistic Communications for Task Force XXI Training,” Simulation Interoperability Workshop, paper 97S-SIW-44.[4] Martin Fowler, UML Distilled, Applying the Standard Object Modeling Language, Addison-Wesley Longman, Inc., 1997.[5] RPR FOM version 0.6, Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, 1998.[6] “Standards for Modeling and Simulation of Communications Systems,” Draft Version 2.1, Navy Modeling and Simulation Management Office OPNAV N6M, 7 June 1999.[7] FM 100-6, Information Operations, 27 August 1996. [8] CJCSI 3210.01, Joint Information Warfare Policy, 2 January 1996. Author BiographiesWILLIAM P. SUDNIKOVICH is a Technical Advisor for the Modeling and Simulation Division in the Command and Control Directorate (C2D) of the U. S. Army Communications-Electronics Command (CECOM).  He is the current chair of the C4ISR Forum of the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO).  His recent work has focused on the development and integration of communications and network models into Army training and testing environments.  His research interests include distributed object technology, distributed simulation and simulation interoperability and standards.JOHN D. ROBERTS is a Project Manager for Atlantic Consulting Services (ACS), Inc. He is currently involved in supporting the transition of various CECOM simulation systems from DIS to the HLA.  Prior to this he spent six years as a Lead Developer with the MITRE Corporation working in the areas of distributed simulation and advanced C2 decision support for military planning.  Other technical experience includes work in the fields of Artificial Intelligence (AI), Expert System development, and customer service support.  Mr. Roberts holds a B. S. in Electrical Engineering from Widener University and a M. S. in Electrical Engineering from Fairleigh Dickinson University.RTIModSAFRTIModSAFHLAGatewaySIMCONFBCB2INC-PCSINCGARS RadioCommunicationPlatoon NetPlatoon LdrPlatoon SgtWingmanWingmanPlt B-1Plt A-3Plt A-2Co CCo BBn CmdCo APlt A-1 EMBED MS_ClipArt_Gallery.2   EMBED MS_ClipArt_Gallery.2   EMBED MS_ClipArt_Gallery.2   EMBED MS_ClipArt_Gallery.2  …DIS/EthernetCommunicationEffects ServerJanus/ModSAFSIMCONGPSServerFBCB2INC-PC EMBED MS_ClipArt_Gallery.2   EMBED MS_ClipArt_Gallery.2   EMBED MS_ClipArt_Gallery.2  LaunchAttack()Figure 4.1 C4I FOM Class Diagram...From RPR FOMBaseEntityDigitize()Compress()Reproduce()digitizationMethodcompressionMethodVoiceMessageTranslate()messageFormatDataMessageEncryptMessage()DecryptMessage()messageTypemessageIdencryptionMethodcryptoKeyIdtimeStampsdataRatedataLengthdataMessagelocalAddrmessageObjsSpoofingtargetServicetargetPortdurationtargetFiletargetHostAddrtargetHostTypetargetOSUnAuthorizedAccessDenialofServiceIWEffectsmodulationTypespreadSpectrumTypeModulationBeamAntennabeamDirectionazimuthBeamwidthelevationBeamwidthezexphaseordercoefficientsSphericalHarmonicAntennaAntennaantennaTypeantennaGainantennaHeightrelativeLocationpatternTypepatternlengthpatternParametersreferenceSystemAddHeader()FillHeader()StripHeader()protocolTypemaxPacketLengthProtocolComputePathLoss()jammingMethodJammingplaceHolderInterferencejammingMethodplaceHolderNetworkDelayterrainProfilepropagationLosssoilConductivitypropagationModelPathLossnoiseLevelCommEffectsTransmitData()ReceiveData()C4IDeviceObjscallSignCommUserConnect()ApplyCommEffectsRouteMessage()CommLinklinkTypelinkIdC4IDeviceObjsprotocolObjsframingMethodcommEffectObjsplaceHolderuserRolemessageSetshostCommIdsechelonIWDeviceC2DevicesystemTypeIWEffectObjsEndUserDevicedeviceTypedataFwdRatesroutingInfoIWEffectObjsNetworkDeviceSetLocation()deviceIddeviceStatedeviceLocationinterfacesdeviceAddresshostPlatformObjcommLinkObjscommUserObjincomingMessageObjsoutgoingMessageObjsC4IDeviceSendMessage()ReceiveMessage()deviceTypetransmitPowerfrequencybandwidthantennaObjsmodulationObjsRadioDeviceHLAGatewayCommunication Effects ServerFBCB2INC-PC EMBED MS_ClipArt_Gallery.2   EMBED MS_ClipArt_Gallery.2   EMBED MS_ClipArt_Gallery.2   EMBED MS_ClipArt_Gallery.2  FBCB2INC-PC EMBED MS_ClipArt_Gallery.2   EMBED MS_ClipArt_Gallery.2  GPSServerSIMCONCo DCo CEPLRSCSMA…………EPLRSCSMACo BPlt B-1Plt A-3Plt A-2Co DCo CCo CBn CmdCo APlt A-1Bn TOCLAN