Virtual Simulation and Joint ExperimentationSTOW and Joint Attack OperationsRae W. DehnckeDefense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)4601 North Fairfax Drive, Suite 704Arlington, VA 22203703-284-8892rdehncke@darpa.milC. Todd MorganSpace & Naval Warfare Systems Center, Code D4420253560 Hull Street, San Diego, CA 92152-5001757-686-7497morgan@jwfc.acom.milKeywords:Joint Experimentation, Attack Operations, STOW, ACTDABSTRACT: The United States Atlantic Command (USACOM) has been designated the executive agent for Joint Warfighting Experimentation.  USACOM will design and conduct joint experiments to explore, demonstrate, and evaluate joint warfighting concepts and capabilities within the Joint Vision 2010 initiative and future warfighting visions.  Within this context, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), USACOM and the Institute for Defense Analysis (IDA) Joint Advanced Warfighting Program (JAWP), will conduct an exemplar experiment that utilizes the Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) Advanced Concept Technology Demonstration (ACTD) simulation prototype to examine Joint Attack Operations circa 2015.  The experiment design requires the STOW team to emulate future platforms and systems, weapons and munitions, a new C4I suite, and integrate a closed loop federate  (SLAMEM) into the STOW federation.  The experiment will be distributed from four operational locations across the United States.  A twelve man player cell will play the role of an Attack Operations Center utilizing the newly developed C4I suite and responding to events occurring in the STOW synthetic battlespace.  Over 10,000 individual entities will exist in the STOW environmental database, which has been specially modified for this experiment.  The simulation will operate at real time with ground truth for Blue information and perceived truth for Red forces passed to the players through the C4I interfaces.  The STOW After Action Review System will capture all relevant data for faster than real time playback and will provide detailed information in support of the Assessment Team.  The STOW federation will be accredited by ACOM for this experiment and will support this initial experiment from June through August 1999.  This paper will discuss how STOW will meet the joint experimentation requirements, planning and testing, accreditation, execution, and preliminary lessons learned in utilizing the STOW prototype, an advanced distributed, entity-based simulation in such a role.Introduction:The United States Atlantic Command (USACOM) was appointed as the Department of Defense (DOD) lead agency for Joint Experimentation (JE) in 1998. As a result of that new mission USACOM created a J-9 staff section and under the direction of a newly assigned Major General organized and resourced the effort to conduct warfighting experimentation. At about the same time the Institute for Defense Analyses (IDA) received a mission from the DOD to investigate future warfighting issues and assist USACOM in the conduct of joint experimentation.  An agreement was reached between the J-9 and IDA’s Joint Advanced Warfighting Program (JAWP) that designated the JAWP as the Executive Agent for the first JE. The original title of the JE was “Attack Operations Against Critical Mobile Targets” and the current version is simply J9901-Attack Operations.The JAWP began concept development and selected two simulations to provide support to their team. The Synthetic Theater of War (STOW), a Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) simulation prototype provides the human-in-the-loop (HITL) virtual simulation and SLAMEM, a closed loop simulation developed by the TOYAN Corporation, provides the faster-than-real-time constructive runs.  Shortly after the program began a decision was made to integrate SLAMEM into the STOW federation to reduce some of the new development which would have been required in STOW to satisfy the requirements of the experiment designers.Warfighting experiments have been around for a long time but this time the intent was to look into the future, using simulation, to investigate and gain insights into the utility and feasibility of new concepts.  Additionally the goal was to model or emulate new technology and see how sensitive the concepts were to the introduction of new hardware or software solutions.  Two other very important objectives were to allow for a robust and intelligent Opposing Force-played with HITL, and to investigate how a player cell could manage the information and add value to the concept.  Thus the challenges for the simulation developers were significant and interesting and all of the work was to be done on a very short time line.Joint experimentation was defined for this experiment as a creative endeavor that focused on operational feasibility and utility.  The intent was to look at the complex interactions among many variables and do analysis with quantifiable data where possible, but “discovery’ and not ‘evaluation ‘ was believed to be the key to success.  The team also wanted to look at ‘what could be’ and recommend branches and sequels for future experiments.  Because of the newness of the joint experimentation process, there was recognition from the start that the simulations were not expected to be perfect and that they would be required to make changes on an almost daily basis in order to support both the players and the experiment design team.J9901 has become the first USACOM generated experiment using modeling and simulation to investigate the JE Concept ‘Attack Operations Against Critical Mobile Targets”.  It is envisioned that this is the first of a series of experiments that will address this concept. ACOM’s mission has been defined as a focused effort to discover potential Doctrine, Organization, Training, Material, Personnel, and Leadership (DOTMPL) recommendations to enhance joint operations against the 2015 Theater Ballistic Missile Threat (TBM).  The working hypothesis is that future sensors, sensor exploitation technologies, future command and control technologies, and future weapons systems can be combined into an attack operations system that will be effective against a future threat capability.  Further, this JE should build a base for future experiments, validate the process of JE at ACOM and assess the capability of STOW to support joint experimentation in the future.Figure 1.1As shown in Figure 1.1 above, J9901 has been conducted utilizing a number of techniques.  As the model suggests the process is iterative, beginning with a concept that is evaluated and modified in a series of discussions and war games.  The concept is then modeled in a series of constructive runs that produce insight and parameters that are useful when establishing the virtual HITL simulation.  Lessons are learned and the process continues with the HITL player cell providing new insights into the manageability of the concept and value of human intervention.  It is not envisioned that J9901 will move to live field events in the near future as the sensors, shooters, and fusion systems exist only in the earliest stages of development, if at all.Synthetic Theater of War (STOW)The STOW simulation prototype was developed by DARPA as part of the STOW Advanced Concept Technology Demonstration (ACTD).  The vision behind STOW was that it is possible to develop and integrate a series of technology areas and build the next generation synthetic battlespace for DOD. Over time the technology areas have included:Entity Level Computer Generated Forces (JSAF)Interactive Synthetic Natural Environments (SNE)Scaleable and Secure Simulation NetworksWarfighter Involvement thru C4I InterfacesAfter Action Review System (AARS)The STOW ACTD has been involved previously at ACOM in two major efforts and the STOW team looked forward to the challenge of modifying the simulation to meet the requirements of the JAWP.  We believed that the design of STOW was such that it would be possible to quickly model the future systems, emulate the future fusion capabilities, develop and implement the concept of operations  (CONOPS) and tactics, and create a new C2 suite for the player cell.  While the experience proved the value of an object oriented entity level simulation as a flexible and reliable tool for joint experimentation, we were certainly not prepared for the magnitude of change requests from the players and the JAWP during the course of the experiment.  A great many lessons learned about the use of simulation in support of JE have been developed and will be reported upon later in the paper.The various STOW technology areas all underwent considerable change from the baseline STOW prototype.  Major software releases occurred between each of the trial periods and daily ‘fixes’ were made to solve problems or react to immediate needs.  The discussion below provides a brief overview of the most significant modifications in each area:Joint Synthetic Forces (JSAF) are behaviorally accurate, intelligent, autonomous forces that operate in the integrated synthetic battlespace. For J9901 it was necessary to build a new set of future weapons systems to include penetrating and non-penetrating fighters and bombers. The parameters with which these entities were built were obtained from a variety of sources to include Program Managers of future systems and DARPA. Physical characteristics, vehicle and unit behaviors were modeled as appropriate.  Future cruise missiles were modeled and flown from ground, air and naval assets and a penetrating unmanned combat air vehicle (UCAV) with a future payload was also played. Each of these systems interacted with a Red Threat force which was modeled with capabilities believed to exist in 2015, to include advance camouflage states.  During the course of J9901 there were numerous requests for munition and platform changes-some were made overnight and others provided at subsequent trials.  The flexibility of JSAF was clearly demonstrated in the development of these new platforms and weapon systems. In all, over 10,000 discrete platforms participated with thousands of missiles and other munitions also accounted for in the simulation.Synthetic Environments were very important to this experiment. Starting from the STOW Southwest Asia terrain database, a number of significant changes were made.  The experiment design required modifications to the terrain such as the addition of forested areas, additional urban settings and a much improved road network. These were made in a relatively short time by taking advantage of new techniques in terrain data base construction.  The STOW World Wide Terrain Data Base project provided lower resolution cells of the outlying areas that were stitched into the SWASIA data base thus allowing play over a significantly increased geographical area.  Finally, a system of interactive grids was developed that allowed for the sensor interaction with JSAF in urban and forested areas.The STOW developed Simulation Network, an IP/ATM end-to-end multicast and quality of service capability, now a part of the DISN-LES, was run at the Secret level using the FASTLANE security device.  Network reliability was exceptional and communications among the four distributed sites was outstanding.C4I interfaces allowed the simulation to provide the information necessary for the player cell to operate.  A STOW developed suite of C2 equipment included GCCS for track information and a STOW Plan View Display (PVD) of Blue ground truth and Red perceived information. The Blue Player Cell received intelligence information and conducted its attack operations utilizing STOW developed tools.  The White Cell, controlling the experiment, utilized both the 2D (PVD) and 3D visualization capabilities of STOW for adjudication and demonstrations.The STOW AARS was critical to the success of the experiment as it provided an enhanced set of tools for query, analysis and presentation of event data. Replay of critical events in 3D was possible as was a faster than real time replay in 2D.  Statistics on military performance measures, killer/victim scoreboards, attrition rates and other Measures of Effectiveness (MOE) were designed and made available in response to requests from the JAWP Assessment Team. The STOW Simulation Infrastructure demonstrated once again that an HLA compliant simulation, operating over an approved Run Time Infrastructure (RTI) has the capability to accept federates and greatly improve the capability of the federation. Running from distributed locations, this PC based simulation federation provided simulation generation and management; runtime with JSAF; Synthetic Environments; C4I systems; data collection; and After Action Review.Having provided this background information on Joint Experimentation and STOW the next portion of the paper will describe how STOW actually supported J9901.STOW in J9901The STOW Federation phase of J9901 focused directly upon the ability of HITL, acting in concert with future sensors and attack systems using advanced decision support tools, to successfully identify and kill critical mobile targets, specifically TBMs.  Critical questions were asked such as:Could the warfighter make operationally useful decisions?Could humans absorb, manage, and make use of the information generated by the sensor suites?Could humans recognize patterns over time?Was the data presented effectively for human interpretation?A further goal was to study the effect of a thinking and dynamically reacting Red Team attempting to confuse and counter Blue actions in a freeplay environment.  A central question was “what would be the impact of unanticipated Red tactics or reactions”?  How sensitive was the new technology to low tech countermeasures?  All these questions drove “discovery” within the experimental framework to hopefully provide some indications of necessary changes in technology, organizational structure, CONOPS, or tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTP) that Blue needed to be most effective?  To help answer these questions, the STOW AARS gathered information on a number of quantifiable measures in support of experiment MOE's and MOP's as well as on discrete “detect to engage sequences” which were called “string data”.  Finally, HITL observers monitored both Blue and Red to collect data for re-construction of events and intuit some cause and effect relationships.J9901 ForcesSTOW modeled a significant force in the J9901 experiment from both future technology and structure perspectives.  Future sensors, attack platforms, munitions, and smart submunitions, as appropriate, were all explicitly modeled at the entity-level.  Civilian and military background or "clutter" traffic were modeled to replicate the difficulties of finding the few TBM assets in a hostile AOR among thousands of other vehicles.  The Red TBM force structure consisted of four independent brigades each of a different type and capability.  These capabilities included both solid and liquid fueled missiles of short and long range based upon postulated Red capabilities circa 2015.  These TBM forces operated within a system of launch and hide sites, forward operating bases, and in-transit routes throughout the AOR terrain.  Blue forces and the number of entities simulated follow:Blue Attack Systemsup to 120 aircraft (a/c) constituting a mix of penetrating and non-penetrating fighter and bomber a/c with  between 40 and 80 a/c available per cycle of an Air Tasking Order UCAV6 ships including a future carrier, two future cruisers, and three future destroyersapproximately 12 loitering future cruise missiles at a given time 36 future surface to surface ground-based missile launchersother on call or divertable a/cBlue Sensor Systems24-48 future satellites 24-48 future unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV's)future DSPUnattended Ground Sensor (UGS)Entity Count - Trial A&BRed	1150Blue Air	40Blue Sea/Grnd	150Civilian Clutter	9950Total	11290J9901 - Attack Operations ProcessThe Critical Mobile Target Cell (CMTC) was postulated as a future organization that may reside in a JFACC or other future headquarters.  The twelve man cell was split into two internal organizations:  the Sensor System Control Node (SSCN), comprised of nine personnel, and the Attack System Control Node (ASCN), comprised of three personnel.  It may prosecute attack operations against high priority targets such as TBMs using an architecture described in Figure 5.1:Figure 5.1The “detect to engage” process followed four distinct steps.Step One began with a Common Tactical Picture (CTP) analyst monitoring sensor detections and resulting tracks in an assigned geographic area.  Creating those tracks was a simulated future automated continuous tracking and identification fusion center that took the satellite, UAV, and UGS raw detection data and fused it into an identified track with a given quality and a percentage of confidence.  Over time that identification confidence climbed and converged to a high certainty.The CTP analyst acted on these tracks per commander's guidance, CONOPS, and TTPs. The future sensors circa 2015 portrayed in the experiment and their specific uses by the SSCN were as follows:Satellite based X Band radar High-range Resolution/Moving Target Indicator (HRR/MTI) and Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR).  Used for broad area coverage UAV based on X Band HRR/MTI and SAR with foliage penetrating (FOPEN) SAR.  Used for aspect angle diversity, fill-in for satellite, and foliage penetrationUGS  used in difficult or special areas such as in localized urban locationsStep Two happened when tracks met certain criteria and were forwarded to the SSCN Director for nomination as targets.  Often the Director delegated this authority to nominate targets according to guidelines to the CTP analysts with him maintaining control via command by negation.  In other words, he only intervened when he disagreed with an action taken and over rode it.    A collection plan analyst could also re-direct sensor assets to respond to changing conditions.  Steps One and Two and the SSCN organization are pictorially represented in Figure 5.2.Figure 5.2Step Three occurred when the ASCN planner/tasker took the nominated track, planned the attack mission, and paired the nominated track with an attack platform.  To assist the planner/tasker automated decision aids called the Attack System Tasking Editor (ASTE) and the Weapon Pairing Algorithm (WPA) were developed to give the current status of all available attack assets and return a select list in order of desirability for the planner/tasker's selection.  The result was a sort of the possible attack systems for a given target by desired attack time, collateral damage, terrain type, ADA in vicinity, estimated target location error, target priority, desired engagement effect, target moving or not, and finally whether the planner/tasker required a variety of platform options be presented.  The ASCN Director was in overall command of the entire CMTC.The future attack platforms and munitions (all had generic names in experiment) circa 2015 used by the ASCN included:	Attack Platforms:Penetrating & non penetrating fighter(F-22/JSF like)Penetrating cruise missile (TLAM/ALCM like)Penetrating UCAV (small payload)Penetrating & non-penetrating bombers (B-2/B-1 like)Surface ships with surface-to-surface missile (LASM like)Surface-to-surface missile (ATACMS like)Munitions:Penetrating & non penetrating missiles (JASSM/JSOW like)Hypervelocity stand-off missileLOCAAS -like munitionBAT - like munitionSensor Fused MunitionsSmall smart bomb (for UCAV) Future free fall/guided bomb(GBU 10 - like) Step Four was the final attack platform and munition engagement responding to the target track pairing directly from the attack planner/tasker.  Steps three and four and the ASCN organization are similarly depicted in Figure 5.3.Figure 5.3J9901 PlanningThree cooperating groups - USACOM J9, JAWP, and STOW, executed J9901.  The experiment organization, responsibilities, and relationships are shown in Figure 6.1.Figure 6.1The experiment planning began in earnest in November 1998 for concept development and initial design considerations.  The model selection of STOW and SLAMEM occurred in December 1998.  The decision to federate the two models was reached during technical development and experiment design meetings in January 1999.  Development commenced the same month with a fairly short and ambitious timeline to complete the work.  Integration and testing with the new J9901 products occurred in a series of events from March through May 1999.  Experiment trials commenced in June and continued through August.  Development continued to enhance reliability, performance, and add capability in reaction to user requests and as a result of experiment learning.  The experiment data assessment will continue into October with a final report expected that month.J9901 - Locations and ResourcesThe experiment was conducted at four distributed sites across the country with a fifth location acting as the network control station.  Figure 7.1 shows the experiment architecture, functions by site, and the summary of personnel and equipment. EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure 7.1The summary figures included blue players, STOW simulation operators, developers, and the experiment control personnel.  Table 7.1 provides specific personnel and Table 7.2 specific equipment details.Table 7.1PlayersSIM OperatorsControlDevelopersTotalJTASC12220640WISSARD2114SSC-SD3249TEC75113TOTAL1214281266Table 7.2C2STOW SIMControlDevelopTotalJTASC281937286WISSARD1710330SSC-SD189734TEC199-28TOTAL28736512178Of particular note, the 11,000+ entities used in Trial A & B required 73 computers and 14 personnel to operate both Blue and Red.Simulation ChallengesConducting this experiment presented numerous simulation challenges.  The six-month timeline required a very tight schedule for concept, design, development, integration and testing, and rehearsal.  Identifying what future systems would be included, developing and testing them and getting adequate data was a difficult endeavor.  Technically simulating sufficient "clutter" traffic required a new entity and behavior approach.  Enhancing the existing STOW Southwest Asia terrain database with new geotypical features and additional terrain was completed with little time left prior to the first trial.  Federating SLAMEM, a closed-form analytical model, as the experiment sensor federate within the STOW Federation, tailoring the existing AAR System and STOW logger, and developing a surrogate future C2 system all presented unique issues for development, experiment design, and the data collection analysis plan.  Finally, tailoring a VV&A process suitable to a futuristic experiment and the available time and resources was a challenging and unique experience.J9901 STOW VV&AJ9901 STOW Federation V&V was conducted in two dedicated 2 day sessions in May 99 with J9 and Service observers.  The JAWP participated to provide experiment concept, design, assumptions briefings, and information to the observers.  STOW personnel focused on demonstrating specific software capabilities in both controlled tests and system-level scenario activity to show appropriate outcomes and actions in the context of J9901 requirements.  The V&V was accomplished by providing a documentation package and using a "face validation" methodology during real time simulation testing.The V&V documentation package included:JSAF Algorithm and Model (JAM) - overview of underlying STOW models, algorithms, documentation, and known limitations with regard to J9901Joint Entity List (JEL) - J9901 specific forcesObserver Report Form and example - in JEL formatProcess briefing presentation and Sensor/scan test matrix STOW J9901 V&V Concept and ScheduleDuring the real time simulation tests the following activities were presented for observer review and comment:Entity platforms/munitions (parameters, interactions, behaviors)Sensor and scan type against various camouflage states and terrainDetect to engage process C4I displays (PVD and GCCS/C2PC)2D playback and AARS processed data outputSystem-level scenario test in two stages:1)	controlled entity group for accurate data end to end AARS check2)	scenario-type activity to capacity of available personnelThe results of these V&V sessions saw some assumptions being revised based upon Service observer input to better bound the experiment.  The STOW Federation had its capabilities and limitations for J9901 identified.  Those items that could be corrected in the short run were fixed.  Others had workarounds developed to mitigate or eliminate their effect and a few were just noted to understand their potential impact upon the experiment.  V&V was an ongoing process as new capabilities and changes based on learning were integrated for subsequent trials.  J9 provided a V&V report and accreditation.J9901 STOW Initial Observations and ConclusionsFrom the experiment preparation phase and first two trials several initial observations stand out from J9901.  Future experiment designers need a fairly firm concept, CONOPS, and their objectives prior to selecting a simulation and beginning specific development.  For J9901 much of the experiment concept, CONOPS, design, development, and objective refinement occurred in an iterative, parallel, and overlapping fashion.  It was extremely evident that the simulation must be adaptable, flexible, and allow daily software changes to react to experiment learning and discovery.  The simulation provider should expect changes in CONOPS and experiment requirements.  The short time period between trials proved to be a huge variable regarding how much work could be done by the simulation team in response to inputs from players or experiment designers.  HITL must be integrated to allow the dynamic Blue versus Red interactions to ensure a rigorous testing of Blue actions and effectiveness.  This was proven to be extremely valuable and insightful in seeing the abilities of human reasoning, trend analysis, and pattern recognition linked with enhanced future system and decision aid capabilities.  The ability to federate with another model to provide required capabilities instead of recreating the capability within a single model saved significant time and resources thus showing its great value.  The short timeline for this experiment, complicated requirements, and required flexibility highlighted the great value of an established and stable simulation team to execute the experiment preparation and execution process.  This experience showed the team was almost as important as the simulation itself.  Finally, experimental discovery showed the prime importance is stimulating the learning process putting the HITL in a stressing real time environment to react to the battlespace and that to do this requires the simulation be "good enough" and not perfect.Author BiographiesCol. (Ret) Rae W. Dehncke has been a member of the STOW Management Team since January 1996 and the DARPA Program Manager since March 1998.  After 30 years of service with the US Army he joined the Institute for Defense Analysis as the STOW Program Team Leader.  Col. Dehncke has a Master’s Degree from the University of Arizona, is an alumnus of the Army War College, and was a Senior Military Fellow at Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government.Clarence Todd Morgan is a Scientist with SPAWAR Systems Center - San Diego employed at the United States Atlantic Command's Joint Training and Analysis Center (JTASC), Suffolk, VA.  He has been the STOW Operations Director since November 1997 and the JTASC Chief Modeling and Simulation Engineer since March 1997.  Following fifteen years of active service, he joined the Naval Reserve and holds the rank of Commander. He is an Operations Research Analyst with a Masters Degree from the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, CA, is a distinguished graduate of the Marine Corps Command and Staff College, and a graduate of the United Naval Academy.