VIRTUAL HOMELAND DEFENSETRAINING SIMULATIONJonathan P. GlassNAWCTSD, PDSE12350 Research ParkwayOrlando, FL 32826407-380-8021 HYPERLINK "mailto:Jonathan.Glass@navy.mil" Jonathan.Glass@navy.milKeywords:Virtual, Distributed, MicroSims, Fleet Synthetic Training, HLA, TacticsABSTRACT:  This paper will discuss and present how HLA/DIS interoperable, cost effective & high fidelity virtual simulations can provide effective and rapid training to the user for Homeland Defense.  This technology is currently being applied and has been proven to be very effective in training not only for the Command Level but also at the Operator Level.IntroductionIn 1998 PC based simulations, first tagged as Micro Simulators (MicroSims), were first introduced to the United States (US) Navy.  These MicroSims were low physical fidelity yet high mission fidelity PC based simulators.  These MicroSims were introduced by the US Navy and used to augment existing flight training.  This concept was first conceived by Ensign Herb Lacey, a US Navy student aviator who built a T-34 Mentor aircraft in Microsoft Flight Simulator (MFS) 98 and became very familiar with the T-34 instrument panel prior to entering the aircraft and spending a single hour in flight [1].  Ensign Lacey’s success was noted and the US Navy decided to conduct a study to determine if MicroSims could enhance and augment existing training.  The idea was to provide simulated classroom training with a virtual cockpit to familiarize students with the aircraft without actually seeing or being in the aircraft.  The benefit is a reduction in real aircraft time to teach these skills.  This not only saves aircraft operation costs, but also reduces the amount of stress the student aviator experiences during flight.  The Chief of Naval Education and Training (CNET) pursued the addition of MicroSims to the US Navy’s curriculum and they continue to be used almost 10 years after their introduction.Figure 1.1 MicroSim with miniature domeBetween 1993 and 1997 the Naval Air Warfare Center Training Systems Division (NAWCTSD) began a study for the Naval Air Systems Command (PMA205) called Naval Aviation Simulation Networking (NASNET).  This study examined the networking of aviation trainers to accomplish integrated multiple team training.  This study lasted 4 years and interviewed over 400 US Navy aviation personnel and Subject Matter Experts (SMEs).  The study revealed that integrated team training is good for Command and Control (C2) as well as communications practice and that microprocessor based (i.e. PC based) systems were a viable low cost alternative for training tactics.Beyond PilotsIn April 2003 NAWCTSD’s Project Director for Special Emphasis (PDSE) began a Research and Development (R&D) project to explore the possibilities of using PC based trainers for tactical team training as described in the NASNET study.  This project focused on selective high mission fidelity.This project, known as the US Navy SH-60B Helicopter Mission Rehearsal Tactical Team Trainer (MRT3), produced a networked, laptop based SH-60B helicopter with each computer representing a crew member’s station.  In the US Navy’s SH-60B helicopter there are three crew members: a Pilot, Air Tactical Officer (ATO)/Co-Pilot and a Sensor Operator (SO).  The MRT3 Instructor Operator Station (IOS) includes a Joint Semi-Automated Forces (JSAF) Navy Training Baseline (NTB) to provide the synthetic battle space.  The initial SH-60B MRT3 is focused on Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW) for Post Fleet Replacement Squadrons (FRS) and includes a laptop to model a high fidelity ocean environment.  The pilot station is based upon MFS 2000 using its multi-player capability.  The SH-60B MRT3 is made up of a total of five laptop computers integrated with ancillary equipment to facilitate communications amongst the aircrew and instructor.  These communications simulate Integrated Communications System (ICS) between the aircrew, and Ultra High Frequency (UHF) between the aircrew and other assets.  Figure 2.1 provides representations of the 3 crew stations and the IOS for the SH-60B MRT3. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT  Figure 2.1 SH-60B MRT3 StationsIn October 2003, a single SH-60B MRT3 was evaluated and demonstrated at the Navy’s Center of Maritime Dominance (CMD) in San Diego, California.  Four separate SH-60B aircrews flew MRT3 and conducted ASW tactics together for the evaluation.  Feedback from the aircrews confirmed what the NASNET study had recommended; that the use of PC based trainers with high mission fidelity could allow valid tactics to be refreshed for Post FRS aircrews in order to maintain proficiency [3].  Multiple Integrated PlatformsAfter the CMD demo, NAWCTSD began to look at the possibility of networking multiple SH-60B MRT3s together in order to facilitate coordinated tactics training.  In September 2004, NAWCTSD conducted another demonstration and evaluation at CMD with three SH-60B MRT3s that were networked and interoperable using High Level Architecture (HLA) simulation services.  During this demonstration, three SH-60B aircrews were able to interact and communicate tactically in an ASW mission in the same synthetic battlespace, prosecuting the same under water target.  This could previously have been accomplished only by three live aircraft in the air, on a range, or while deployed.  This demonstration demonstrated that mission rehearsal could be conducted in a classroom prior to using an instrumented range or operating live in an aircraft.  Allowing aircrews to use the SH-60B MRT3 to rehearse and augment training dockside facilitates higher quality range and live training events.   In today’s climate of reduced budgets and rapidly aging airframes, making the most of live training events is crucial.  This demonstration reinforces what Ensign Lacey knew, back in 1998, that practicing on PCs with simulations prior to actually flying will make you better once you go live in the aircraft.After this demonstration, NAWCTSD began to develop an SH-60F MRT3 and to continue to enhance the SH-60B MRT3 based upon aircrew feedback.  The US Navy’s SH-60F helicopter is similar to the SH-60B except for its crew of four, and additional ASW sensors.  The SH-60F has a Pilot, Co-Pilot, Acoustics Sensor Operator (ASO) and a Tactical Sensor Operator (TSO).  In May 2005 two SH-60B MRT3s were delivered to the East coast SH-60B Weapons Tactics Unit (WTU) for extensive evaluation.  The SH-60B MRT3s proved to be very usable and deployable.  During this evaluation period, one of the SH-60B MRT3s was deployed with the WTU to the Atlantic Undersea Test and Evaluation Center (AUTEC) range.  The SH-60B MRT3 was utilized for refresher training prior to aircrews going out on the range to conduct live training.  This exercise demonstrated that with minimal training, instructors could pack up an SH-60B MRT3, deploy it to a forward site, and provide training with no outside technical support.Distributed ExercisesIn March 2006, a single SH-60B MRT3 participated in a US Navy Carrier Strike Group (CSG) Fleet Synthetic Training (FST) event.  By using an MRT3, this was the first time a complete SH-60B aircrew had the means to participate in an FST event.  The SH-60B MRT3, using HLA in the Navy Continuous Training Environment (NCTE), interoperated with all other Live, Virtual and Constructive (LVC) units in the exercise.  These exercises allow the users to interactively train tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs) and communicate with each other prior to conducting live exercises and deployments.   These exercises make all users better prepared for their 'at sea' time.  While focused at the Command Staff level for C2, the exercises also provide valuable training at the operator and team level when they are provided with a relevant training device to train with during the exercise [4].  In July 2006, two SH-60B MRT3s participated in the next CSG FST and the aircrew was able to train with up to six different ship's crews.  Prior to this capability, the only training opportunities for the ship's crew and their air detachment were live at sea. Late 2005 was the first time that NAWCTSD supplied a MicroSim that participated in an exercise that involved Homeland Defense. Since this time frame, several MicroSims have participated in additional exercises involving Homeland Defense.  These exercises are similar in nature to US Navy FSTs where there a various LVC players interoperating in a distributed HLA environment.  These exercises are primarily focused on the Command and Staff level versus the operator or team level.In Feb 2007, two SH-60B MRT3s were used at Afloat Training Group (ATG) Mayport during a CSG FST.  The ability to train at their primary duty station was not only very convenient, but was also cost effective from a training standpoint.  The SH-60B Atlantic Wing is based on Naval Station Mayport which allowed them to train with ships in Mayport and Norfolk without leaving their home port.  After months of user feedback, the SH-60F MRT3 also participated in the same FST event in Dam Neck, VA.  This was the first time that SH-60B and SH-60F aircrews were capable of conducting coordinated ASW operations in a relevant environment without flying in a live helicopter.  SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 3.1 SH-60F MRT3 StationsHomeland Defense TrainingMicroSims can be a very powerful tool for Homeland Defense training.   MicroSims have been used in four Homeland Defense exercises since late 2005.  The number and type of MicroSims have been easily adapted as the Homeland Defense exercise scenarios have changed.  There are multiple, powerful attributes of MicroSims including flexibility, scalability, affordability and small footprint.  To date, a maximum of eight MicroSims have participated in a Homeland Defense exercise in the same scenario.  In the last Homeland Defense event in March 2007, MicroSims represented a Boeing 747, two US Coast Guard HH-65 helicopters, a Lear jet and 4 Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs).  MicroSims have also represented Boeing 767s, 757s and Cessna aircraft in previous exercises.  MicroSims, while predominately representing air platforms, have also been used to represent US Coast Guard Cutters in Homeland Defense exercises.It was noted during the NASNET study that as the number of live players increase in a training exercise the more realistic the training becomes to the trainee.  Live players add significantly more free play to an exercise and more unpredicted behavior than does a constructive player.  The constructive player always performs as it was programmed, without human error.  The perceived truth that a live player provides through his sensors has significant impact on how the exercise concludes in almost every instance [2].  ConclusionThe return on investment (ROI) for MicroSims in these US Navy and Homeland Defense distributed training environments, whether large or small, have proven to be very high.  MicroSims provide high mission fidelity for training events and remove live training constraints such as availability of other Fleet assets, limited target/adversary support, range limitations, safety limitations and weapons employment limitations.  Decision makers at the highest levels experience higher stress with live situations through the addition of MicroSims in an exercise.  The cost effective, small footprint allows many units to be used to incorporate many live players.  Full motion simulators that cost over $20 million cannot meet the utilization rates in per unit cost.  Low physical fidelity, PC based simulators, with selective high mission fidelity that are cost effective, can aid in meeting the utilization rates that these HLA distributed training exercises demand.  A very robust Homeland Defense training environment can be implemented for the cost of one full motion simulator.  The U.S. Navy and the Department of Homeland Security continue to exploit the MicroSims technology to aid in providing very realistic distributed training environments for Command, staff, and operators.  NAWCTSD continues to develop MicroSims to provide cost-wise readiness to make the US Navy Team even better.References[1] White, Kotick, Anschuetz, Wharton (I/ITSEC 2003) PC-Based “MicroSims” in a Distributed Military Simulation Environment[2] Hougland, Patterson, Owens, Oser, Bergondy (December 1998)Networking for Naval Aviation Training: High Level Architecture Implementation Cost Analysis[3] Gallo, Frye, Kotick, Glass, Matthews (I/ITSEC 2004) Stick and Rudder Training for the Mind[4] Gallo, Buckley, Douglass, Glass, Cipolla, Frye, Velez (I/ITSEC 2006)ASW VAST MRT3:  The Tip of the Virtual SpearAuthor BiographiesJONATHAN GLASS is a Project Manager with the Naval Air Warfare Center, Training Systems Division, Project Director Special Emphasis Branch (PDSE), in Orlando, Florida.  He is currently the Project Manager for ASW VAST MRT3.  Mr. Glass has 9 years experience as a PJM and 17 years of experience in systems engineering in both combat weapon systems and simulations. He is a graduate of the University of Central Florida (UCF) with a BS EE degree.  Previously, he worked as an Inertial Navigation Systems Engineer for the Naval Undersea Warfare Center in Norfolk, VA.SH-60F Pilot Station       TSO      AUTECASOIOS (AUTEC)SENSOATOSH-60B Pilot StationIOS