Simulation Interoperability for SoS and Large Systems Capabilities ValidationRoberta ColombariMarco PalazziSELEX Sistemi IntegratiVia Hermada, 6B16156 Genova, Italy+39-010-654-6361, +39-010-654-6260		rcolombari@selex-si.com, mpalazzi@selex-si.comAgostino LongoDomenico RecchiaSELEX Sistemi IntegratiVia Tiburtina, km 12,40000131 Roma, Italy+39-06-4150-4237, +39-06-4150-3273alongo@selex-si.com, drecchia@selex-si.comKeywords:		Interoperability, IT&V.ABSTRACT: The Integration Test and Validation (IT&V) of complex systems, as Systems of Systems and Large Systems, implies an extensive use of Modeling and Simulation solutions with strong accent to interoperability and compatibility. A Large System is an organized collection of systems integrated by flexible and adaptive interconnection infrastructures and rules. Large Systems provide not just the sum of the functionalities of each component system, but also emergent properties.In order to validate Large Systems and SoS the approach adopted is the creation of interoperable Test-beds based on a synthetic environment (SE), simulated parts and real parts (HWIL, SWIL). Such kind of Test-beds allows IT&V operations from single component/sub-system to full SoS,/Large system, passing through multiple configurations for incremental capabilities. SELEX Sistemi Integrati has experience in the integration of different kinds of Systems, Systems of Systems and Large Systems. In particular interoperable simulations are used for the integration of: Naval Combat Systems, shore surveillance through sensors network systems, Vessels Traffic Systems, Air Defense Systems, Air Traffic Control Systems.In SELEX activities real part is mainly represented by Command & Control Systems, which are stimulated by synthetic environment through the simulated parts.In developing a Large System Test-Bed the interoperability issues to be considered include the following topics:Simulation systems legacy dues to non-standard solutionsManagement of DIS and HLA simulationsCompatibilities among different HLA solutions (DoD HLA v1.3, HLA IEEE 1516, use of different FOMs and RTI vendors)Time Synchronization between real systems and simulated systems.Coherence in geographic data managementTactical Data Link simulation (SIMPLE, HLA)Monitoring capability and data recordingData mining for different data exchange solutions (format of data, data models, SOA, DDS, TDL, voice data).1. IntroductionIn the defence industry the customers are demanding for solutions improving and supplying new operations capabilities in the field of Homeland Defense and Homeland Security, this is in accordance with the realization of complex systems based on the concepts of System of Systems (SoS). Therefore topics as Air Defence, ALTBMD (Active Layered Teatre Ballistic Missile Defense), Harbour Protection, Maritime/Land Border Security, Air/Vessels Traffic Control, Crisis management against terrorist attacks or natural and human-made disasters, are just some examples of nowadays needs in the fields of Homeland Defence and Homeland Security.In such a view, SELEX has interests in the integration of what we define as Large Systems. Large systems are particular Systems of Systems composed by complex “sub/systems” (as SoS); which are integrated in a C2/C3/C4I Network Centric solution.From the System Engineering point of view it is easy to understand the critical role of IT&V for SoS/Large Systems and the importance of Integration Test & Validation Environment (IT&VE), which can be considered the keystone of the integration process. In this paper we treat some general aspects about technological choices and interoperability issues defining IT&VE as Integration Test-Beds (ITBs) for today SoS/Large Systems solutions oriented to include the Net-Centric concepts. The application of M&S and IT technologies to ITBs allow either the reduction of integration costs or extended reconfiguration capabilities, nevertheless the choice of international standards assures high levels of simulation interoperability.Our attention is on the ITB infrastructure and the related enabling technologies and interoperability issues. We will no consider aspects on the VV&A (Verification, Validation and Acceptance) of simulation and Security requirements. We assume models as black boxes and we do not treat security issues, as they are strongly dependent on National laws and specific security requirements.2. ITB InfrastructureA generic ITB Infrastructure has to allow the user to perform testing of single systems, testing of single capabilities, testing of integrated systems, testing of integrated capabilities considering either “co-located” or geographical distributed configurations.The integration process includes an extensive use of simulation solutions for at least these purposes: -Stimulate real Systems/SubSystems/Equipments by means of a Synthetic Environment (SE).-Simulate Systems/SubSystems/Equipments by means of models receiving SE data.-Increase interoperability and ITB capabilitiesTogether with that we have to point out the System Engineering needs. Thus implies to focus on the capabilities of the infrastructure in order to support the management of tests, the evaluation of trials, the configuration management.In another way a ITB infrastructure includes three main features:-Scenario data simulation;-Tactical data simulation;-Other Services and IT&V tools.2.1 ITB Scenario DataFor the integration of complex systems, the availability of a real scenario to perform complete integration tests is neither practical nor cheap. The use of dedicated software as Computer Generated Forces applications or, in general, Scenario Generator and Animator applications, together with SW/HW solutions in order to inject synthetic scenario data into the systems, permit saving of time and money.The main standard protocols for scenario data distribution are HLA and DIS, but it is still not rare have to integrate models using proprietary protocols. Nowadays models and stimulator interfaces are often HLA 1516 compliant, but the ITB infrastructure needs to support multiple standards and in particular:-DIS IEEE 1278.1 & 1278.1a [1], [2];-HLA IEEE 1516 RPR-FOM [3], [4];-HLA v 1.3 [5] RPR-FOM -Proprietary protocols when required.In order to integrate models of various origins, developed using different standards, it is necessary to be able to manage contemporary at real time different solutions.In particular as regards scenario data and HLA we remark that a particular point is the choice of a reference FOM standard, which in our case is the SISO product RPR-FOM. 2.2 ITB Tactical Data SimulationTactical Data are all the data exchanged in compliance with the Interface Description Documents (IDD) of the systems under integration/test.With tactical data simulation we mean the simulation of a bus of data in such a way to carry out tests compatible with HWIL. Among tactical data we can identify a critical one: radio communications. In fact, for integration tests of SoSs can be neither useful nor practical to realize in a laboratory this kind of communications, but it’s still important exchange the associated data. The solution is the simulations using LANs or WANs and standard protocols. For example, in the case of TDL protocols (Link 11/11b, Link16, etc.) the reference standard seems still SIMPLE but the M&S community is moving to HLA as indicated by SISO products: standard for Link 16 simulations (see reference), Link 11 A/B PDG -Link 11 A/B Network Simulation Standard, see reference [7].Similar examples can be provided for voice radio communications where DIS and HLA are the reference standards and COTS solutions are available.Moreover it is important to remind that SoS/Large Systems have to include Net-Centric concepts, therefore, Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) solutions, see references [8], acquire a particular importance together with web-based technologies and optimized data distribution middleware like, for example, the OMG Real-Time Data Distribution System (DDS) standard, see reference [9]. Another aspect about tactical data it is the necessity to treat different sets of geo-referenced data, thus it bears to integrate GIS solutions.2.3 Services and IT&V toolsIn order to support the IT&V phase, ITB infrastructure include three different kinds of services:-Data Recording and Monitoring on Line of either scenario data (DIS, HLA, selected proprietary protocols, etc) or tactical data (SIMPLE, HLA, proprietary protocols, MIP JC3IEDM see reference [10], etc).-Databases as GIS information, interface description databases, see reference [11];-Data mining and data analysis.These services implement a SOA architecture and they allow the user to describe formatted messages and exchange rules and automatically update the recording and the analysis tool.Moreover, thanks to standard protocol for scenario data, it is possible integrate COTS product like a 3D stealth and monitoring applications.In case of geographical distributed configuration should be considered also services for communications (VoIP, videoconference, ecc), secure connection, data encryption.3. Geographical Distributed ITBThe ITB architecture concept is not limited to a single centre, but it is extended to geographical distributed configurations.Connections among centres should be oriented to sharing of services and real-time simulation through scenario data and tactical data communications.One issue of critical interest is the capability to grant connection and interoperability among old solutions based on proprietary protocols and ISDN, today centres and the future ones.In our laboratories we performed different campaigns of tests on legacy and interoperability issues with either National and International partners.4. Remote Support Extension CapabilityOnce the IT&V phase of a SoS program is concluded the ITB architecture doesn’t terminate to operate. In fact the scenario generator, the models, the services and HWIL/SWIL items can be used in order to test concepts of operations, for specific operator’s training and for support capabilities.As regards support capabilities, we have experimental experience in the field of Naval Combat Systems, where new releases of SW can be tested and validated in an ITB and then directly released to the platforms by radio satellite communications.This kind of applications requires a solid configuration management system, and the idea will be easily applied in presence of WAN connections.5. Net-Centric CapabilityThe main program on Net-Centric Operations and Warfare is US DoD Global Information Grid (GIG), see reference [13]. In agree with GiG, the generic ITB infrastructure should include basic concepts in order to provide the support for the integration of future SoS based on Net-Centric Operation requirements. At the moment this means to adopt at least some enabling technologies as SOA, DDS, web-service application and flexible tools for data recording and data mining ready to implement the metrics, which will be identified.6.  ConclusionsThe field of Integration Test & Validation Environment represents a driver to develop and consolidate concepts in SoS and Large Systems. The experiences collected in this paper allow the characterization of a generic ITB framework oriented to IT&V of SoS and Large Systems, which take advantages from different approaches while maintaining flexibility and potential capabilities beyond the integration purpose and in some way oriented to Net-Centric solutions.7. References[1]	IEEE Std 1278.1, “Standard for Distributed Interactive Simulation”, New York: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 1995.[2]	IEEE Std 1278.1a, “Standard for Distributed Interactive Simulation” (supplement to IEEE1278.1), New York: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 1998.[3]	IEEE Std 1516, Standard for Modeling and Simulation (M&S) High Level Architecture (HLA) New York: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2000[4] Defense  Modeling  and  Simulation  Office: High Level  Architecture  Interface  Specification,  Version 1.3, 1998. [5]	IEEE Std 1516, 2000 Standard for Modeling and Simulation (M&S) High Level Architecture (HLA) New York: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2000[6]	SISO-STD-002-2006: “Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) Standard for: Link16 Simulations, 08 May 2006.[7]	SISO: Link 11 A/B PDG - Link 11 A/B Network Simulation Standard, www.sisostds.org[8] 	Vijay Gehlot1 et al., “Model Driven Development of a Service-Oriented Architecture Using Colored Petri Nets”, First Workshop on Quality in Modeling, ACM/IEEE 9th International Conference on Model Driven Engineering Languages and Systems, October, 2006. [9] Data Distribution Service for Real-time Systems Version 1.2, OMG Available Specification, January 2007.[10] The Joint C3 Information Exchange Data Model Overview, Edition 3.1a, MIP, February 2007.[11]P.Satyanarayana, S.Yogendran , Military applications of GIS, http://www.gisdevelopment.net/application/military/overview/militaryf0002.htm.[13] G.Fox et al., “Grids for the GiG and real time simulations”, DS-RT 2005 Proceedings. Ninth IEEE International Symposium on Distributed Simulation and Real-Time Applications, 2005Author BiographiesROBERTA COLOMBARI is the head of  Simulation and Integration Centres of SELEX Sistemi Integrati - Defence Business Unit. Before she reached this position and after the graduation in Mathematics, she has got experience in sonar simulations and prototyping for more than ten years. As head of the Simulation and Integration Centres department she has developed several simulation solutions for Italian Navy and she is involved in International cooperation. Starting from the first system delivered “The Integration Centre of Italian Navy NUMC Patrol Vessels” the application of simulations standards represents one fundamental part of her job.MARCO PALAZZI since 2003 he is Simulations Analyst at SELEX Sistemi Integrati Simulation and Integration Centres department in Genoa (Italy), he is envolved in drawing Integration Test Beds simulation solutions for different purposes. He holds a PhD in Accelerator Physics and he has more than 8 years of experience either in numerical simulations and distributed simulations.AGOSTINO LONGO has over 15 years of experience in dealing with M&S related applications. Graduated in physical oceanography he spent more than 8 years in developing simulation using parallel computing facilities applied to medical, oil and gas, film restoration, synthetic environments, decision support systems, environmental protection application fields. Today has a prime responsibility for the development of M&S Capabilities to support Large System Architecting Development Process at SELEX Sistemi Integrati.DOMENICO RECCHIA is a senior System Engineer of Large System Architecture Unit of SELEX Sistemi Integrati. He joined SELEX Sistemi Integrati in 1997, after a decade of experience as an independent software project leader, analyst and architect in several programs within Land and Naval Command and Control systems. During the past few years, besides being in charge of the software process improvement project, based on SW-CMM (Capability Maturity Model), he has been part of SELEX Sistemi Integrati workgroup in charge of Homeland Protection Systems, as a software functions analyst and software infrastructure architect. In this operative context, he has been developed a strong knowledge in system-of-systems design and integration, state-of-the-art system interoperability technologies and information management.( Copyrights Selex Sistemi Integrati S.p.a. All rights reserved