Towards a European Distributed Experimentation Capability:MBDA Experiences and PerspectivesFrançois MonjanelDr Mick PriestleyAntonella SpanòMBDA France1 rue Réaumur92358 Le Plessis Robinson CedexFRANCE+33 134882145 HYPERLINK "mailto:francois.monjanel@mbda.fr" francois.monjanel@mbda.frMBDA UK LimitedSix Hills WayStevenageHertfordshire, SG1 2DAUK+44 1438 752581mick.priestley HYPERLINK "mailto:louise.trainis@mbda.co.uk" @mbda.co.ukMBDA Italia S.p.A.Via Valdilocchi 1519136 La SpeziaITALY+39 0187 5084821 HYPERLINK "mailto:antonella.spano@mbda.it" \o "mailto:antonella.spano@mbda.it" antonella.spano@mbda.itKeywords:CWE, NEC, SBA, SE, WANABSTRACT:  Distributed modeling and simulation capabilities have become a key element of experimentation, supporting transformation, Simulation Based Acquisition and Networked Enabled Capability.  For some time, MBDA Missile Systems has had experimentation facilities in the UK, France and Italy.  In the UK, the company has a Distributed Experimentation Capability consisting of a high bandwidth network linking the Simulation Centre at Stevenage, the System Integration Facility at Bristol and the Trials Facility at Bedford.Over the last two years, a multinational team, part of the Synthetic Environments Centre of Excellence within the company, has been established.  Its primary objective is to create a company wide European Distributed Experimentation Capability, linking the facilities in the UK, to Châtillon in France and La Spezia in Italy.  Different link technologies are being evaluated, including internal company networks and the Internet.  As part of this evaluation, a Test-Bed infrastructure was established in the UK and distributed to France and Italy for the integration of French and Italian simulations.  An interim milestone was a co-located experiment held at the end of 2005.  However, the capability continues to be developed to achieve the distributed networking capability.  Extensive use is being made of Collaborative Working Environments including: an SE Web on the company’s Intranet and an always-on video conferencing.This paper outlines the challenges of creating such a distributed capability covering: working across national boundaries, export controls, distributed teams, the network technologies and the benefits of sharing a common toolset and approach.  This paper SUBJECT   \* MERGEFORMAT  was first presented at the NATO Conference in October 2006 (RTO-MSG045-014).1	INTRODUCTIONDistributed modeling and simulation capabilities have become a key element in the experimentation that supports transformation, Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) and Networked Enabled Capability (NEC).  SBA is part of the new procurement process, which considers the use of simulations throughout the CADMID lifecycle and its use of simulation in the Concept and Assessment phases of a program is well understood.  Synthetic Environments (SE) also supports NEC by allowing users and engineers to explore the information exchange across systems and thus enable Rapid Prototyping.SE’s play an important role because they provide the capability to link models and simulations together and enable the interoperability.  SE’s also provide the additional benefit of being able to visualize the emergent, simulated battle-space, which give a better understanding of the complex interactions between systems.  This is indeed a highly valuable commodity especially when we are able to place customers or users in-the-loop.MBDA Missile Systems has for some time made use of simulation based experimentation facilities in the UK, France and Italy.  Over the last two years, a multinational team, part of the Synthetic Environments Centre of Excellence (SECE) based within the company, has been formed.  Its goal is to establish a collaborative working practice and infrastructure which will enable the international partnerships within the company to make use of SE to support SBA and NEC.2	COLLABORATIVE WORKING2.1	Three Ways to SimulateIt is the inevitable fact that within a newly formed multinational company there will exist, for a time, distinctive patterns, practices and working culture.In the UK the SE Team has been using a common SE-based approach since 1995  REF _Ref144781105 \r \h [1].  They have developed a set of core software libraries to provide a middleware layer between applications using the DIS and HLA protocols.  The middleware layer provides a foundation for a mature SE Toolset, which has been used extensively on many national and multinational projects.  Federation development processes have been developed to support rapid prototyping and integration, together with Smart Prototyping Environments, that support the design, test and integration of complex systems using real and virtual equipment  REF _Ref144781231 \r \h [2].In France, there are many different uses for simulation.  The SE Team has been predominantly focused on the development of Future Federated Training Systems and battle models, making use of SE-API to achieve DIS and HLA compliance.  Through rapid prototyping techniques their future potential is to support joint training and System of Systems components.In Italy, there are also many different uses for simulation.  The SE Team makes extended use of Simulink as a model development and validation platform.  The team is increasingly making use of Synthetic Environments within Air Defense and Command and Control simulations.2.2	SE Centre of ExcellenceThe UK SE Team has been chosen to be the Centre of Excellence for Synthetic Environments across MBDA (SECE).  Its objective is to provide co-ordination and leadership in SE’s by:Sharing best practice;Enabling the sharing of a common SE Toolset;Encouraging the common use of SE-API;Consolidating research activities;Focusing the company’s education strategy through the in-house Missile System University, providing standard SE briefs and distribution of user guides.To forge collaborative working, the SECE is using a joint study with the UK, France and Italy SE Teams, using the following program of work:2004 planning and component development;2005 linked collocated simulations;2006 distributed linked simulations.2.3	ObjectivesThe primary objective of this program is to create a company wide European Distributed Experimentation Capability that links the facilities in Stevenage in the UK, to Châtillon in France and La Spezia in Italy.The objective drives these additional goals:The development of a world class SE capability, providing MBDA with a unified and distributed SE Capability that can support multinational projects;The development of core competencies in: simulation open-standards, distributed simulation, and integration and exploration of the interoperability of constructive, virtual and real equipment;The development of a Common SE Toolset available across the UK, France and Italy;The development of a Common Test-Bed infrastructure and architecture and ensuring that the Test-Bed components available across the international company;The capture and dissemination of best practice.2.4	Collaborative Working EnvironmentsTo support the efficacy of international working, extensive use is made of Collaborative Working Environments (CWEs).  These create an approachable, use-friendly foundation on which to build the inter-team dialog and working practices.  The established CWE includes a Euro SE Web hosted on the company Intranet and an always-on networking and video conferencing facility.Euro SE WebThe Synthetic Environments International Web, or Euro SE Web, has become the single source of SE information across the company and is accessible from any standard desktop in all three nations, Figure 1.  The Euro SE Web hosts information on:The Common SE Toolset;The program of events within the SE community;The SE Centre of Excellence;The international Applied Research programs.In addition, the service is bi-direction.  Users are allowed to upload information, documents, help guides, software and toolset components onto the web.  Users at any site can then download them for immediate use.2.4.2	Always-on Networking and Video Conferencing FacilitiesThe approach to developing Synthetic Environments has always been to follow a familiar set of steps:Develop a common infrastructure;Develop components at national level, initially in isolation;Collocate for integration.However, to support distributed working practices and “online integration” the SE Teams have constructed a set of dedicated infrastructure elements, namely a Wide-Area Network (WAN) and a video conferencing facility.  The WAN between each site uses either ISDN or a bandwidth-share on the company’s IWAN for exclusive use by the SE Teams.  The direct network links dedicated to SE support a rapid integration timeframe.  Developers are given remote computer access to allow remote software debugging, configuration checking or the latest software transfers.The WAN can be considered always-on and supports the additional video conferencing facility between all three countries.  There have been many benefits to these dedicated facilities.  With the always-on video conferencing, the SE Teams can create an effective “virtual office”.  Cost savings through minimised travel are attained by a ready ability to conduct ad-hoc meetings and immediate access to local experts.All these benefits give a faster integration cycle by providing, firstly, a faster and more agile response to changing requirements and experimental needs, and secondly by keeping team members informed. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 1: The Synthetic Environments International Web (Euro SE Web)2.5	Common Test Bed InfrastructureAs part of the joint program, a Common Test-Bed infrastructure was established in the UK and distributed to France and Italy for the integration of French and Italian simulations, Figure 2.  The Common Test-Bed defines three features: a common architecture, a common infrastructure and common components.2.5.1	Common ArchitectureThe common architecture defines a baseline solution, which may be built upon and extended.  The architecture also defines a road-map that can be exploited for re-use across project domains, while maintaining a consistency of approach.  This supports rapid re-use and develops a common understanding between domains.2.5.2	Common InfrastructureThe Common Test-Bed components are built upon the SE-API middleware and are, therefore, both DIS and HLA compliant.  However, it is our practice to use HLA during experimentation whenever possible.Consistency of the FOM within the Common Test-Bed is achieved amongst partners by using a single, inclusive “Common Operating Environment FOM”.  The FOM is based on RPR-FOM v1 with extensions to meet individual project needs and includes the Link 16 BOM proposed by SISO  REF _Ref144657137 \r \h [5].2.5.3	Common ComponentsThe common components of the Test-Bed cover a number of areas:Bridges to interface to any number of DIS and  HLA federates and federations;Bridges to interface the SISO compliant Link 16 federation to the Link 16 SIMPLE NATO standard  REF _Ref144657116 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [6];Federation Control to manage the federation execution when all sites are in operation;Blue Force and Red Force battle models;Support and integration tools such as Logging and Replay, 2D and 3D god’s-eye views. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 2: The Common Test-Bed Infrastructure2.6	Support to UsersSupport to users of the Common Test-Bed technology is given in terms of workshops, user guides, video conferences and the SE Euro Web.  The company as a whole is given support through participation in the Missile Systems University.As an example of support to users, during the joint study, an interim demonstration was conducted to give the team an understanding of the philosophies and practices behind SE.  The demonstration was in the form of a co-located experiment held at the end of 2005.  It provided a basis to reinforce the Common Test-Bed and associated practices of work, the Collaborative Working Environment, common toolset, etc.3	DISTRIBUTED CAPABILITYIn the UK, the company has a Distributed Experimentation Capability consisting of a high-bandwidth, secure network linking the Simulation Centre at Stevenage, the System Integration Facility at Bristol and the Trials Facility at Bedford.For connections between the European sites, different link technologies are being evaluated, including guaranteed bandwidth on the internal company network (IWAN), ISDN and the Internet.The need for low-latency connections with minimal timing jitter is well understood, especially when the links need to support real-time, fast maneuvering targets.  The connections established by the SE Teams have proven to be adequate for their desired purposes.  Table 1 shows the typical timings for the IWAN connections.Between SitesMean turnaround time (msecs)Variation (msecs)Peak (msecs)UK & France(Vélizy le Bois)2510164UK & Italy(Rome)704108UK & Italy(La Spezia)110--Table 1: Timing results for WAN TestsSince the initial co-located demonstration, several experiments and demonstrations have been conducted across the European WAN involving all three sites.  A typical federation is shown in Figure 3.  The capability continues to be developed to achieve an even better distributed networking capability.  The SE Teams believe the Collaborative Working Environment and distributed capability is unique across Europe and provides a world-class capability, Figure 4. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 3: The Distributed Common Test-Bed SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 4: The MBDA Distributed Experimentation Capability4	WORKING PRACTICESWorking across national boundaries inevitably creates challenges: distributed teams, and their need to travel, have largely been mitigated through the Collaborative Working Environment; language and cultural differences are used as an opportunity to discover rather than hinder.Export controls between nations can be challenging and the approach of the SE Teams has been to prepare insensitive tools, datasets, etc. to ease consent for their release.Networking technology is relatively low risk due to the open standards being adopted internationally.  The greatest challenge is the network latencies, especially when real-time simulations are involved, which include fast manoeuvring assets.  This difficulty is reduced by the teams’ readiness to share experience in this problem and solutions become readily available.The practice of pooling tools to form a common toolset and aligning SE practice has been encouraged and the benefits of reuse and cooperation have been appreciated by the SE Teams and clearly demonstrated to the company.5	CONCLUSIONSThe importance of SE to support the SBA process and the realization of NEC is appreciated by MBDA and an international capability has been sought.  A programme of activities has been facilitated by the SE Centre of Excellence in partnership with teams across Europe.The close co-operation of the teams has allowed them to pool their resources and experience to form:A common set of tools, models and simulations, for re-use;A common infrastructure through SE-API;A common set of working practices;The potential to link internally via IWAN and externally to other companies and facilities via ISDN.All of these are embedded within a Collaborative Working Environment for access by all members of the SE Teams.The team believes that its approach has achieved the goals of:Cost savings and risk reduction to company programmes;The sharing of a common toolset;The sharing of best practice;A European Distributed Experimentation Capability to support MBDA activities.6	REFERENCESR. Smith (2005). SE-API – A Synthetic Environments Toolset. HLA Conference 2005, Lerici, Italy.M.D.J. Priestley (2004). Rapid SE Prototyping – A Key to Smart Integration. SE National Advisory Committee (SENAC) Conference 2004, London, UK.L. Trainis (2005). Distributed Integration for NEC. SE National Advisory Committee (SENAC) Conference 2005, London UK.C. Rouget (2006). Development and Evaluation of a Federated Link 16 Test-Bed. Royal Aeronautical Society (RAeS) Conference 2006, Boscombe Down, UK.Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO). Link 16 Simulation Standard. SISO-STD-002-V2.9.6North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Military Agency for Standardization (MAS) Standardization Agreement (STANAG). Standard Interface for Multiple Platform Link Evaluation (SIMPLE). STANAG 5602.Author BiographiesFRANÇOIS MONJANEL graduated from the university of Paris X11 Orsay with his first degree in physics and mathematics in 83 (DEUG) and after different degrees in software license, master and DESS (superior specialized study degree) called "systems and communication man machine" he joined MBDA in 1990.  Francois has worked in expert system domain (artificial Intelligence) later in mission planning for UAV and since 1995 in the Synthetic Environment domain oriented for training systems products.DR MICK PRIESTLEY has worked in the defence industry for 12 years following his second graduation from Bristol University with a PhD in Electronic Engineering and Computer Science.  Mick has developed his understanding of Synthetic Environment technologies and working practices through involvement in SE's both at company and national level.  More recently, he has gained experience by developing SE's that provide virtual test and evaluation environments.  These have had the practical application of architecture development and system integration.  For the last ten years Mick has been senior Engineer with the SE Team at MBDA, Stevenage.ANTONELLA SPANÒ is currently the Head of Operational Analysis & Synthetic Environments sector in Technical, Engineering & Systems Dept. of Italian NatCo.  Antonella has worked since 1982 in a defence industry, now called WASS, of Finmeccanica Group, operating in electro-acoustical underwater sector, first as system engineering specialist and then in charge of Company IT.  Inside the formerly AMS Missile System Division and now in MBDA Missile Systems:Since 1995 she has been involved in Synthetic Image Generation System activities, relating real time virtual scenarios development with both visual and sensor (InfraRed/Radar) renderization.Since 2000 she has performed Operational Analysis simulation models of Surface to Surface, Air to Surface, and Surface to Air missile systems.Copyright © 2007MBDA UK Limited, MBDA Italia SpA, MBDA France SAWAN (ISDN)FRANCEITALYHLAHLA2D / 3DViewersC2 NodeWeapon SystemFed Control2D / 3DViewersC2 NodeWeapon SystemBridgeBridgeBridgeTactical ControlleriSpy Analyser2D / 3DViewersBristolVélizy - ChâtillonMunichLa SpeziaRomeStevenageEW RadarBridgeBattle ModelWeapon SystemHLAUKMITLComponentFederationControl2DViewersHLA Logger& ReplayPrimeEquipmentWeapon SimulationBlue ForceBattle ModelMITLComponentRed ForceBattle ModelSystemSimulationBridge??? - HLABridgeDIS - HLABridgeHLA - HLA3DViewersLink16InterfaceLink16InterfaceHLALink16Interface