Joint Battle Management Language (JBML) -Phase 1 Development and Demonstration ResultsDr. Stan LevineDr. J. Mark PullenDr. Michael R. HiebC4I CenterGeorge Mason UniversityFairfax, VA{slevine, mpullen, mhieb}@netlab.gmu.edu Cynthia PandolfoGestalt LLC 680 American Ave, Ste 320 King of Prussia, PA 19406 HYPERLINK "cpandolfo@gestalt-llc.com" cpandolfo@gestalt-llc.comCurtis BlaisMOVES InstituteNaval Postgraduate SchoolMonterey, CA 93943 HYPERLINK "mailto:clblais@nps.edu" clblais@nps.edu John Roberts Atlantic Consulting Services Inc.167 Ave at the CommonShrewsbury, NJ 07702 HYPERLINK "jroberts@acsinc-nj.com" jroberts@acsinc-nj.comJohn KearleyDynamics Research Corporation1813 Foxhound LaneVirginia Beach, Va. 23454 HYPERLINK "jkearley@drc.com" jkearley@drc.comKeywords:Joint Battle Management Language (JBML), interoperability, information exchangeABSTRACT: The Joint Battle Management Language (JBML) is being developed as an unambiguous language for command and control of live and simulated forces conducting military operations, and to provide for situational awareness and a shared, common operational picture. The purpose of the Phase 1 development and demonstration effort was to build and demonstrate an initial Joint BML capability to transmit digital orders from Joint Forces using a Battle Management Language construct as a Proof of Principle.  This paper summarizes the successful completion of the development and demonstration of this Joint (Land, Sea, Air) proof of principle construct. A combination of Service and Joint real Command and Control (C2) systems and simulations were used in an operationally realistic Joint scenario as part of the demonstration. The results of this effort will serve as a basis for a SISO Coalition Standard on BML. In addition, this effort is applicable to Homeland and Societal Security. BML will provide a robust method for exchanging clear interoperable plans, orders, and situational awareness reports between military, paramilitary, civilian governmental, and non-governmental organizations.	 Background:The need to interface Command and Control (C2) and Modeling and Simulation (M&S) systems has long been established. The Department of Defense has worked at great length to establish general simulation-to-simulation standards (e.g., High Level Architecture - HLA). However, there has been limited enterprise work to establish standards for C2-to-M&S interoperability. Accordingly, almost every simulation has a unique C2 interface. A notable exception is the Battle Management Language (BML) effort and its use of the international Multinational Interoperability Programme (MIP) data standards, the Command and Control Information Exchange Data Model (C2IEDM)/Joint Command, Control and Consultation Information Exchange Data Model (JC3IEDM) family of data models as a system-independent community vocabulary for passing plans orders, and reports between C2 systems and simulations. Project Description:The purpose of this project was to develop a Joint BML by building a proof of principle system that integrated Army, Air Force and Navy BML for a Joint Operations Use Case. The project is described in reference [1]. The project tasks were to:leverage the existing Service BML efforts (described in references [2], [3], [4], and [5]) to develop a limited Joint scenario for a set of existing C2 Planning and Execution systems and Simulationsdevelop an expanded BML based on the set of tasks in this joint scenariodevelop a proof of principle demonstration to evaluate this BMLperform the demonstration and conduct an assessment of the BML utilized.JBML Phase 1 Team LeadsMr. Michael Powers, TEC, Program ManagerDr. Mark Pullen, GMU, Project LeadDr. Michael Hieb, GMU, Technical LeadDr. Stan Levine, GMU, Project ManagerDr. Andreas Tolk, ODU, Standards LeadDr. Harry Keeling, HU, Testbed LeadMr. John Roberts, ACS, Ground LeadMr. Curtis Blais, NPS, Maritime LeadMr. David Perme, Gestalt, Air LeadMs. Shea Smith, JATTL, JFCOM CoordinatorMr. John Kearley, DRC, Scenario Lead Demonstration Task Description:The project objective was to develop and conduct a demonstration of BML in a Joint Operations Context, with each Service playing identifiable Service and Joint roles. The work leveraged existing projects and assessed the ability of BML and JC3IEDM to support the planning and execution process.Demonstration Concept of the Operation:The overall demonstration scenario Concept of Operations was for a notional Commander, Joint Task Force Caspian Sea (CJTF-CS) to conduct offensive operations with Joint and, as assigned, coalition forces to seize designated objectives and defeat enemy forces in the Gulf of Caspia area, specifically in Atropia (see Figure 1) and to drive enemy forces from Atropia.Specifically, Army units were to proceed from the northwest to the southeast, through several Urban Areas (Imamverdili, Vtoroye, and Imishli), seizing these towns and the Imishly airfield as the designated objectives. The Army units were to also destroy enemy forces in order to reestablish the international border.These Army movements were to be preceded by:Reconnaissance from Navy and Air Force fixed wing aircraft (preceded the demo portion of the CONOPS)Navy and Air Force air strikes on key C2 and communication nodesPre-planned Navy Tomahawk strikesClose Air Support missionsScenario Description: Gulf Of Caspia Operation Principle Challenge (OPORD for CJTF-CS)Figure 1: JBML Demonstration Scenario Area of OperationsBackground:The area surrounding the Gulf of Caspia holds large oil reserves that are key to U.S. national interests (Figure 1). The entire region has a long history of fighting, factionalism, and unrest. Western economic interest and investment is centered on increasing oil and gas extraction for export. Increased U.S. government and commercial involvement in the Caucasus region includes:oil pipeline project to connect the oil fields of Atropia and the Gulf of Caspia for transshipment to the Westdesire for social, political, and economic progress and stability in the region.Recent Developments:2005 - Border incursions by Ariana sponsored organizations (South Atropian People’s Army (SAPA)) into Atropia attacking infrastructure, oil pipelines, and displacing Atropian citizens; continued unrest and sporadic violence by various factions2006 - Continued and increasing frequency of border incursions; Ariana commenced major troop movements and exercises along the Arianan-Atropian borderSeptember 2006 - CJTF Caspian Sea (CJTF CS) is established as JTF Commander from the EUCOM SJFHQ and forward deployed to Gorgas; U.S. shifts its diplomatic thrust from mediation to coalition building;  U.S. forces (Army, Navy, USAF, & USMC) begin deployment to EUCOM to report to CJTF-CSOctober 2006 - Ariana begins to hold large-scale military exercises near the Atropian border; SAPA attacks the British and Canadian embassies in Baku, AtropiaNovember 2006 - Ariana reserve units mobilize; Terrorist group strikes Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline in Atropia; Ariana sponsored insurgents conduct operations in southern Atropia occupying key towns and roads and take control of local infrastructureDecember 2006 - Ariana brigade exercises along the Atropian southern border; Ariana infantry division buildup along the Atropian southern border. US Army and USMC forces begin coalition exercises with Gorgas forces; U.S. Sixth Fleet augmented by one additional CVSG (carrier strike group) in eastern Mediterranean Sea and begin transit to Gulf of Caspia; USAF and US Navy aircraft join coalition exerciseJanuary 2007 – Naval forces operate in Gulf of Caspia; USAF units forward deploy to EUCOM to various coalition airfields in the Caucasus region; forces under CJTF-CS command continue coalition exercises and trainingFebruary 2007 – Final elements of USAF Air Expeditionary Force (AEF) III arrive in EUCOM to report to CJTF-CS; Ariana division units en masse violated Atropia’s southern border beginning 22 February; Atropia requests U.S. assistance as deterrent against Ariana aggression.March 2007 – U.S. Joint and coalition forces conduct force protection and force deterrent operations in southern Atropia in late March, continuing into April 2007, beginning CJTF CS combat operations.April 2007 - The President directs execution of OPLAN 4903-10 PRINCIPLE CHALLENGE , a Joint/Coalition force mission to eject Ariana forces from Atropia and re-establish the international border.Theater Operations:The President directs execution of OPLAN PRINCIPLE CHALLENGE in EUCOM theater with CJTF-CS in direct command of U.S. and coalition forces.The Joint/Coalition forces mission is to eject Ariana forces from Atropia and restore the borders (Figure 2).Army forces provide the main effort from northwest. 1 HBCT thrust to southeast (includes 1-66 CAB) is given highest priority for joint support. 1-66 CAB attack is a vital movement as the southernmost US unit attacking to southeast to re-take strategic towns, airfields, railheads, and restore the border.US Air Force and Navy provide reconnaissance, strike, and close air support missions to coalition forces.Joint Combat Operations:CJTF-CS Joint issues the following orders to component commanders:JFLCC, as supported commander, will conduct operations to defeat the Ariana invasion, drive Ariana forces from Atropia territory, and render Ariana incapable of further offensive hostile action.JFACC will conduct offensive operations in support of JFLCC providing deep strike, close air support, reconnaissance, surveillance, intelligence, special operations, and IO support.JFMCC will conduct offensive operations in support of JFLCC providing forces (air and cruise missile) to JFACC for deep strike, close air support, reconnaissance, surveillance, and intelligence, special operations, and IO support, and maritime intercept operations to prevent armed infiltrations via the sea or coastal waters from Ariana.Operation Crazy Horse 1-66 Combined Arms Battalion Joint OperationsObjectives of 1-66 CAB (supported commander) are:Maneuver rapidly from an attack positionSeize objectives IMamverdili Vtoroye and ImishliRe-take important populated area astride key roads, the railroad infrastructure, and the Imishly airfieldReestablish the international border JFACC Air forces will support 1-66 with strikes, CAS, R&S, and IO flights IAW ATOMaritime forces will support 1-66 with air and cruise missile strikes, CAS, R&S, and IO flights  IAW ATO and maritime intercept operations to prevent armed infiltrations via the sea or coastal waters from ArianaSupport OperationsSupport operations include:1-66 CAB attacks to southeast to destroy Ariana forces occupying Imamverdili Vtoroye, Imishli, and the Imishly airfield.Joint operations and attack in an urban area demands careful planning to ensure minimal civilian casualties and minimize damage to infrastructure.Strike missions immediately prior to 1-66 CAB units movement into the towns and airfield vital to mission success.1-66 CAB companies will attack in force, concentrating firepower on the enemy during maneuver to defeat Ariana forces and seize designated objectives.Close air support from joint forces will be required during movement to objective to support force maneuver and minimize enemy attacks on US forces.	 EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 2: JBML Demonstration OperationsJBML Web Service InfrastructureCurrently Web Services are the communication means of choice for distributed system development. BML can be passed between C2 and simulation Web services in two ways:Synchronous connection: direct real-time path between C2 and Simulation, pairwise. Asynchronous connection: BML messages are buffered in one or more intermediate system that store(s) system state. Synchronous is more responsive but asynchronous is more flexible. In the latter case one repository can serve multiple C2 and Simulation systems. It is not necessary for all systems to be continuously responsive. Asynchronous connection is particularly good for development, experimentation, and distributed operation where it is hard to keep all systems responding constantly. The phase 1 implementation of JBML was asynchronous. Using a Web service repository simplified JBML development and enabled distributed development over Internet. The “repository” is described in the following paragraphs as a layered Service Architecture with three primary layers (Figure 3). The layering approach we used was inspired by Tolk [6].	 EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8 Figure 3: JBML Service ArchitectureDomain-Configured Service - Domain Layer:The Domain-Configured Service (DCS) implements BML in a domain context. In the case of an OPORD, the transaction at this layer would specify all information about a given task (i.e., who, what, when, where, and why).DCS is a Generic Web service that is configured by an XML schema called Domain Knowledge Schema (DKS)The DCS is built to be configurable by the XML schema and based on the layering concepts put forward by the Virginia Modeling, Analysis, and Simulation Center (VMASC) in various papersIt supports a Push operation to store order information and a Pull operation to retrieve an orderIt is based on a BML grammar concept of Schade and Hieb (see reference [7], The BML grammar supported in the demonstration can be described in terms of a few primitives:<command>	<tasker-who>	<taskee-who><affected-who>	<what> (action)	<where><start-when>	<end-when>			<why><label>					<modifier>BML Base Service - Composite LayerThe BML Base Service (BBS) provides primitive BML elements such as Who, What, When, Where, and Why.The BBS accesses all of the database tables associated with information primitives, including extensions to the underlying JC3IEDM, through the Common Data Access software.BBS Interfaces:Upwards: API interface (4) to the DCS. Downwards: uses the BML Common Data Access API.The alternate Web service interface to the BBS (8), which will be available for SISO experimentation, was not used in the JBML Phase 1 Demonstration.Common Data Access Service (CDAS) - Atomic LayerThe CDAS provides mechanisms to: inspect database tables externallyboth read and update the database tables directlyThe CDAS can support inspection of every database table used in any domain of BML, in order to support understanding of system behavior during development.There are two higher level interfaces to the CDAS:Internal interface, defined as an API active in both directions (write and read)External interface defined using a WSDL (XML/SOAP based) (5) which is a one way pull interface intended to be used for inspecting (reading) tables. A push interface, which will be available for SISO experimentation, was not used in the JBML Phase 1 Demonstration. The lower level CDAS interface (7) to the database is SQL based.CDAS provides error controlJBML Demonstration EnvironmentFollowing is a description of the 9 elements of the JBML Demonstration Environment as depicted in Figure 4.	 SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 4: JBML Demo EnvironmentAs described previously, the demonstration scenario context involved a Joint Task Force operation located in the Caspian Sea Area. The Joint Task Force was tasked with a Joint Urban Operation described in a Joint Operations Order (OPORD) that drove an Air Battle Plan, a Maritime OPORD, and a Ground OPORD. Each of these was processed into a common, extensible and vetted XML schema based JBML Web service. This information was then converted and used to drive two linked Joint Semi-Automated Forces (JSAF) simulations.Step 1: Maritime Order GenerationA Graphical User Interface (GUI) was used to produce files containing Maritime orders for Tomahawk cruise missile strikes. The output files were produced in native JBML DCS XML (i.e., conforming to the Domain Knowledge Schema) and used for input to the BML Web Service during the exercise. The original intent was to integrate this GUI with the JC3IEDM-based Tactical Collaboration (JTC) system, a prototype C2 system that has operated as a client to the Global Command and Control System (GCCS) in Navy exercises/experiments. However, JTC software was not available for use in the demonstration. When integrated, JTC can be employed as a “native JBML-speaking” JBML C2 collaborative planning tool.Step 2: Air Tasking Order GenerationA Theater Battle Management Core System (TBMCS) was used to produce files containing an Air Battle Plan (ABP) and an Airspace Control Order (ACO) for both Air Force and Navy Air missions. These files were produced before the demonstration and translated into the Command and Control Data Interchange Format (C2DIF).  These C2DIF files were used for input to the JBML Web Service.  The whole process could not be shown at the demonstration as there was not an instance of TBMCS available.Step 3: Ground Order GenerationThe Ground Operations Order was created by the Combined Arms Planning and Execution System (CAPES) injector component of the USMC Command and Control Personal Computer (C2PC). The C2PC, developed by the US Marine Corps is a Windows client/server network application that displays positional tactical track data and provides a complete geographically based situational awareness capability, including the capability to display Global Command and Control System (GCCS) COP data. The C2PC included the Joint Tactical COP Workstation (JTCW) Planning Injector (PI) capability. The PI is a software component designed to assist military planners in all aspects of planning. It frees the user from most of the routine tasks normally associated with operational planning. The PI allows the user to better focus on the higher level concepts — missions, plans, tasks, activities and resources. The PI is an adapted version of the Combine Armed Planning and Execution Monitoring System (CAPES).Step 4: Conversion of Air Tasking Order to JBML XMLThe ABP and ACO information contained in the C2DIF files were converted to the JBML DCS XML format. In the future, this function could be performed as part of the TBMCS or any other system that had the capability of producing Air Tasking Orders.Step 5: Conversion of Ground Orders to JBML XMLThe Ground Operational Orders were exported from the CAPES/C2PC application as an XML mission file. The mission file was then read into an XML Parser application that converted the native CAPES format into JBML DCS XML and used the JBML Push command to store the ground forces order information within the JBML database. In the future, this function could be performed in the C2PC or as part of any other C2 system capable of producing Ground Operational Orders.Step 6: JBML Web ServiceThe Air, Maritime, and Ground BML information was pushed into the BML Web Service. The service was built over a Joint Consultation, Command, and Control Information Exchange Data Model (JC3IEDM) compliant server and provided operations to push and pull orders from a JC3IEDM database.Step 7: Conversion of Air Tasking Orders to JSAF CommandsThe Air Force and Maritime Air Tasking Order information was pulled out of the JBML Web Service by an intermediate software application, converted to a JSAF compliant format, and pushed to the JSAF version 3.1.Step 8: Conversion of Missile Launch Orders to JSAF CommandsThe Cruise Missile Maritime Order and the Ground Operational Order information was pulled out of the BML Web Service, by an intermediate software application, and converted to JSAF version 2004 SP1 by way of a customized UDP interface as DIS 2.04 packets. The packets carried C2 type message information for creating units, control measures, and tasks.Step 9: DIS Bridge Across JSAF SimulationsThe two JSAF systems (version 3.1 and version 2004 SP1) were linked via DIS 2.04 using two HLA Gateway applications supplied with each JSAF version. Both JSAFs displayed consistent simulation information throughout the demonstration.ResultsThe demonstration was completely successful and performed accurate generation, conversion, processing, extraction and insertion of the orders from C2 to simulation.Most of the simulated units acted as intended during the demonstration. However, there were a few anomalies with aircraft and missiles that did not execute the Orders as planned. These anomalies were analyzed and attributed to artifacts of the simulation application either caused by the terrain representation or the implementation of certain types of behaviors.The Orders information provided by the system files was compared with the resulting information stored in the JSAF files. The information was exactly the same. This proved that the conversion software and the BML Web Service executed their functions as designed and that the anomalies were created internal to the JSAF.The push of information to both JSAF systems was totally automated with no human intervention. There were no JSAF operators needed to interpret the orders being received since they were directly communicated to JSAF either through auto loaded scenario files or the C2 message data feed via UDP packets.  The resulting operation was both an improvement in accuracy and a reduction in operating cost due to the reduced need for operators. This will be a major contribution when JBML becomes widely employed in the community.Lessons Learned/RecommendationsThe JBML team recommends appropriate data gathering, analysis, and assessment be conducted to support a decision on how thoroughly BML should capture content from various doctrinal message standards such as United States Message Text Format (USMTF), Over-the-Horizon GOLD (OTH-GOLD), Variable Message Format (VMF), etc. The JBML demonstration rigorously addressed USMTF message content in the Maritime missile launch orders, creating a mismatch in level of detail compared to the ground and air orders that had leveraged earlier BML development efforts. Widespread adoption of BML may require expression of the details found in current doctrinal message structures.Additional work is needed to ensure all domains employ consistent interpretation of JC3IEDM structures. For example, there are some questionable mappings from the JBML DCS XML structures to JC3IEDM data structures in the Maritime domain, not because they are "wrong" per se, but because there might be better or more correct ways to use the JC3IEDM structures.  Plus it may be possible to create more consistency in the ways the three domains view their content in JC3IEDM (probably achievable just through more time to work together). Follow-on JBML development work needs to include a JC3IEDM expert to ensure consistent and community-accepted interpretations of the model are implemented.If there is concern that the who/what/when/where/why transactions used in JBML Phase 1 needs revision, or that the mappings to JC3IEDM will need frequent revision, then a different way of organizing the BBS layer could be appropriate. The mappings from the JBML-DCS XML structures to the JC3IEDM structures were implemented in software coding. In a future version, these mappings could be in a data structure rather than in code in order to facilitate evolution of the capability. It could be useful for as much processing as possible to be in "data" (XML files) rather than embedded in the code in order to permit JBML development and evolution to be be more agile, configurable, and extensible. The Phase 1 prototype is a strong first step in this direction.The Ground portion of JBML conversion software should be migrated to JSAF v3.1 to eliminate the use of JSAF 2004 SP1 within a future instantiation of the demonstration environment. The Ground portion of the JBML schema should be updated to more operationally match the ground BML representation currently being used for the GeoBML effort. This will potentially facilitate a smoother integration of JBML with GeoBML in the future.Urban units and tasks in JSAF should be investigated to potentially include more urban oriented operations within the schema and future demonstrations.Demonstration systems (C2 and Simulation) should be selected as early as possible during the next phase for full integration into the demonstration. Follow-on work should include application of MSDL for use in initializing the C2 and simulation systems and to explore integration of BML into MSDL file structures. SummaryThe Phase 1 JBML project was successful in proving the principle of a basic integrated Joint Battle Management capability. ATO, Ground OPORD, TLAM INDIGO information was correctly interpreted, integrated, and exchanged. TBMCS, C2PC, and multiple JSAF systems were effectively integrated during the demonstration.  Future work will be able to build on the foundation of the Phase 1 effort to rapidly add plans, orders, and reports for broader sets of operations in the Joint context.AcknowledgmentsThe authors of this paper are only a fraction of the JBML team responsible for the success of this effort. All team members need to be recognized, in particular the following individuals: Mr. Michael Powers, TEC, Program Manager; Dr. Harry Keeling, HU, Testbed Lead; Mr. David Perme, Gestalt, Air Lead; and Ms. Shea Smith, JATTL, JFCOM CoordinatorReferences[1]	Pullen, J., M. Hieb, S. Levine, A. Tolk, and C. Blais, “Joint Battle Management Language (JBML) - US Contribution to the C-BML PDG and NATO MSG-048 TA,” IEEE European Simulation Interoperability Workshop, June 2007[2]	Sudnikovich, W., J. Pullen, M. Kleiner, and S. Carey, “Extensible Battle Management Language as a Transformation Enabler,” SIMULATION, Vol. 80, pp. 669-680, 2004[3]	Tolk, A. and J. Pullen, “Using Web Services and Data Mediation/Storage Services to Enable Command and Control to Simulation Interoperability,” Proceedings of the 9th IEEE International Symposium on Distributed Simulation and Real Time Applications (DS-RT 2005), pp. 27-34, Montreal, Canada, October 2005[4]	Galvin, K., W. Sudnikovich, P. deChamps, M. Hieb, J. Pullen, and L. Khimeche, “Delivering C2 to M&S Interoperability for NATO - Demonstrating Coalition Battle Management Language (C-BML) and the Way Ahead,”  IEEE Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 2006[5]	Perme, D., M. Hieb, J. Pullen, W. Sudnikovich, and A. Tolk, “Integrating Air and Ground Operations within a Common Battle Management Language,” IEEE Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, April 2005[6]	Tolk, A., S. Diallo, C. Turnitsa, and L. Winters, “Composable M&S Web Services for Net-centric Applications,” Journal of Defense Modeling and Simulation 3 (1) 27-44, 2006[7]	Schade, U. and M. Hieb, “Development of Formal Grammars to Support Coalition Command and Control: A Battle Management Language for Orders, Requests, and Reports, Proceedings of the 11th International Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium, CCRP Press, 2006Authors' BiographiesSTAN LEVINE is Research Professor with the Center of Excellence in C4I at George Mason University. He also serves as a senior consultant to several Army organizations in the areas of information system technologies, architectures, System of Systems acquisition, and interoperability. He has over 33 years experience in systems acquisition. He holds a BSEE and a MS degree in Physics from Monmouth University, and a PhD in Engineering Management from Madison University. He is a recipient of the Army's three highest Civilian Service Awards. He is also a member of the Federal 100 top executives who had the greatest impact on the government information systems community.J. MARK PULLEN is Professor of Computer Science at George Mason University, where he serves as Director of the C4I Center and also heads the Center’s Networking and Simulation Laboratory. He holds BSEE and MSEE degrees from West Virginia University, and the Doctor of Science in Computer Science from the George Washington University. He is a licensed Professional Engineer, Fellow of the IEEE, and Fellow of the ACM. Dr. Pullen teaches courses in computer networking and has active research in networking for distributed virtual simulation and networked multimedia tools for distance education. He has served as Principal Investigator of the XBML and JBML projects.MICHAEL R. HIEB is Research Associate Professor with the Center of Excellence in C4I at George Mason University. He was the Co-Chair of the SISO CBML Study Group and also was on the team that developed the initial BML concept for the US Army while with Alion Science and Technology. He was the Technical Director of the MRCI interface project while at SAIC. He received his PhD in Information Technology at George Mason University in 1996, developing an instructable Modular Semi-Automated Forces agent. He has published over 70 papers in the areas of BML, Simulation Interoperability with Command and Control Systems, and Multistrategy Learning.CURTIS BLAIS is a Research Associate in the Naval Postgraduate School Modeling, Virtual Environments, and Simulation (MOVES) Institute. Mr. Blais is a Ph.D. candidate in MOVES conducting research into the application of current and emerging Semantic Web technologies to obtain valued information for military decision-makers in net-centric architectures and to improve interoperability across C2 and M&S systems. CYNTHIA PANDOLFO has over 7 years of experience in Object-Oriented programming and design. She is currently a Consultant for Gestalt, LLC. Ms. Pandolfo joined Gestalt directly after completion of her M.S. in Computer Science from Villanova University where she studied such topics as networks, distributed systems, artificial intelligence, multimedia, human/user interface design, and computer graphics. She has experience with many aspects of J2EE including JSPs/Servlets and EJBs. Since joining Gestalt, Ms. Pandolfo has worked with various Modeling and Simulation tools developed by both Gestalt and other companies. She is the co-author of two articles. The first, on the topic of Internet Harassment, was presented at an international conference on computer ethics by Ms. Pandolfo. The second article focused on the Wireless Application Protocol (WAP) in which Ms. Pandolfo researched security aspects of WAP. JOHN ROBERTS is a Project Manager for Atlantic Consulting Services (ACS), Inc. Shrewsbury, NJ. For the past eight years he has been technical lead on several Army and DARPA projects involving the integration and interoperability of C4ISR systems and simulation applications. Prior experience has involved the technology areas of distributed simulation, advanced C2 decision support for military planning, Artificial Intelligence (AI), and Expert System development. Mr. Roberts holds a B.S. in Electrical Engineering (EE) from Widener University and a M.S. EE from Fairleigh Dickinson University.JOHN KEARLEY is a Department Head, at Dynamics Research Corporation, for the Training and Performance Analysis department including training assessment, doctrine and Navy Tactical Task List development, Top Down Functional Analysis (SE approach to Human System Integration), and support to development of the US Coast Guard Universal Task List and Coast Guard METLS. He provides direct support to the OSD (R&T) Joint Assessment and Enabling Capability (JAEC) for the OSD Training Transformation Block Assessment.  He is the DRC PM for several programs including training assessment, doctrine development and the Universal Naval Task List (Navy Warfare Development Command) and Navy Warfare Training/ NMETL support to US Fleet Forces Command. He retired as a Captain, USN, serving as a Surface Warfare Officer in command-at-sea and on Atlantic Fleet operational staffs. He is a graduate of the US Naval Academy and also holds a MBA from Old Dominion University.987654321Gateway/MissileGndUSA/USNGatewayAIRUSAF/USNInterfacesSim–BML BridgedV 3.1JSAFC2 MessagesJSAF Scenario Files2004 SP1JSAFJBMLPULL OUTJBMLBMLNATIVEXMLplusUSMTFInterfaceC2 SpecificInterfaceC2 SpecificInterfacesC2–BML GroundAirMaritimeJTCCAPESC2PC/TBMCSGCCS/PUSH INServiceJBML WebJC3IEDMGeorge Mason University–Center of Excellence in C4I 2Slide JBML Demo Environment