MATREX Develops an Innovative Approach for the V&V of a Complex Simulation EnvironmentTom HurtThomas.Hurt@belvoir.army.milUS Army Research, Development and Engineering CommandSystems of Systems IntegrationFort Belvior, VA 22060William Yeakelwpy@orsacorp.com Michael Carothersmlc@orsacorp.comORSA CORP1003 Old Philadelphia Road, Suite 103Aberdeen, MD 21001Susan Harkrider susan_harkrider@att.netIndependent Consultant to RDECOMAuburn ALRichard Mangierirmangieri@virtc.comRaytheon-VTC5510 Cherokee Avenue, Suite 350Alexandria, VA 22312Lana McGlynnlana.mcglynn@comcast.netMcGlynn Consulting Group1805 Crystal Drive, Suite 406Arlington, VA 22202ABSTRACT:  The Modeling Architecture for Technology and Research EXperimentation (MATREX) Program Management Office is conducting a multi-tiered verification and validation (V&V) strategy to support future accreditation of the MATREX federation.  The tiers include Component, Federation, and Federation Event-Support V&V.  MATREX is a composable Modeling & Simulation (M&S) environment, comprised of a collection of integrated multi-fidelity models, simulations, and tools.  The MATREX architecture is used to conduct analyses, experimentation, and technology trade-offs for the Research, Development and Engineering Command (RDECOM) and other Army Commands.  The components cover a broad spectrum of functionality, from battle command, survivability, communications, vehicle dynamics, sensors, ordnance, logistics, and damage effects to human performance.  The architecture and design decisions of MATREX have been captured in a content management system that provides multiple views into this information with linkage relationships.  Due to the complexity of the MATREX program, it is an excellent choice to serve as a pilot program to implement the proposed MIL-STD “Documentation of Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) for Models and Simulations”.1. Introduction The Department of Defense (DoD) has a long history of employing models and simulations (M&S) to address a wide range of problems from engineering design to mission planning, rehearsal, and review.  Since the vast majority of  M&S are abstractions of real world (or envisioned future real world) situations or phenomena, it is imperative that decision makers understand the M&S level of suitability for the questions being addressed.  In point of fact, decision makers should be aware of the risks they assume by using a specific model or simulation.  A large body of literature has been developed over the years to define the process of assessing this suitability and has come to be known as verification, validation, and accreditation (VV&A).Whereas accreditation is focused on identifying the risk tolerance of the decision maker, verification and validation (V&V) activities provide necessary and sufficient proof that the specified level of risk tolerance has been met.  In simplest terms, V&V are two distinct yet interrelated processes that gather and evaluate evidence to determine the M&S capabilities, limitations, and performance relative to the real-world phenomena the M&S were designed to simulate.  Verification determines if the M&S was built to specification whereas validation assesses the adequacy with which it addresses the real world issue at hand.  The decision to use a particular model or simulation depends upon the capabilities, accuracy of results, and availability of credible and appropriate data, in addition to its suitability in context of the application.  It is verification and validation that support the “use or don’t use” decision.  So how does one appropriately and efficiently address building a body of V&V evidence for a composable federation that addresses accreditation issues and assures suitable, credible results? This paper will describe the complexity of MATREX, the innovative V&V approach developed, and how the VV&A documentation standard meets the needs of this intricate VV&A effort.2. A New ProcessOver the past few decades, computer hardware and software technologies have evolved from stand alone M&S to distributed interactive simulations operating over a network and not necessarily co-located.  DoD invested heavily in Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) capability to support a wide range of experiments and studies dealing with most areas of doctrine, organization, training, materiel, leadership, personnel, and facilities.   As the use of DIS grew across DoD, it became obvious that there were a new set of problems introduced along with the new capabilities.  Issues of bandwidth, communications latency, protocol definitions, terrain databases, system nomenclature consistency, visual systems (image generators), and data structures took on a new dimension of complexity and were gradually dealt with.  In a sense, the solutions developed to address those concerns were ameliorated by the fact that the DIS generation of M&S relied very heavily on look-up tables of pre-processed data.  As is often the case, this blessing also turned out to be something of a curse in that both precision and accuracy were compromised.  The compromises were not only due to limitations of the data table structure but to the non-linear nature of many data elements. Linear interpolation of values between data table increments, though known to have inaccuracies, was accepted because there was no more efficient way to address the issue.  An outgrowth of the DIS technical maturation was the development of a High Level Architecture (HLA) which served as a blueprint for linking M&S more flexibly and efficiently.  The advent of HLA and M&S federations has changed the VV&A landscape.  Concerns about the appropriate interactions among components must be addressed as should the various tool sets developed to support the use of federations in experiments, studies, and analyses.  Federations of M&S are by design composable hence there exists a high probability that each federation instance will require a different configuration of components and interactions.  Historically, V&V did not have to address the range of variability inherent in HLA federations.  Even though HLA federations are more flexible, this adaptability in turn creates the necessity for additional V&V each time an application is used.  More specifically, HLA federations, such as MATREX, feature the ability to use engineering algorithms to improve accuracy and precision thus avoiding the extensive use of look-up tables.  Because of features such as these, the standard methodology for V&V required a new process and approach, which the MATREX program is defining.3. MATREX DescriptionThe Army began the MATREX effort in 2003 as a Science and Technology Objective (STO) with stated goals of (1) designing a simulation architecture, (2) integrating a reference implementation that would represent the key characteristics of network enabled battle command warfighting systems, and (3) building  Figure SEQ Figure \* ARABIC \s 1 1 Bottom-Up Simulation Architecturea suite of supporting M&S tools.  The STO sought to provide a secure, persistent environment to support the evaluation of the concepts and technologies associated with Army transformation. Most of these transforming concepts and technologies are heavily reliant upon net-centricity and carry an underlying assumption that the whole of the system will provide greater military utility than would the sum of the individual parts.  This necessitates a thorough understanding of system interdependencies whose military value can only be fully comprehended at a Systems of Systems (SoS) view.  Whether operating at the platform/entity-level, or focused on a narrowly-defined engineering-level slice, or scaled-up to a full Brigade Combat Team, the MATREX environment sought to enable an improved SoS view by addressing deficiencies in domain-specific, stove-piped M&S and data that often failed to be  interoperable or reusable.  MATREX was thus chartered to integrate that SoS perspective over the full range of both M&S system and technical expertise within the U.S. Army Research Development and Engineering Command (RDECOM).RDECOM is comprised of nine distinct, mission-oriented, research and development laboratories, activities and centers.  These organizations employ very detailed and highly accurate physics-based models for the technologies, capabilities, and systems being studied and analyzed for potential acquisition, upgrade or sustainment throughout the product life-cycle. As depicted in Figure 1, the comparatively small ‘cap’ of the pyramid conveys the broadest scope of M&S applications, whereas the components at the base of the pyramid incorporate higher fidelity and generally more physics-based representations.  This diagram suggests that fidelity is lost as you ascend the pyramid.  The tradeoff between fidelity and scale has vexed M&S professionals, who aim to apply the correct model to the problem.  Determining if a system model representation is correct in an appropriate operational context remains a difficult practice.  A preferred approach would retain the physics-based models and apply them at the broader scales.  This approach has been historically dismissed as untenable, primarily Figure 2.  MATREX Reference Implementationbecause of finite computational resources, but also because the problem complexities do not scale linearly with platform/entity/object count.  While it may never be possible to explicitly account for every transistor in an entire brigade, the MATREX effort, by utilizing the engineering-level models and expertise throughout RDECOM, seeks to push the envelope ‘up the pyramid’.  Restated, the MATREX enables the federation of mission-specific ‘best of breed’ M&S to provide a composable Army-wide virtual environment.  The aim is to vastly improve the level of precision applied to M&S and thereby provide greater confidence in M&S results.The MATREX is first and foremost a service oriented architecture, providing a computer based synthetic environment in which services exchange object data through a Run Time Infrastructure (RTI).  It consists of three distinct tiers: a core architecture, the components and tools that are federated upon that architecture, and the persistent infrastructure required to bring them all together into a single distributed execution space.These M&S components, or ‘federates’ in the MATREX, represent a tremendous amount of knowledge capital, and have been developed, validated, and employed in support of various Army acquisition programs.  For the current release of the MATREX, more than twenty of these engineering level components have been integrated into the MATREX Reference Implementation, as depicted in Figure 2.  The MATREX component list is located on the MATREX Integrated Development Environment (IDE).These components cover a broad spectrum of capabilities from battle command, survivability, communications, vehicle dynamics, sensors, ordnance, logistics, and damage effects, to human performance.  Accompanying the components are various tools provided by the MATREX program to assist in the integration effort.  One such tool is the Automated Testing Capability (ATC) for automated regression and pair wise testing of federation capabilities.  The Objective Force OneSAF (OF OneSAF) provides the platform level representation necessary to augment the physics-based models developed at the RDECOM organizations. Because of the complexity of the program and the geographically dispersed organizations involved in the approach to V&V, MATREX is a prime candidate to utilize the value to be derived from the DoD VV&A Documentation Standard.4. Three Tiered Approach to V&VTo accept the necessity for an innovative V&V approach it is important to understand that the MATREX Federation can be composed in a variety of configurations depending upon the need for specific component involvement and the assessment objectives.  On the surface, a credible program of V&V activities designed to minimize the risk and cost for future customers would have entailed looking at all combinations of components.  Clearly that approach is unnecessary, inefficient, and unaffordable – in addition, not all combinations would make sense.  The challenge was to identify a methodology that maximizes the return on V&V investment.  After an investigation of alternatives, the MATREX Program Management Office (PMO) made the decision to look at documented and readily available Model Design Decisions (MDDs) as a way to reduce the test matrix to a prioritized subset of components.  Each MDD identifies the participating components along with complete details of interactions including data definitions for what is being published or subscribed to in the MDDs.  The MDDs are used in a building block approach to develop federation-scale capability threads.  The MATREX program prioritized the MDDs, allowing for more efficient allocation of V&V resources and providing focus on what was deemed most important. The program also published the details on its IDE.  An additional benefit of the MDD focus is that it allows for a “crawl, walk, run” process which accommodates the need for corrective action if and when problems are encountered during execution.  The PMO had already accepted the idea of a three tiered approach that addresses individual components, interactions, and event-driven V&V.  However this acceptance in turn raised the issue of how to use the MDDs to support the three tiers of the MATREX V&V process. 4.1 Tier One:  Component V&VThe first tier of this V&V approach is focused upon individual components.  A reasonable assumption was made that RDECOM component organizations already committed resources to planning, executing, and documenting their own V&V efforts.  This assumption was based on the fact that the majority of these component M&S were developed for customers and purposes other than being part of a MATREX federation.  As such, they complete requirements testing focused on the purpose(s) for which they were originally developed.  For practical reasons, the MATREX program relies upon M&S developers to code fundamental algorithms correctly. Therefore, no further V&V efforts are required to address these algorithms unless issues surface during the exercise of MDD interactions.  Hence, the first step was to assemble all the relevant documentation into one place where it would form a readily available record of those efforts.  The MATREX PMO issued a data call for all the relevant documentation.  The V&V agents initial risk assessment is based upon the existence of those supporting artifacts.  Where important documentation is lacking, the intent is for the agent to work with RDECOM component organizations to generate the documentation and provide it in appropriate format for inclusion on the MATREX IDE.  The format will be in compliance with the new MIL-STD for the Documentation of VV&A for M&S.  The objective in posting the artifacts to the MATREX IDE is to assist future MATREX customers.  Maintaining a consistent format will facilitate finding required information more readily.4.2 Tier Two:  Federation V&VThe second tier addresses the V&V of combinations of MATREX components distinct from the focus on a single component.  The approach to performing the V&V on this tier required some ingenuity.  A MATREX federation is, of course, a combination of components linked to address some particular operational, analytical or technical issue.  A MATREX federation is composable and also comprised of a number of basic network message transaction sequences embedded among the components that combine to form a customer’s use case.  These transaction sequences are documented in the MDDs and they represent the elemental level of how capabilities are implemented in the MATREX architecture.  Each MDD represents a discrete function.  So, from a slightly less traditional perspective, MATREX is also comprised of a set of MDDs that represent the details of how functionality will be implemented in the MATREX simulation environment.  Each MDD is comprised of more than one component and the associated interactions.  These MDDs represent discrete functions that can be assembled to implement a capability.  Thus, the Tier Two V&V focuses on the discrete functions represented by the individual MDD and on combinations of MDDs that logically work together to provide functionality within the Federation environment.  This should ensure that the proper communications occur within and between MDDs in the context of the functionality they provide.  The specific approach being applied by the agent amounts to an expansion of the Tier One approach.  The MATREX prime contractor, that developed the detailed MDDs, will be testing the various interactions in collaboration with the IV&V agent.  The IV&V agent will work with the prime contractor by reviewing specific test plans, requesting appropriate test modifications, helping to define boundary conditions, suggesting ways to improve test robustness and reviewing test result documentation.  The test results in combination with the assessment of relevant component V&V documentation will form the primary source for assessing compliance of a MDD.  That compliance is an indirect indicator of MDD suitability for inclusion in a customer application.  The intent of the MATREX Program is to build and make available (on the MATREX IDE) the body of evidence to support the Tier Three V&V.4.3 Tier Three:  Federation Event V&VThe third tier is conducted as specific events arise, usually as a customer driven distributed event.  First the intended use for the event and the accreditation authority guidance concerning what is important with respect to the application must be clearly understood and agreed upon by the user and the MATREX PMO.  Given a thorough understanding of the intended use, a detailed decomposition into a set of end-to-end capabilities supporting the application is necessary.  Mapping this decomposition to the appropriate set of MDDs determines the fit between MATREX capabilities and event requirements as well as providing a credible basis for leveraging V&V efforts from Tiers One and Two.  This approach minimizes the remaining V&V investment of time and dollars for future users.  Nevertheless, such users would be well advised to check for undocumented changes via a carefully planned regression testing strategy.  Given the likelihood of a distributed simulation environment, regression testing of the MATREX configuration’s specific interfaces and interactions would also be recommended.  The extent of such regression testing would logically be tied to an analysis of the V&V initiatives performed and documented in the first two tiers. ConsiderationsMATREX is more than a collection of engineering level M&S that is completing V&V.  Part of the rationale for building the MATREX was to create a “best of breed” environment of the physics-based M&S employed in the Army’s research and development labs.  This environment also includes a suite of tools that are designed and developed to facilitate the use of the distributed federation for a wide range of applications, from concept proof of principal to force-on-force simulation.  As such, a limitation of a V&V strategy that is centered on MDDs reveals that the tool set could be neglected.  The MATREX developed tools include the Run Time Infrastructure (RTI), the MATREX Middleware Independence Capability (MMIC) (including Protocore), and the Configuration and Static Analysis Tool (CSAT), as well as commercial tools such as hlaControl® and hlaResults®.  The Protocore facilitates integration into the MATREX environment of customer M&S and flexibility in the use of MATREX components in non-MATREX environments.  The CSAT configures the scenario and simulation architecture information at a centralized integrated point.  These tools are fully tested and their performance verified during Tiers Two and Three of the MATREX simulation V&V.  In addition, the ATC Tool is used extensively during Tier One and Tier Two testing of individual federate interfaces.  Although tools often take a supporting role in M&S V&V, they are by no means unimportant to the effort. As such, we strongly recommend the Tier Three efforts include looking at how the use of tools impacts the simulation V&V.  The use of M&S tools facilitates the V&V efforts but they also become a critical factor in the successful monitoring, collection, and storing of data during an event.5. Supporting the Three Tiered V&V ApproachOne of the foundations of the V&V approach is the use of the MATREX System Design Document (SDD).  The SDD is captured in a content manager system, the MATREX IDE, as a set of specialized nodes that represent the functions, architecture and design decisions of MATREX.  The IDE provides multiple views into this information, provides real time updates to design information, and most importantly, provides a well defined information structure that supports traceability    between   requirements    to   low    levelFigure 3 MATREX IDE Supporting the Three Tiered V&Vspecifications as well as linkage relationships that support related information.  It is through these relationships that MATREX supports the three-tiered V&V approach and is able to link test efforts at each tier to the appropriate system elements throughout the design structure. Starting from an intended use, a link is made to a capability, modeled by the sequenced linkage of a number of MDDs. The MDDs represent the details of how functionality will be implemented in the MATREX simulated environment.  An MDD contains an event sequence with each event providing detail information from both a functional and a component view of the event.  There are two types of events represented, the communication event which describes a sending function or role, the data being communicated (i.e. Object update, interaction, etc.), and the receiving function or role. In addition, the event provides detailed information on the parameters and/or attributes that are being used by the events in that particular representation.  The second event type is the internal event, where the sending function is the same as the receiving function.  This is used to note important internal operations that are being performed during this sequence that may not involve the transmission of data.Figure 3 shows how the three tier V&V approach fits into the information architecture of the MATREX model.  This figure is best read from the bottom up to get a clear picture of how V&V is conducted in the MATREX environment. At the lowest level, we find Tier One V&V being performed on the components.  This V&V activity will focus on the appropriateness of the individual component to deliver the functionality specified in the model at a fidelity and degree of accuracy that is acceptable. The next level of V&V activity, Tier Two, addresses V&V of the federation by focusing on the event sequences within the MDD. At this level, all the communication interfaces are checked to ensure that the data being passed from function to function and from component to component are tested for correctness, accuracy, and completeness. The Tier Two V&V ensures that the proper communications occur within and between MDDs in the context of the functionality they provide. For the third tier of V&V activity, the intended uses are defined by the event and then supported by testing and demonstrating the end to end capability that supports the intended use. Previous V&V activity will be analyzed to determine what additional effort will be required to ensure adequate V&V of each capability to support the event.  By including tests and test histories as part of the MATREX model on the IDE, the details of how V&V was performed are then available to all MATREX users. 6. Flagship Program for Implementing the New MIL-STDMATREX is the flagship program for implementing the new MIL-STD for the Documentation of VV&A for M&S because it chose to be.  It saw the long-term value that could be derived from employing a standard means of documenting all VV&A efforts within a distributed simulation environment.  Conducting the V&V of such a complex system calls for both an innovative approach and an easy to use method for documenting the V&V results.The standard began with a discussion between the former DMSO and the Navy Modeling and Simulation Office (NMSO) in July 2005.  The former DMSO solicited all M&S Working Group (MSWG) members for representatives to serve as part of the VV&A Documentation Standard Tiger Team.  The core set of members consisted of representatives from the Army, Navy, Air Force, National Security Agency, and the former DMSO.  In April 2006, the Tiger Team met for the final time to address all unresolved issues and make editorial changes.  The VV&A Technical Working Group then received the final version for independent review and comment. Results were incorporated into the “Documentation of VV&A for M&S” standard which was submitted to the Defense Standardization Program for DoD wide coordination.  The standard is expected to be approved as a MIL-STD by late Fall 2007.  Although the VV&A documents are normally prepared and used at different times and by different groups, much of the information included in each document is common and should be shared.  The standard formats provide a common framework and interfacing capability between the various documents.  This offers consistency and efficiency in the documentation that assists the document developer, model developer, and the customer in the execution of VV&A for M&S, and especially for MATREX. 7. Conclusion The MATREX PMO made the decision early on to build a “best of breed” federation that could be used extensively by a wide range of Army and DoD customers.  That decision included a solid commitment to meeting VV&A standards to minimize the customer’s ultimate cost.Toward that end the MATREX PMO developed a three tiered approach that is effective and efficient.  The approach uses MDDs as logical combinations of components designed to address a specific functional requirement.  Future users of MATREX will compose their particular configuration of the federation based upon specific functions and capabilities. This makes the selection of MDDs as a focal point of V&V all the more appropriate. The end result of the process minimizes follow-on V&V requirements to support user accreditation.  To its credit, the MATREX PMO invested significantly in an IDE that has the dual purpose of keeping information organized for the existing community of users and developers, along with providing a library of relevant documentation for future users.  This paper has described how the architecture of the IDE accommodates the specific requirements for cataloging V&V documents and artifacts at all three tiers of the MATREX approach.Finally, the MATREX PMO recognized the benefits of compliance with the new MIL-STD for the Documentation of VV&A for M&S.  The initial investment to convert existing documentation into compliance is regarded as reasonable with the expectation that future users will readily benefit from the programs decision through reducing research and documentation costs.  The combination of the VV&A documentation standard and the three tiers of MATREX V&V approach offers the consistency and efficiency critical to the realization of the benefits of VV&A as applications of the MATREX federation are developed.8. References[1] Hurt, Harkrider, and McGlynn, “MATREX Leads the Way in Implementing New DoD VV&A Documentation Standards”, 75th Military Operations Research Society Symposium Briefing, June 2007.[2] Youngblood, Bailey, Johnson, Oates, Park, Schwartzenburg, and Stutzman, 2007. "Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) One Voice Unified, Common & Cross-Cutting", Proceedings of the 2007 Summer Computer Simulation Conference. [3] Hurt, McDonnell, and McKelvey, “The Modeling Architecture for Technology, Research, and Experimentation”, Proceedings of the 2006 Winter Simulation Conference.[4] Department of Defense Standard Practice, Documentation of Verification, Validation andAccreditation (VV&A) for Models and Simulations MIL-STD-XXX002 Draft, December 5, 2006.[5] Harkrider, S. and Yeakel, W. “Anti Armor Advanced Technology Demonstration (A2ATD) Experiment 1”, 12th DIS Workshop, Orlando, FL, 1995.[6] Harkrider, S. and Yeakel, W. “Augmenting the Utility of constructive Models and Simulators Through Distributed Interactive Simulation”, AORS XXXIII, 1995. Author BiographiesMICHAEL L. CAROTHERS has served in various M&S and V&V positions during his 20 plus years at the Army Materiel Systems Analysis Activity (AMSAA).  Most of his career since graduating from college has been in the M&S arena.  Since his retirement from the Department of Defense, he has been involved with modeling efforts and prior to supporting MATREX, supported the FCS BCT Modeling and Simulation Management Office developing the Independent V&V Strategy, VV&A Master Plan and providing VV&A guidance to the MSMO.  He holds a Bachelor of Science Degree in Mathematics and Physics from Central Oklahoma State University and has pursed a Master Degree in Computer Science from University of Maryland.SUSAN HARKRIDER is a systems engineering consultant for the Army Research Development and Engineering Command.  Over the past seventeen years, she has led modeling and simulation and training efforts for Army, Joint, and Navy programs.  Recent efforts include the representation of unattended ground sensors and intelligent munitions systems for NVESD, the use of M&S to stimulate live systems, Objective OneSAF (OOS) transition, and various HLA infrastructure tools.  She has served on the Executive Committee (EXCOM) and Standards Activity Committee (SAC) for the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO).  She currently supports the MATREX, 3CE, NVESD, and PM UA FCS programs.  She received her MSE and BSE from the University of Central Florida.Tom D. Hurt is the MATREX Project Manager and holds a position in the U.S. Army Research, Development, and Engineering Command (RDECOM), Systems of Systems Integration, Fort Belvoir, VA.  He worked previously in the commercial electronics industry and holds more than 30 patents, U.S. and international, in information technology and nano-technology systems engineering.  He holds a Bachelor’s Degree in Electrical Engineering from Capitol College, MD.RICHARD MANGIERI is a RaytheonVTC Project Manager in the MATREX group.  Richard has a BS in Mathematics from Guilford College, an MS in Computer Science from Kansas State University and an MBA in Technology Management from Phoenix University.  Richard has an extensive background in project management and configuration management spanning a twenty five year career working for AT&T, Lucent Technologies, SEMATECH, EDS, and DHS.  Richard has a daughter in College and enjoys boating, fishing, and relaxing with a good book.LANA E. MCGLYNN, founder of McGlynn Consulting Group (MCG), has over 30 years of hands-on experience in technical and leadership positions.  She offers comprehensive consulting in the fields of modeling and simulation (M&S), testing, logistics, acquisition, and studies and analyses.  Ms McGlynn has led various domestic and international working groups and task forces, to include serving as the Vice Chair of the NATO Modeling and Simulation Group.  Prior to retirement from federal service, she served as the Special Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary of the Army for Operations Research (DUSA (OR)) for Modeling and Simulation (M&S).  She is a member of the Army Acquisition Corps and was certified as an Acquisition Professional, Level III, functional specialty of Program Management.  She is a graduate of Harvard’s JFK School of Government Senior Executive Fellows Program April 2001, the Federal Executive Institute’s Leadership for a Democratic Society Program August 1996, and the resident course at U.S. Army War College June 1993.WILLIAM YEAKEL, President of ORSA Corporation, spent sixteen years working for the United States Army Materiel Systems Analysis Activity (U.S. AMSAA) as an operations research/systems analyst.  In his last government assignment, he chaired the Army-wide analysis effort supporting phase one of the Future Combat Systems (FCS) program.  He led the AMSAA modeling/methodology team which had broad responsibility for developing and testing mathematical models in support of new technical and analytical requirements across the Army.  Much of his Modeling and Simulation expertise was gained as the technical lead for the Anti-armor Advanced Technology Demonstration, where he supervised the verification, validation and accreditation of Army Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) simulators and semi-automated force simulations.  Mr. Yeakel earned Bachelors degrees in German and Philosophy from Gettysburg College, and Mathematics from Towson University.  He completed a Masters in Statistics and a Ph.D. (ABD) in Operations Research at the University of Delaware, and an Executive Masters of Business Administration through Colorado Technical University.  He currently serves on the Army Science Board and co-chaired the 2004 study on Army Modularity.  PAGE  