MSDL the Road to BallotingMr. Jeff AbbottOneSAF/CAE11869 High Tech AveOrlando, FL 32817407-658-9888 (x115) HYPERLINK "mailto:jeff.abbott@us.army.mil" jeff.abbott@us.army.milCurtis BlaisMOVES Institute, Naval Postgraduate School700 Dyer Road Rm265Monterey, CA 93943831-656-3215 HYPERLINK "mailto:clblais@nps.edu" clblais@nps.eduTram ChaseSimVentions, Inc. 11905 Bowman DriveFredericksburg, VA 22408-7344540-372-7727 HYPERLINK "mailto:tchase@simventions.com" tchase@simventions.comJavier (Jeff) CovelliNorthrop Grumman Corporation12000 Research Parkway, Suite 236Orlando, FL 32826321-235-7560 HYPERLINK "mailto:jeff.covelli@ngc.com" jeff.covelli@ngc.comMike FrakaUS Army TRADOC Analysis Center255 Sedgwick AveFort Leavenworth, KS 66027913-684-9268 HYPERLINK "mailto:mike.fraka@us.army.mil" mike.fraka@us.army.milFrançois GagnonCAE8585 Côte-de-LiesseSaint-Laurent, QuébecCanada, H4T 1G6 HYPERLINK "mailto:francois.gagnon@presagis.com" francois.gagnon@presagis.comKevin GuptonACSIS/ARL-UT10,000 Burnet Rd.Austin, TX 78758512-835-3679  HYPERLINK "mailto:kgupton@arlut.utexas.edu" kgupton@arlut.utexas.eduPer M. GustavssonResearch EngineerSaab Microwave Systems+46 31 794 8939 HYPERLINK "mailto:Per.M.Gustavsson@saabgroup.com" Per.M.Gustavsson@saabgroup.comKenneth PeplowSAIC/OneSAF12901 Science DriveOrlando, FL 32826407-243-3331 HYPERLINK "mailto:kenneth.w.peplow@saic.com" kenneth.w.peplow@saic.comDave ProchnowThe MITRE Corporation7515 Colshire DriveMcLean, VA 22102703-983-6167 HYPERLINK "mailto:prochnow@mitre.org" prochnow@mitre.orgDr. Robert WittmanThe MITRE Corporation3504 Lake Lynda Dr Suite 410Orlando, FL 32817407-737-9103 HYPERLINK "mailto:rwittman@mitre.org" rwittman@mitre.orgKeywords:MSDL, Process, Standards, BallotingAbstractThe MSDL study group completed their efforts in spring of 2006.  Since then the drafting group under the leadership of the MSDL PDG has worked to grow the results of the study group to become a solid foundation for standardization for the specification of military scenarios.  This work involved the construction of a multinational team of drafting group members, the documentation, review and approval of the MSDL Product Development Plan, development of common engineering processes for all DG members, numerous decision analysis and resolution (DAR) studies, tiger team efforts, and peer reviews. This integration of a plan, engineering processes, and community expertise provides a framework for monitoring and controlling the development of the MSDL standard openly.  The integrity and openness of the methods employed have done much to assure the success of the MSDL drafting group’s efforts.  This paper explores the value and lessons learned of the development framework that may assist other product development and study groups in their efforts. OverviewThis paper outlines the rationale for MSDL Drafting Group (DG) decisions leading to the candidate version 1 specification and schema of MSDL. The primary objective of the DG was to provide the foundation of MSDL for integration of JC3IEDM, C-BML, and candidate extensions to MSDL.  The secondary objective was to develop this foundation of MSDL on a defined and deliberate schedule.  The theme followed by the DG was “This is an important First Step forward.”  Drafting group efforts leading to the MSDL version 1 candidate specification began at the 2006 Spring SIW, and concluded by 2007 Fall SIW.Topic AreasThe road to balloting begins with MSDL DG History, which covers the formation of the drafting group, the development of formal DG processes and the products produced through those processes based on the initial MSDL Study Group (SG) draft standard.  The DG then focused on action items related to alignment with other standards, including the base object model (BOM) and JC3IEDM.  The work through the DG processes and action items resulted in changes, additions, deletions, and removal (reduction in scope) of the draft version 1 schema.  The technical standard was then brought up to date with the schema.  Following a final DG review, the specification was put out for the first round PDG review.  This review identified new actions to be taken for alignment of XML Style Guidelines.  A second round PDG review was conducted with emphasis on the XML Style Guidelines.  The last mile in the road to balloting was the SAC Review and Balloting Invitation.DG Processes and Initial DG ProductsDrafting Group The initial MSDL DG was formed during 2006 Spring SIW.  The original membership included eight individuals from four nations (United States, Canada, Sweden, and Great Britain), representing six different programs/organizations.  Initially, these groups were primarily Army or ground oriented, with Air Force, Joint, and Coalition representation as well.  It was decided in the first PDG meeting at 2006 Spring SIW that the DG needed to expand to include additional services and nations.  The DG/PDG went forward with an objective to recruit a broader representation for the standard.  By the time balloting for the standard began, DG membership had grown to 17 individuals.  Members include representatives from the Netherlands and South Africa, with military service representation of Air Force, Navy, Army, and Joint.  Early on the SISO Standards Activities Committee (SAC) brought forward an issue/concern.  The SAC felt that MSDL and C-BML PDGs were clearly related and needed to work together to ensure the standards were mutually supporting.  To this end, the drafting groups of both efforts shared membership.  The MSDL DG Editors were included in the C-BML DG, and the C-BML PDG/DG secretary and vice chair were included as a member of the MSDL DG.  Additionally co-chair positions were created across the two PDGs to ensure common representation of the PDG decision makers.   Through the course of drafting the standard, potential new members were identified and actively recruited to become part of the MSDL DG.  Ultimately this proved to be crucial to success, for as the sponsorship for individual members changed the need for new members/sponsors grew. By being proactive, MSDL DG membership expanded rather than shrank.  While schedule conflicts sometimes required the DG to reschedule meetings, the bi-weekly DG telecoms never included fewer than 3, with a typical attendance of 5 to 8.  The DG meetings immediately became the forum for the participatory evolution of the standard.  All input from all members was not simply heard but was instead considered valid, necessary for success, and integrated into the products of the MSDL specification accordingly. DG ProcessesThe first order of business for the DG was to define the common engineering processes to be followed by the group.  These processes were developed to provide a vehicle for communication among stakeholders (members).  Additionally, these processes ensure no single group/organization could dominate the content and scope of the standard.  There were early SAC concerns related to program specific agendas; the integrity of formal processes tailored from CMMI practices ensured an open and objective way forward, by providing clear justification and rational for all DG decision made.  It is worthy to note that the formal process based approach to drafting group activities was new to SISO PDGs in general.  The MSDL DG worked to develop, review, and implement these processes from April through June of 2006.  CMMI level 2 and 3 practices were used to develop the MSDL DG process documents [1].  The adoption of these CMMI practices ensured all engineering efforts were documented and traceable.    When drafting of processes had concluded the DG had policies in place for:MSDL DG Product Development Plan (PDP) – The PDP is the overarching document that defines all activities and processes to be conducted by the DG related to specification development.  Reference  REF _Ref172254041 \h Figure 1: PDP Product Lifecycle as tailored from IEEE/EIA 12207.2 (1997) [2].MSDL DG Decision Analysis and Resolution (DAR) – The DAR process is the policy followed in assessing alternatives for MSDL specification content.MSDL DG Problem Change Request (PCR) – The PCR process provides a decision tree leading to action items, tiger teams, and future extensions/fixes to the specification.MSDL DG Review Process – The review process establishes the methods and schedule associated with DG reviews of all products to include the DG processes themselves.MSDL DG Comment and Resolution Process – The comment and resolution process establishes the methods and schedule associated with resolving comments made during DG product reviews.Drafting group meetings became a forum for coordinating efforts and verifying status. As a result, votes during these meetings became a formality, as all decisions to be made were accomplished by the process prior to the meetings.  Debate was limited to differences in members understanding of doctrines and standards on which the MSDL specification was drafted.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1: PDP Product LifecycleThis was not an insignificant step.  The activities related review, comment and resolution of products would continue throughout the process of drafting and balloting of the MSDL specification.  The standardization of DG processes established common expectations of the group, as well as served as a ‘warm-up’ activity for the real challenges to come. The success of these practices did not go unnoticed either.  During 2007 Euro SIW the SAC requested the MSDL DG provide a generalized version of processes that could be applied to any DG under SISO, not as a standard policy, but as an example of best practices.  Those generalized processes were provided to the SAC that same week. DAR StudiesBeginning in June of 2006, DAR studies were begun for the SG version of the MSDL specification.  Because the version originated from the OneSAF program, rather than PDG activities, all content of the initial specification was put through the same formal review process as any other candidate extension of the standard.  This decision pushed the initial optimistic schedule far to the right.  REF _Ref172256756 \h Figure 2: MSDL DG DAR Process represents the DAR process flow to include roles and responsibilities of the drafting group and the DAR team/proponent.  The entire process required a minimum of turn around time of one month;   two weeks for review and two weeks for resolution.The DG recognized that a single organization, OneSAF had brought forward the SG content.  It was agreed that it was the OneSAF DG members who bore the burden of publishing the DARs for that content.  In order to ensure a fair and open evaluation of options for representing the OneSAF content, the DG drafted a set of review guidelines.  These functional guidelines were designed to cut orthogonally across the DAR criteria used to evaluate options presented in the DAR studies.  These guidelines become the basis for comments, resolutions, and decisions of the DARs conducted for version 1. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2: MSDL DG DAR ProcessDuring the course of DAR studies, the DG identified a dividing line for content within the SG specification of MSDL.  A significant portion of the specification was characterized as representing a necessary foundation for the remaining content.  In order to keep development on a reasonable schedule, the DG voted to recommend a split of content across MSDL versions.  The foundation would represent version 1; the remaining extensions were allocated to future versions 2 and 3.  The MSDL PDG voted to accept the recommendation unanimously.  Much of the SG MSDL content was closely related.  The DG proceeded to conduct DAR studies concurrently across these related areas of the specification in order to maintain schedule (Overlays & Tactical Graphics, Installations and MOOTW). Other DARs were conducted in a staggered but overlapping fashion.  As comments for one DAR were being resolved, anther DAR was published for review.  This approach roughly cut the initial schedule for DAR studies in half.Comments resulting from these reviews are divided into three primary groupings as Defects to be resolved in the review, Problem Reports to be resolved through action items and tiger team activities, and Change Requests which were to become new candidate extensions post the version 1 standard.  During the conduct of these studies, the DG recognized a need for improved process tools.  Initially the SISO file area was used to post documents.  However under SISO policy only the PDG secretary could post documents and updates. This resulted in complications in coordinating and tracking both resolutions and updates.  The DG recognized the necessity to improve DG processes, and took specific steps to accomplish just that.  MITRE volunteered to provide a SharePoint portal through which the DG was able to collaboratively and seamlessly perform all DG activities.Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 1: MSDL DAR Studies and MetricsDateTitleProponentCommentsVersionJune 2006DAR-01	Forces and SidesOneSAF14V1June-July 2006DAR-02	Task OrganizationOneSAF20V1July 2006DAR-03	OverlaysOneSAF1V1July-Aug 2006DAR-04	Tactical GraphicsOneSAF6V1Aug 2006DAR-05	Environment and WeatherOneSAF6V1Aug-Sept 2006DAR-06	InstallationsOneSAF0V1Aug-Sept 2006DAR-07	Military Operations Other Than War (MOOTW)OneSAF6V1FutureDAR-08	ThreatsOneSAFTBDV2FutureDAR-09	Plan and Course of ActionOneSAFTBDV2FutureDAR-10	Effects GuidanceMATREXTBDV2FutureDAR-11	ACSIS ExtensionsACSISTBDV2Share PointThe MSDL DG used SharePoint portal services to streamline activities.  A DG calendar was used to schedule and conduct drafting group meetings and other events. SharePoint provides the ability to view any list, which includes dates, as a calendar.  These lists can be authored to include links to workspaces.  Workspaces are templates that include all kinds of components/functions, including:Lists of events, contacts, reviews, comments, action items, tiger teams, meetings and more.Document libraries for DAR studies, tiger team reports, specification documents, process documents, or any other document you might find under Windows.   Documents can be viewed, downloaded, and modified seamlessly with your existing applications such as MS Office.Configuration Management – All documents include check-out/check-in functionality.  Simply opening the document checks out that document from version control for modification.  Just click on the application’s “Save” button/menu to update the document in the library.  Share Point even provides for revision control, so documents can be rolled back to any earlier version.  The feature is so robust that a laptop can be disconnected from the network (say in your conference room) then reconnected later (say in your office) with the document still open and checked out.  No need to log back in, just select Save and Close and the document is updated in the library. Administration – Share Point services include administrative capabilities like those found under Windows.  In fact Share Point can be configured to use the same administrative groups that are used under your Windows domain server.The DG used Share Point services to manage and coordinate PCRs, reviews, comments/resolutions, documents/reports, DG meetings, DG events (SIW, I/ITSEC, etc), tiger teams, action items and other business.  Share Point enabled the MSDL DG to conduct business in a distributed fashion.  With the Share Point site operating the DG required only a single face-to-face meeting during the drafting of the MSDL version 1 specification.Action Items and Tiger TeamsThree tiger teams were stood up by the MSDL DG to investigate opportunities of standards alignment for version 1 of the specification.  Those standards included the SISO Base Object Model, JC3IEDM, and UNCEFACT XML Design Rules.Base Object Model (BOM) Alignment:BOMs provide a component framework for enabling interoperability, reuse, and composability. The BOM concept is based on the assumption that piece-parts of models, simulations, and federations can be extracted and reused as modeling building-blocks or components. One important piece of information contained in the BOM that facilitates such reuse is the Model Identification element. The purpose of the Model Identification is to document certain key metadata information about the BOM. For instance, when federation developers wish to pose detailed questions to those who were responsible in the development and distribution of the BOM, point-of-contact (POC) information within a BOM is important. Likewise, a desire of MSDL is to promote reuse. Attaching metadata to each scenario allows military scenarios to be cataloged and searched upon, it can’t be reused if it can’t be found and understood.Foregoing the desire to develop a new metadata structure, coupled with the fact that the model identification schema was capable of standing alone and only need be imported by the MSDL schema the tiger team recommended MSDL adopt the model identification metadata as a meta description content for MSDL (military) scenarios.JC3IEDM Alignment The purpose of the MSDL – JC3IEDM tiger team was to determine how the Military Scenario Definition Language (MSDL) specification from the study group and the Joint Consultation Command and Control Information Exchange Data Model 3.0 (JC3IEDM) specification can be aligned. The investigation resulted in a document and a presentation describing the commonalities, differences and possible mappings of the concepts, vocabularies, data structures and enumerations from the two specifications. The document and presentation also included recommendations of the way forward for the alignment effort.The actual work was divided to cover the main elements of the first version of MSDL. Each element was assigned to one of the tiger team members.Forces, Sides, and Associations – The DG recommendation was to adopt the domain values used within the JC3IEDM for the ethnic, functional, geopolitical and religion groupings in MSDL.Task Organizations and Installations (2525B Appendix A) – The DG recommendation was to align post to version 1.UnitsEquipmentInstallationsTactical Graphics and Overlays (2525B Appendix B and D).  Recommendation was to align post to version 1.Environment (2525B Appendix C) – Modify and extend the general weather information of the proposed MSDL specification to be more aligned with the JC3IEDM specification in the following areas:Terrain (Area of Interest)Weather (Atmospheric, Oceanic, Space)TimeMilitary Operations Other Than War (MOOTW, 2525B Appendix E) – MOOTW symbol codes can generally be mapped to JC3IEDM data constructs. Some gaps are easily resolved by adding enumeration values to JC3IEDM attributes, while others can be addressed by combinations of existing JC3IEDM constructs.The tiger team recommended immediate alignment opportunities for weather as well as organizations (forces, sides, and task organizations).  As the alignment was further investigated, the scope of the organizations alignment was reduced to only cover the forces and sides portions. This was done to mitigate the risk associated with the impact of the changes to MSDL. For weather, elements from the JC3IEDM specification were used to entirely replace the previously existing weather model found in the study group version of MSDL.  This wholesale replacement was taken because no system other than CCTT had shown the existing weather model to be sufficient. The extracted information was later upgraded to the JC3IEDM 3.1 specification.The actual alignment of MSDL XML schema to JC3IEDM data types was accomplished largely through the adoption of JC3IEDM data types as XML simple types.  This enabled MSDL to retain stability of physical structure (data model), while at the same time providing a very strong logical alignment to JC3IEDM.  Additionally, the tiger team validated the inter-relationships of MSDL XML elements in context to the JC3IEDM.  The tiger team’s final report made these conclusions and recommendations:  MIL-STD-2525B (and therefore MSDL) MOOTW symbol codes can generally be mapped to JC3IEDM data constructs. Some gaps are easily resolved by adding enumeration values to JC3IEDM attributes, while others can be addressed by combinations of existing JC3IEDM constructs. Overall, JC3IEDM has a much richer set of constructs for describing MOOTW information and can be used as a source for increasing the expressiveness of MSDL. If the additional concepts also need to have associated symbol codes following the MIL-STD-2525B methodology, the coding scheme would have to be modified accordingly.UNCEFACT-XML Naming and Design Rules This UN/CEFACT – XML Naming and Design Rules Technical Specification can be employed wherever business information is being shared or exchanged amongst and between enterprises, governmental agencies, and/or other organizations in an open and worldwide environment using XML schema for defining the content of the business information payload. [4]This technical specification will form the basis for standards development work of technical experts developing XML schema based on information models developed in accordance with the UN/CEFACT Core Components Technical Specification – Part 8 of the ebXML Framework (CCTS), version 2.01. The Core Components Technical Specification (CCTS) has subsequently been published as ISO/TS 15000-5 ebCCTS ebXML Electronic Business Extensible Mark-up Language, Part 5: ebCCTS ebXML Core Components Technical Specification, Version 2.01 (2003-11-15). [4]The more than 200 UNCEFACT XML naming and design rules were reviewed for those that applied to MSDL and were appropriate for adoption within version 1 of MSDL.  The results of that review were adopted within the MSDL XML Style Guide and MSDL schema.  Those adopted guidelines and other changes to MSDL XML style are summarized as follows:Complex/Simple Types – All elements, complex and simple, were redefined to reference these global types.Keys and Key References – Removed due to poor and conflicting standards support in parser implementations. Object Handle Keys and Key References.Namespaces – All namespaces used including MSDL and those referenced by MSDL are explicitly declared as qualified.Upper and Lower Camel Case – Upper camel case (UpperCamelCase) is used to specify elements and complex types in the MSDL schema.  Lower camel case (lowerCamelCase) is used to specify simple types in the MSDL schema.DG Face-to-Face MeetingsThere were occasions in which the DG needed to meet face-to-face to coordinate and plan future activities.  Such meetings occurred only once over the drafting period of the specification.January 2007 (Orlando) – The DG meeting was conducted as a working group to resolve a number of actions related to the MSDL standard as well as the process tools used by the MSDL DG.  The results of this working group were the introduction of a Share Point portal from MITRE to be used to coordinate DG reviews, meetings, actions, etc.  In addition the DG developed a tailored approach to 2525B based affiliations and coordinated resolutions for all non-editorial DAR comments.Changes, Additions, and DeletionsThe conduct of DAR studies served to bring the MSDL DG and PDG members to a common understanding of the study group version of the specification.  This common understanding resulted in informed decisions related to changes, additions, and removal of data related to MSDL content and scope.Change and AdditionsAs a result of DAR comments many broad reaching changes were identified for MSDL.  These included changes to content and scope as well as the XML style used in the specification of the MSDL schema.  Specific changes and additions include:XML Schema Style – MSDL XML schema style was significantly impacted during alignment efforts with UN/CEFACT XML Naming and Design Rules.Enumerated Choices – XML choices are now specified based on an enumerated value.  These include Owner, Formation, Anchor, Location/Coordinate, Organic Relation, etc.  The enumeration unambiguously specifies which choice is to be used.Ownership – A common ownership model was added to equipment, tactical graphics, MOOTW, and Installations which enable these objects to be owned by a Unit or higher Force/Side organization.Disposition and Formation – Consolidated position, speed, direction of movement, and standardized the organization of this data under the Disposition and Formation elements.  Additionally, Formation was expanded to include the position of units/equipment within a higher element’s formation as well as the unit’s own formation of subordinate elements.  This enables a higher element to be in one formation (column for example), but the lower elements to be in another formation (wedge for example).Other Tracks (beyond ground) – MSDL was extended to organizations other than beyond ground elements.  These extensions include formations other than ground.Environment – The representations of Area of Interest and weather were changed.  Weather took on a JC3IEDM centric structure, while the previously existing Terrain element was renamed to Area of Interest for military doctrinal alignment. Removals and DeletionsDuring the conduct of the DAR studies, the DG recognized a clear line between a stable foundation of MSDL, and other content that while important, had not been shown to be stable nor sufficient.  These sections were deemed high risk.  The DG moved to recommend to the PDG that these sections be deferred to later versions of MSDL.  In some cases, existing MSDL content was recognized as being out of scope.  For example, display only attributes and modifiers from 2525B which did not apply to the MSDL definition of “Scenario” were identified and removed.   Specific removals and deletions include:Unit/Equipment Enumerations – These enumerations were removed due to application/simulation dependence.  No common non-simulation or otherwise application independent standard   could be identified.  The decision was to remove them entirely in preparation of JC3IEDM alignment in a later version of MSDL.COA/Plan – These elements of MSDL were removed in preparation of C-BML alignment.  Additionally, there was a strong dependence of these elements on the foundation of MSDL (version 1 content).  Any changes to that foundation would have significant impacts to these elements.Threats.  These elements of MSDL were removed in preparation of JC3IEDM alignment.  Additionally, no application had made use of this data for the purpose of initialization.  It was an unproven approach.Display Only Elements.  No functional representation to simulation existed for these elements.  They were an artifact of the OneSAF Military Scenario Development Environment (MSDE).Judgment Information – Judgment information such as credibility and anticipated status is ambiguous and was removed.  Other elements which were ambiguous were redefined/modified to mitigate that ambiguity.PDG Review First Round: MSDL SpecificationThe MSDL PDG conducted two reviews of the MSDL specification.  The first review put into motion actions to further align MSDL with UN/CEFACT XML naming and design rules.  The second review was primarily in the context of that alignment.Schedule and MetricsThe review comment period opened on the 19th of April 2007.  The comment period closed on the 17th of May 2007 (30 days).  General discussion of the review occurred on the 17th of May 2007 during the regular PDG meeting (telecom).   REF _Ref175187134 \h Table 2:Comment Summary Round 1 gives a summary of the comments received, by change type, for the first round.Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 2: Comment Summary Round 1Change TypeNumberGeneral6Editorial206Minor Technical32Major Technical1Total =SUM(ABOVE) 245The single major technical comment from round 1 was in context to date and time standards.  “Date and Time Standards, there are at least two formats used from different standards for date and time values. One format is military and the other the ISO.”  The resolution was to adopt the ISO standard in order to further MSDL alignment with JC3IEDM and C-BML.Resulting ActionsThe PDG directed the DG to review the UN/CEFACT XML Naming and Design Rules in detail to identify candidates for version 1 inclusion.  This decision was made to ensure MSDL would not be adversely affected by such alignment post version 1.During this same time frame SISO began to move forward with an XML style guide or best practices to be used or applied across all product development groups.  Members of the MSDL DG/PDG participated in reviews and meetings on this topic to help further common standards for all drafting group efforts.PDG Review Second Round: XML Style GuidelinesThe second round review of the MSDL specification concentrated on the review of technical guidelines on how to express MSDL in XML schema.Schedule and MetricsThe review comment period opened on the 20th of June 2007.  The comment period closed at midnight on the 28th of June 2007 (18 days).  General discussion of the review occurred on the 29th of June 2007 during the regular PDG meeting (telecom).   REF _Ref175187276 \h Table 3: Comment Summary Round 2 gives a summary of the comments received, by change type, for the second round.Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 3: Comment Summary Round 2Change TypeNumberGeneral1Editorial72Minor Technical12Major Technical1Total =SUM(ABOVE) 86The single major technical comment during round 2 was in context to global XML elements. “Any global element can be the root of an XML document, syntactically valid but semantically invalid documents can be created when elements other than the root elements are global elements. Global elements are sometimes used in place of complex types to allow re-use. Complex types must be used in these cases.”  The resolution was to “Limit the use of global elements to root elements only.”Resulting ActionsComments from second round review greatly improved on the XML schema.  Clarity of how simple types, complex types, and local and global elements all inter-relate greatly improved on the quality of the specification.  Standardizing on an XML schema versioning approach and spelling/dictionary standard assured lifecycle management and a common definition of terms used in the technical specification as well as XML annotations, and XML style guide.  Specific actions from this review included:Version Numbering – Major version numbers are reflected in the namespace declaration of MSDL while minor version numbers are only reflected in the schema location (targetNamespace).Global Elements – Only one element, the MilitaryScenario was retained as a global element.  The complex and simple types are global within the MSDL name space.  This approach enables another schema to import and use any of the simple or complex types as needed.Spell Checking & Oxford Dictionary – Many comments identified spelling errors in the schema’s annotations.  A question arose related to which English dictionary should be used as the standard for spelling.  The Oxford dictionary was selected as the international standard for English spelling.As a result of DAR studies and PDG reviews, the drafting group’s effort of working comments through to resolution became common practice.  These efforts also helped to level set PDG expectations for schedule leading into the balloting phase of MSDL as well. The experience of working through the to the life cycle of change requests, problem reports, and general comments resolution provided the necessary training and practice for the balloting phase to follow.SAC Review and Balloting InvitationSAC Input and GuidanceThe SAC provided a good deal of input and guidance to the MSDL PDG members.  Early in MSDL development the SAC cautioned that the schedule was too optimistic.  Reverse planning of milestones quickly confirmed that.  When the DG setup the engineering processes to be followed the PCR process recommended in the BPDSP were consulted to ensure drafting group efforts would comply with SISO policy.  All PCRs identified during drafting group efforts were subsequently captured and posted to the SISO File Library for inclusion in the balloting package by SISO policy.The two PDG reviews of the candidate version 1 MSDL specification used the SISO Comment Tracking System to capture reviewer’s comments for the standard and guidance products.  Comment and resolution data was captured to the SISO File Library for inclusion in the balloting package by SISO policy.The BPDSP defines the SAC – PDG interaction process.   The process was facilitated through early communications with the SAC prior to requesting SAC Review of the standard product.  That communication enabled the MSDL PDG to request a SAC review of the specification to run concurrently with the balloting invitation/announcement.  As a result MSDL PDG was able to shrink the overall schedule by one month.Under SISO balloting announcement preparation and development of a balloting pool is a collaborative effort between PDG and SAC.  The MSDL PDG found that having members on the SAC was very helpful.  These members were able to answer questions the SAC had and keep them informed on MSDL PDG schedule and intent. Balloting intentions were communicated to SAC at the 2007 Euro SIW.  As soon as intentions to move to the balloting step were posted to the MSDL discussions, assistance from SAC was provided to prepare a Ballot Announcement (BPDSP section 4.3.4.1) in the form of BOM example balloting announcement.At the time of writing the standard was submitted for SAC Review and recommendations for the formation of the balloting pool were being prepared.  Approval to ballot is pending the SAC Review.ConclusionsStandards of common engineering processes and policies assured an even playing field between drafting group members.  Common standards ensure fair play and help minimize the effects of individual agendas and strength of personality.  These processes represent the doctrine followed in the conduct of all drafting group efforts.  SISO policies including the SISO Code of Ethics and the BPSPD provide the standard of effectiveness by which the drafting group processes are evaluated.  Process tools such as Share Point enable international distributed development.  Together, these processes, policies, and tools assure success and minimize risk.Just as process standards facilitate product development, alignment to technical standards facilitates product specification.  By relating MSDL to other standards, the drafting group had placed limits on MSDL scope.  MSDL began to evolve into a specification of how MSDL relates to JC3IEDM, C-BML, and XML.  The act of relating MSDL to a common technical standards means MSDL is largely specified through common understandings already shared across a much larger community.Common standards whether technical, or of engineering conduct provide integrity to the drafting group, product development group, and the technical specifications produced.  By following structured processes and aligning to common standards, the PDG was able to ask the hard questions and get those questions answered and posted before balloting began.  This information is captured in form of meeting minutes, Reviews, Comments, PCRs, DAR studies, and of course the MSDL specification itself.References [1]	Software Engineering Institute (SEI): Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI),  HYPERLINK "http://www.sei.cmu.edu/cmmi/index.html" http://www.sei.cmu.edu/cmmi/index.html, Carnegie Mellon University 2007. [2]	Industry implementation of International Standard ISO/IEC 12207: 1995. (ISO/IEC 12207 standard for information technology - software life cycle processes - implementation considerations.[3] 	Ören, T.I., Elzas, M.S., Smit, I., and L.G. Birta (2002). A Code of Professional Ethics for Simulationists. Proceedings of the 2002 Summer Computer Simulation Conference.[4] 	Mark Crawford SAP Labs U.S., Paula Heilig Worldspan, Gunther Stuhec SAP AG, Margaret Pemberton Diskray, Garret Minakawa Oracle/OAGI, UN/CEFACT Technical Specification, XML Naming and Design Rules Version 2.0, 17 February 2006.  HYPERLINK "http://www.unece.org/cefact/xml/xml_index.htm" http://www.unece.org/cefact/xml/xml_index.htmAuthor BiographiesJEFF B ABBOTT holds a masters degree in engineering from the University of Central Florida.  Jeff has worked in the area of modeling and simulation for 20 years.  Much of that time has been spent working issues of interoperabity related to simulation based training.CURTIS BLAIS is a Research Associate at the Naval Postgraduate School with the Modeling, Virtual Environments, and Simulation (MOVES) Institute. His principal research areas at NPS include agent-based simulation of non-traditional warfare and application of Semantic Web technologies to improve interoperability of Command and Control systems and Modeling and Simulation systems. Prior to coming to NPS, Mr. Blais spent 25 years in software development in industry and government working on Navy and Marine Corps command staff training systems and C4I simulations. Mr. Blais has a B.S. and M.S. in Mathematics from the University of Notre Dame, and is a Ph.D. candidate in MOVES at the Naval Postgraduate School.TRAM CHASE is a software engineer at SimVentions, Inc. (http://www.simventions.com) and is focused on the development and integration of technology for creating innovative and engaging experiences and solutions. Tram is a graduate of Virginia Tech, with a B.S. in Mathematics (1994), and has supported a wide variety of modeling and simulation and system engineering efforts within the DoD. Tram lives in Virginia with his wife and two children.JAVIER (Jeff) COVELLI is a Sr. Software / Systems Engineer and Program Manager for Northrop Grumman Corporation (NGC), a Certified Modeling and Simulation Professional (CMSP) and has been working in the Live, Virtual and Constructive military simulation and training field for over 20 years. While on active duty, he was a Navy Carrier pilot and served as Training and Safety Officer for various squadrons and for the Flight Deck and Combat Information Center (CIC) aboard the U.S.S. George Washington (CVN-73), where he earned Officer of the Deck (OOD) and Tactical Action Officer (TAO) qualifications. For the past four years he has worked as a technical lead on the Army sponsored programs. He holds a B.S. Ocean Engineering Degree from the United States Naval Academy (USNA), an M.S.E.E. degree from the Naval Postgraduate School (NPS), an M.S.I.E. (Simulation and Training) from the University of Central Florida (UCF) and is currently finishing his Ph.D. degree in Modeling and Simulation from UCF.MIKE FRAKA is an operations research analyst at the US Army TRADOC Analysis Center at Fort Leavenworth and a senior software engineer on the AWARS development team, a position he has held from AWARS inception in 1997. He is the lead architect of the AWARS indirect fire and command and control capabilities and a major contributor to AWARS' interfaces with C3 systems. Mr. Fraka was a founding member of the Eagle development team from 1988 to 1996 and one of the lead developers of Eagles command and control and the Eagle battle management language. Mr. Fraka is a 1982 graduate of the University of Nebraska with a BS in Chemical Engineering. He is currently enrolled in a Masters of Software Engineering degree program at Kansas State University.FRANÇOIS GAGNON holds a bachelors (B.Sc.) and a masters (M.Sc.) degree in Computer Science from the University of Montréal. He has been at CAE Inc. since 1986 and its subsidiary Presagis since 2007. Over the years, François has specialized in system software and services, in networking and distributed applications, and in real-time and simulation environments. He is currently software analyst and architect for the S-Mission product line, the STRIVE technology, and more specifically the simulation framework.KEVIN GUPTON is a research engineer in the Signal and Information Sciences Laboratory, Applied Research Laboratories, The University of Texas at Austin.  He has over 6 years’ experience in enterprise system engineering, data modeling, and scientific software engineering and is a member of the SISO MSDL Drafting Group.PER M. GUSTAVSSON is a Research Engineer at the M&S and Information Fusion office at Saab Microwave Systems (SMW) working with applied research in the area of advanced decision support systems. He is also an industrial Ph.D. student at University of Skövde. Gustavsson is currently a visiting scholar and Affiliate Research Faculty at the C4I-Center, George Mason University. Gustavsson is the Vice-Chair for the Coalition Battle Management Language (C-BML) and Co-Chair the Military Scenario Definition Language (MSDL) standardization. Gustavsson holds a M.Sc. in Computer Science, New Generations Representations, Distributed Real-Time Systems and a B.Sc. in Systems Programming both from University of Skövde, SwedenKENNETH W PEPLOW is a senior systems engineer at Science Applications International Corporation.  Mr. Peplow supports standards process activities for OneSAF Objective System.  He also serves on technical integration and data modeling teams for US Army programs.DAVID PROCHNOW is a Principal Software Engineer in the Modeling and Simulation Engineering department at the MITRE Corporation, where he has served as the technical lead on several simulation programs.  He previously led the simulation initialization activities of the MATREX program, on which MSDL was leveraged heavily.  While at BDM International and Control Data Systems, he developed software for various corps-level and theater-level wargames.  Mr. Prochnow received a B.S. in Computer Science from the University of Virginia in 1983.ROBERT L. WITTMAN JR. currently works for the MITRE Corporation supporting the OneSAF program.  He has been part of the U.S. DoD M&S community since 1990. He holds a B.S. in Computer Science from Washington State University, a M.S. in Software Engineering from the University of West Florida, and a Ph.D. in Industrial Engineering from the University of Central Florida