Common Image Generator Interface Standing Study Group (CIGI SSG) Meeting MinutesTuesday, 18 September 20071:35 p.m. to 5:22 p.m.Holiday Inn Orlando International Dr. Resort6515 International Dr.Orlando, FL, USA   32819Planned Agenda: Welcome and IntroductionsStatus review of previous meeting’s action itemsReview of recent maturity activitySymbology interfaceOld BusinessBreak (if appropriate)New businessSet up next meetingAdjournMeeting Purpose:The purpose of this meeting was to conduct business of the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO), Common Image Generator Interface (CIGI), Standing Study Group (SSG).Attendance:NameOrganizatione-mail AddressTelephoneJahren, TimRaytheon HYPERLINK "mailto:jahren@raytheion.com" jahren@raytheion.com  321-235-1708LaFont, DouglasNorthrup Grumman HYPERLINK "mailto:Douglas.LaFont@NGCo.com" Douglas.LaFont@NGCo.com 321-242-0679Marrou, LanceSAIC (SE CORE) HYPERLINK "mailto:marrouL@SE-CORE.net" marrouL@SE-CORE.net 407-243-3710Peterson, MarkBinghamton Simulation Company (BSC) HYPERLINK "mailto:mpeterson@bsc.com" mpeterson@bsc.com 607-759-4457Phelps, BillBoeing HYPERLINK "mailto:willard.b.phelps@boeing.com" willard.b.phelps@boeing.com314-777-4799Riner, BruceNAWC TSD HYPERLINK "mailto:Bruce.Riner@NAVY.mil" Bruce.Riner@NAVY.mil 407-380-4943Summary of Decisions Made:The idea of writing a PCR for entity lists per channel was determined to not be necessary at this time and was closed with no further action required.Lance Marrou will be added to the CIGI SSG voting body.The next meeting of the CIGI SSG will be at I/ITSEC 2007.Open Items:No open items were identified.Action Item Assignments:Action Item: Bill Phelps to add Lance to the voting body list and provide a SISO Individual Membership Roster form for Lance to fill out with affiliations and contact information.Action Item: Bruce Riner to create and submit an SBIR proposal in an effort to secure funding for a CIGI compliance test tool.Action Item: Bill Phelps to add a call for new CIGI SSG officers to the CIGI SSG I/ITSEC meeting agenda.Action Item: Bill Phelps to review the use of the term “Reserved” vs. “Unused” for available space in CIGI data packets with Lance Durham and respond to Lance Marrou’s suggestion and make changes if they are deemed appropriate.  This change is recommend in accordance with general practice in IEEE standards where “Reserved” would indicate that those bits cannot be considered for usage in new PCRs.Action Item: Greg Basler to correct the error of two data parameters of the Symbol Text Definition data packet (Figure 32) having the same label of “Character n-2.”Action Item: Greg Basler to either identify the discussion on texturing symbology in the Symbology interface proposal or add appropriate discussion to the proposal.Action Item: Lance Marrou to follow up on the possibility of implementing a standardization of common CIGI component controls. Expected completion will likely be a series of PCRs, probably one for each of the Component Controls (as needed).  Others are strongly encouraged to contribute.Action Item: Bill Phelps to revisit the topic of manipulating an IG’s color palette via CIGI with the Boeing CIGI developers to get further clarification of opinion. This is not to say that this opinion is a final decision but that it should be considered in future discussions.Action Item: Lance Marrou to consider color palette as a component control when standardizing component controls.  This activity will be coordinated with Bill’s.Action Item: Greg Basler to determine at what range a single precision float value will not have enough accuracy to support smooth motion of a view.Action Item: Lance Marrou will make a general query of the IG community via the SISO web board to gather opinions on whether there needs to be independent control of top and bottom cloud SCUD.Action Item: Lance Marrou will be taking a closer look at sensor implementations to ascertain a robust set of parameters that would be needed to fulfill known sensor requirements.  Expected completion will be sometime next year.Action Item: Lance Marrou to consider the application of illumination sources in a component control packet for entities.Action Item: Bill Phelps will create a list of the currently known CIGI IG vendors. This list will be used to query IG vendors as to other useful status information that might be contained as a status code from an IG.Action Item: Lance Marrou is being asked to provide examples of how viewport ambience would be used, i.e. what’s the purpose?  Expected completion will be at the I/ITSEC meeting.Action Item: Bruce Riner to investigate using a NAVY conference room at I/ITSEC to hold our CIGI meeting.Action Item: Mark Peterson to investigate using the BSC conference room to hold our CIGI meeting at I/ITSEC.Details of the Meeting Proceedings:WELCOME AND INTRODUCTIONS The meeting was called to order at 1:35 p.m. and the planned agenda for the meeting was reviewed. Each person was given the opportunity to introduce themselves. The status of each action item from the previous meeting was reviewed.STATUS REVIEW OF ACTION ITEMS FROM IITSEC 2005 MEETINGAction Item: Bill Phelps will ask Mark McCall if making a public Wiki will hold up changes, additions, or extensions from being standardized by IEEE.Status – Bill has spoken with both Mark McCall and Katherine Morse on this subject. Both strongly suggest that CIGI stay within SISO and not become involved in the IEEE process. This will be the intention moving forward therefore the action item should not be a concern.Action Item: Bill Phelps will ask Kerry Thompson of Rockwell Collins for permission to post (future) sensor dialogue between Boeing and Rockwell Collins on the CIGI SSG discussion board. Status – Kerry’s reply is, “I don't object to having our interchanges made public.”Action Item: Lance Durham will add some text to the next version of the ICD to convey that the notion of re-defining a view to change the view type is appropriate for the View Definition data packet, i.e. sending View Definition data packets during a real-time simulation is allowed.Status – In work, text has been drafted. The clarification will go into CIGI ICD version 3.3. No release data scheduled as yet.Action Item: Bill Phelps will send a request to the people that have volunteered to be part of the voting body for information to assure that everyone has fair representation and that the voting body is not biased toward any particular company or program.Status – Complete, the form was sent in follow up to the release of the proposed symbology interface.Action Item: Steven Schwalm will write a PCR introducing different entity lists per viewport, i.e. the host would manage the list per channel. This would be useful when driving an OTW and sensor IG from the same host.  The sensor channel can see entities that the OTW can not.  The OTW should not be forced to process entities it can not see.Status – This item was open until Lance Marrou mentioned he was aware of this request and had knowledge that Steven Schwalm would not be moving forward with this request. Therefore the action item is closed with no further action required.Action Item: Mark Peterson will write a PCR to propose having Latitude and Longitude fields added to the HAT/HOT Extended Response packet.Status – Open. Mark is working this PCR.Action Item: Bill Phelps to contact Bruce Riner of NAVAIR to discuss further actions on needs for a CIGI test tool.Status – in work, in original discussion there was a suggestion that NAVAIR may have means to fund this effort. To date funding via NAVAIR has not been identified. Further discussion was had on this topic. See SBIR discussion below.Further discussions:Lance Marrou requested that he be added to the voting body of the CIGI SSG.Action Item: Bill Phelps to add Lance to the voting body list and provide a SISO Individual Membership Roster form for Lance to fill out with affiliations and contact information.NameOrganizatione-mail AddressTelephoneDeakins, RichardPEO STRI HYPERLINK "mailto:Richard.deakins@us.army.mil" Richard.deakins@us.army.mil 407-380-4839Dobson, BillRockwell Collins HYPERLINK "mailto:wjdobson@rockwellcollins.com" wjdobson@rockwellcollins.com817-501-3176Duff, SeanCAE HYPERLINK "mailto:Sean.duff@cae.com" Sean.duff@cae.com 813-887-1437Gill, DougFlightSafety HYPERLINK "mailto:doug.gill@flightsafety.com" doug.gill@flightsafety.com314-551-8421Hendersen, ChrisMultiGen-Paradigm HYPERLINK "mailto:chris.henderson@multigen.com" \o "mailto:chris.henderson@multigen.com" chris.henderson@multigen.com214-473-0269Johnson, JarradQuantum3D HYPERLINK "mailto:jjohnson@quantum3d.com" jjohnson@quantum3d.com 256-705-5739Marrou, LanceSAIC (SE CORE) HYPERLINK "mailto:marrouL@SE-CORE.net" marrouL@SE-CORE.net 407-243-3710O’Reilly, JohnCAE HYPERLINK "mailto:John.oreilly@cae.com" John.oreilly@cae.com 813-887-1667Peterson, MarkBinghamton Simulation Company (BSC) HYPERLINK "mailto:mpeterson@bsc.com" mpeterson@bsc.com 607-759-4457Phelps, BillBoeing HYPERLINK "mailto:willard.b.phelps@boeing.com" willard.b.phelps@boeing.com314-777-4799Schroeder, CurtisLockheed Martin HYPERLINK "mailto:Curt.m.schroeder@lmco.com" Curt.m.schroeder@lmco.com 770-494-8192Bill Phelps suggested that at the CIGI SSG meeting to be held at I/ITSEC 2007 there should be a call for new officers of the CIGI SSG.Action Item: Bill Phelps to add a call for new CIGI SSG officers to the CIGI SSG I/ITSEC meeting agenda.During the discussion of the action item on contacting Bruce Riner of NAVAIR to discuss further actions on needs for a CIGI test tool, there was a discussion on ways to get the creation of a compliance test completed. This is a reasonably complex task with many facets to be considered. After several suggestions Bruce volunteered to submit an SBIR (Small Business Innovation Research) proposal to see if this could be a funding mechanism for this effort. Both Mark Peterson and Lance Marrou suggested they could help if needed. This test tool should serve testing of both the IG and Host sides of the interface.Action Item: Bruce Riner to create and submit an SBIR proposal in an effort to secure funding for a CIGI compliance test tool.REVIEW OF RECENT MATURITY ACTIVITY (Symbology Interface)During the review of the Symbology interface proposal Lance Marrou suggested that the use of word “Reserved” for available space within a data packet is actually a misnomer and may be contrary to the IEEE style guide. We are not bound by the IEEE style guide but this terminology leads the reader to believe that the space has been reserved and is not available for interface updates. There was a suggestion to change the wording to “Unused” or “Not Used” where the space is not actually reserved.Action Item: Bill Phelps to review the use of the term “Reserved” vs. “Unused” or “Not Used” for available space in CIGI data packets with Lance Durham and respond to Lance Marrou’s suggestion and make changes if they are deemed appropriate. Also during the Symbology interface review it was pointed out that there was an error in the Symbol Text Definition data packet, Figure 32 where there are two data parameters labeled “Character n-2.”Action Item: Greg Basler to correct the error of two data parameters of the Symbol Text Definition data packet (Figure 32) having the same label of “Character n-2.”It was not clear during the review of the Symbology interface how texturing of symbology should work. There are references to texturing in the component control discussion of the proposed interface, but there appears to be more description needed of how this should actually work. Perhaps in the brief time this was discussed it was over looked.Action Item: Greg Basler to either identify the discussion on texturing symbology in the Symbology interface proposal or add appropriate discussion to the proposal.OLD BUSINESS ITEMS FROM IITSEC 2005 meetingThere was no identified old business from the previous CIGI SSG meeting.NEW BUSINESS ITEMSThe new business section of the meeting began with a discussion on manipulation of human forms. This conversation did not have a focused goal in mind other than to discuss the merits of several approaches. It was the general feeling of the group that articulating every joint of a human body would not be practical over a real-time interface and that component controls and scripting within the IG would be the most practical approach.There was also a discussion on standardizing common component controls to further increase CIGI interoperability. This is not a new concept and Bill Phelps explained that an attempt at providing a place to archive various companies’ component controls was set up as a wiki on sourceforge. It has not been completed as yet. Lance Marrou suggested that perhaps his team could take on standardization of component controls.Action Item: Lance Marrou to follow up on the possibility of implementing a standardization of common CIGI component controls.Lance Marrou presented his finding thus far on a gap analysis of current IG capabilities vs. CIGI interface capabilities. This analysis was done across several programs within SE Core primarily with the Rockwell Collins EPX IG.There were a number of areas identified by Lance. Several of the more important areas identified by Lance are discussed below:Color ControlDefine mechanism for controlling the colors (palette & gamma) on the IG.Gap analysis comment – It’s not clear how useful this is for a Host function as opposed to an IG control panel function. However, it is supported as Host function by the Rockwell Collins EPX.  For palette control, specify the Palette ID (0-3), color number (10-bit) plus an RBG value (24-bit). For gamma control, specify the curve ID (8-bit), channel number (view?), and type (0=gamma/1=colorspace).  Based on the channel number, perhaps the gamma control should go into the View Definition packet (there is only 8-bits of reserved space available, which would be enough for the curve ID but not type, unless we use only 7-bits for the ID or perhaps just assume gamma).Discussion – Bill Phelps mentioned that during the development of CIGI, color palette manipulation was discussed. Recognizing that the use of color palettes was diminishing in the industry and this would not be a universal capability for IG’s this capability was not provided in a specific CIGI data packet. However CIGI does not prohibit the manipulation of a color palette by using either a system level component control or a user defined data packet. Action Item: Bill Phelps to revisit the topic of manipulating an IG’s color palette via CIGI with the Boeing CIGI developers to get further clarification of opinion. This is not to say that this opinion is a final decision but that it should be considered in future discussions.Action Item: Lance Marrou to consider color palette as a component control when standardizing component controls.  This activity will be coordinated with Bill’s.EyepointsDefine a mechanism for eyepoints.Gap analysis comment – CIGI does not currently support the concept of eyepoints.  How useful is this for CIGI?  It could possibly be a very significant change or perhaps just a simple parameter change to packet 21 View Definition or packet 16 View Control.Discussion – Bill Phelps pointed out that CIGI supports this capability through the concept of Views and View Groups. However a question did arise as to whether the offset values in the View Definition data packet had adequate range for a weapon flyout.Action Item: Greg Basler to determine at what range a single precision float value will not have enough accuracy to support smooth motion of a view.Independent ScudSupport independent scud at the top and bottom of cloud layers in packet ID 12 (Weather Control).Gap analysis comment – The Weather Control packet could be modified such that "Scud Enable" would be "Bottom Scud Enable."  We would then change Reserved Bit 5 to be "Top Scud Enable." It does not appear from the EPX documentation that independent scud frequency control is required (or even that scud frequency control is possible).Discussion – Lance Marrou suggested that CIGI should have the capability to enable and disable SCUD control independently. Currently CIGI only allows for enabling and disabling top and bottom SCUD at the same time. The EPX interface does allow for independent enabling and disabling of top and bottom SCUD on clouds. Bill Phelps suggested that if this was really a desired control that perhaps full control of all aspects of SCUD should be provided for both top and bottom SCUD.Action Item: Lance Marrou will make a general query of the IG community via the SISO web board to gather opinions on whether there needs to be independent control of top and bottom cloud SCUD.IR EnvironmentProvide controls for vertical wind speed, ground temperature, and rainsoak.Gap analysis comment – These parameters would need to be added at the end of the Sensor Control packet, with possible enable flags.  There is plenty of Reserved Space for enable flags.  Temperature and wind speed are only required as 16-bits, but making them 32-bits would not be a big problem. Rainsoak is a Boolean condition (rainsoak / no rainsoak).Discussion – Lance Marrou commented that the listed parameters need more study but in general CIGI does not contain enough information to support sensors. This has been an area of interest for maturation for some time. Bill Phelps pointed out that some of these parameters already exist in CIGI, but the appropriate data packet would have to be used to acquire the data. As an example, it would be expected that a user would acquire vertical wind speed from the Weather Control data packet and not include a weather related datum in a sensor data packet just because it would be convenient. It was also suggested that instead of focusing on the identified parameters that a more robust investigation should be conducted to understand all parameters necessary to fulfill a generic sensor model.Action Item: Lance Marrou will be taking a closer look at sensor implementations to ascertain a robust set of parameters that would be needed to fulfill known sensor simulation requirements.Lights, SourceDefine controls for illumination sources.Gap analysis comment – There is no method for explicitly identifying illumination sources.  The recommend methods for lights points are via Global Terrain Surface component control, but that seems to be for non-illuminating light points.Discussion – Bill Phelps explained that lights and light sources are supported in CIGI. However the CIGI approach to simulation is to provide control of real world objects and attributes via an object oriented approach as much as possible. What this means is data is not lumped into a data packet for convenience. CIGI gives the user a way to create and control objects in a building block approach. In this case, for example, a spot light should be created using an entity control data packet. This spot light entity, or object, also has certain attributes that the user will want to manipulate. To do this CIGI expects the user to create one or more component control data packets as necessary. For instance, the spot light component control data packet might contain controls for on/off, beam width and height, beam intensity and so forth. In this way CIGI has abstracted the creation of objects to a point that virtually any object can be simulated and controlled. Matching up existing IG interfaces with this concept will cause a shift in thinking in some cases, but once the paradigm is understood and the shift made it is expected these types of “perceived” discrepancies will diminish.Action Item: Lance Marrou to consider the application of illumination sources in a component control packet for entities.TeleportProvide a direct method to identify paging / teleporting operations.Gap analysis comment – There are probably a number of common status indicators that could be assigned to the "IG Status Code" field of the Start of Frame packet.  We can start with "1" as "Paging / teleporting."Discussion – During this conversation it was suggested that IG vendors be queried as to what other information would be useful. This lead to a question of, “Is there any existing list of all IG vendors?” As no one in attendance knew of any, a list will be started from currently know CIGI users.Action Item: Bill Phelps will create a list of the currently know CIGI IG vendors. This list will be used to query IG vendors as to other useful status information that might be contained as a status code.Viewport AmbienceProvide a viewport-specific ambience parameter.Gap analysis comment – There is sufficient Reserved space for a 16-bit View ID in packet ID 9 of Celestial Sphere control, but that is probably not appropriate.  The problem is that Celestial Sphere control is recommended for ambience values, but then only indirectly (no direct ambience value except perhaps with component control - celestial sphere).  The possible solution, then, is to define the celestial sphere component control packet more definitively, providing an ambience level (32-bit).Discussion – It was not completely clear what the need for this control might be. Is it to provide a “shade value” for a particular view, perhaps a sensor?Action Item: Lance Marrou is being asked to provide examples of how viewport ambience would be used, i.e. what’s the purpose?In closing up the new business section of the meeting Bill Phelps mentioned that there has been a radar interface developed for use with Boeing’s Multi-Mode Radar Simulator.  The expectation is that this interface will be proposed as a Multi-Mode Radar Simulation interface for CIGI.SET UP NEXT MEETINGAt this time the next CIGI meeting will be at I/ITSEC 2007.Bill Phelps had heard that perhaps one of the services would allow time in their conference room for a CIGI meeting at I/ITSEC. Bruce Riner volunteered to look into this. Mark Peterson also suggested that we might be able to use the BSC room.Action Item: Bruce Riner to investigate using a NAVY conference room at I/ITSEC to hold our CIGI meeting.Action Item: Mark Peterson to investigate using the BSC conference room to hold our CIGI meeting at I/ITSEC.ADJOURN The meeting was adjourned at 5:22 p.m.PAGE  2PAGE  10			 PAGE 1	Willard B. Phelps		314-777-4799 