Cross Command Collaboration Environment (3CE): Multipurpose Platform for Simulation C2Mr. Arthur B. SheppardWireless Facilities, Inc.BLDG # 71600, 16th StreetFort Gordon, GA 30905706-791-7455, 706-373-7441arthur.sheppard@wfinet.com, arthur.sheppard@us.army.mil Keywords:distributed; persistent network; simulation-rich environmentABSTRACT: Cross Command Collaboration Environment (3CE) is a U.S. Army and Boeing’s Lead System Integrator (LSI) initiative that was developed to support concept development and experimentation of Future Combat Systems (FCS) in a closed, distributed, persistent, simulation-rich environment. The configuration, maintenance, administrative and security responsibilities have been assigned to three individual U.S. Army Commands and one LSI peering-point to function as a virtual network operations center (NOC).This paper will specifically address the network services that are provided to facilitate the Command and Control (C2) aspect of every future force experiment. It will describe the virtual NOC’s primary function of providing a secure wide area network that supports a distributed, persistent, simulation-rich environment.  Additionally, this paper will describe the administrative services provided over the 3CE to include:  voice over IP, video teleconferencing, network monitoring, web portals and data repository. Furthermore, a brief description of the virtual NOC’s responsibilities will be provided to include antivirus protection, intrusion detection, authentication, and accreditation, surrounding an enterprise-sized WAN.  In conclusion, the paper will preview future evolutionary refinements anticipated for the 3CE and its continued role as the environment for evaluating the Army future force development.1. Introduction“The Secretary of Defense has been driving the United States military to transform itself from a post-Cold War fighting force to one that is capable of addressing emerging 21st century challenges.”[1] The Department of Defense (DoD) is evolving to a network-centric platform that requires great amount of flexibility, performance, security and connectivity. The 3CE is one of the many evolving network-centric platforms that will succeed in the steps of meeting that challenge. The 3CE’s backbone is the Defense Research Engineering Network (DREN). The DREN is a robust, high capacity, low-latency nation-wide network that provides connectivity between and among the High Performance Computing Modernization Program’s (HPCMP) geographically dispersed High Performance Computing (HPC) user sites, HPC Centers, and other networks. [2]In July 2003, a Memorandum of Understanding was reached between TRADOC, U.S. Army Test and Evaluation Command (ATEC), U.S. Army Research, Development and Engineering Command (RDECOM), and Boeing’s Leading Systems Integrator (LSI) to connect several separate distributed networks together. [3] The purpose of 3CE is to support common concept exploration, systems integration, analysis, and acquisition of the FCS-Equipped UA System-of-Systems in a distributed environment. 3CE Wide Area Network (WAN) now connects four peering point routers at Ft Gordon, GA, ATEC, White Sands Missile Range, RDECOM, and Boeing LSI.The structure of the 3CE network embodies four persistent networks.  These networks are: US Army’s Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) Battle Laboratory Command Simulation Environment (BLCSE), Army Test and Evaluation Command (ATEC) Army Test and Integration Network (ATIN), Research Development and Engineering Command (RDECOM), and Boeing’s Future Combat Systems (FCS) Enterprise Classified Network (ECN) and FCS Distributed Network (FDN). See network diagram below in Figure 1.Figure 1. 3CE Network Diagram – DREN Backbone SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Since inception, the 3CE has evolved into a stable environment that uses the DREN as its transport backbone. The 3CE is a secure network that connects and integrates over 50 U.S. Army Labs and system proponents into a virtual warfare environment that focuses on primary capabilities necessary for a commander to synchronize events occurring on the battlefield with the required actions of his/her staff.The 3CE project is designed to digitally network and integrate these Labs, proponents and Industry partners. This connectivity enables interaction for remote collaboration, routine virtual teaming, and distributed models and simulation. The network can allow connections that reach other services to permit access to possible Joint Experimentation. Capability Development Integration Directorate/TRADOC Integration Office (CDID/TIO) Experimentation Division is responsible for the functions associated with an overall virtual Network Operations and Security Center (NOSC), which are key roles for soldiers of US Army Regiment Signal Regiment.The 3CE provides a Network Centric Operations Conceptual Framework which explores the interaction of multiple organizations and various echelons. It allows multi-celled experimentations among several locations that cover all of the United States. It can become a gateway for Joint experimentation linking to other Service Labs. It has opened doors for additional technology collaborating with Communications Electronic Command (CECOM), Space and Naval Warfare (SPAWAR), and industry partners. It has allowed integration of environments to support development of system-of-systems combined arms capabilities across the Army and in support of Joint operations. It has helped validate and refine concept documents. The 3CE has help define the synergistic effect of ubiquitous battlefield situational awareness and how that information would be controlled in a FCS environment in order to decisively win warfare engagements.2. 3CE ConfigurationThere existed a communications requirement to provide full time, on-demand, high-capacity capabilities for the three aforementioned Commands and Boeing to participate in complex integrated simulations. All Commands and Boeing had sufficient WAN bandwidth capabilities. However, the lack of connectivity between the Commands and Boeing resulted in the loss of productive man hours and involved extensive amounts of travel during experiments, which was counter-productive to the mission of the FCS and material developers. The formation of the 3CE network has gone through several months of integration trials and system upgrades. Currently, the 3CE is configured as a secure Wide Area Network (WAN) with four peering-points used as a virtual Network Operations and Security Center (NOSC) for their respective remote sites. 3CE utilizes multiple Layer-3 circuits on the DREN connection as its backbone architecture. The peering-points use an OC-12 (622Mbps) DREN circuit and their remote sites have at least a shared DS-3 (45Mbps) DREN circuit. The benefit of this high-speed broadband system is that it helps enhance the FCS mission of developing the future force. This network also has the capability to use Layer-2 ATM service for other non-3CE sites that would like to participate in future force experiments. For example, this was demonstrated in joint exercises like FCS Soldier 1.1. Also, 3CE is prepared to continue execution of specified tasks and provide all required collaboration services to include the provisions of on-site support for remote nodes in an ad-hoc experimental network as demonstrated in FCS Soldier 1.1.3CE capabilities include:• Operation in secure mode for data, voice, video, and collaboration tools.• Support for simultaneous voice, video, network security and management, and collaboration services.• Capability for collaboration between entities on a variety of topics such as program information, data, metrics, lifecycle process, tools, simulations, and models.• Knowledge management capabilities for further collaboration.• Command and control capability of exercises from remote locations, including live-force play.• Integration of combined arms experimentation in support of Army Transformation concept and materiel developments.The 3CE federation utilizes certified scenarios and authoritative data to expedite analysis and reduce travel and facility costs while offering expanded opportunity.  This approach assures scalability. The 3CE consists of three levels of collaboration to assist and provide constructive and virtual simulations. The three levels of collaboration are: (1) Subject Matter Expert (SME) online, (2) Distributed collaborative environment, and (3) Federation of models integrated to facilitate distributed simulation-based experimentation.Three Levels of Collaboration:SME (Level 1)•Decreased reliance on on-site SMEs•SMEs perform functions on a distributive platformDistributed Collaboration (Level 2)•Enables distributed Levels 1 & 2•Pre & post experiment coordination and products performed on a distributive platform•Collaborative tools enable experimental C2 and technical coordinationModel Federation (Level 3)•Core federation of models decreases experiment preparation time•Can include additional nodes/models on an as needed basis (IAW established federation rules)•Not intended to include all models/sites3. Command and ControlThe DARPA Future Combat Systems (FCS) Command and Control (C2) Program has initiated the execution of battle command in a future force. In the FCS environment, the commander must command and control an information-enabled combined arms tactical organization to rapidly develop situational awareness and effectively control subordinate organic systems.[4] It has the capability to emulate future force concepts that support Command, Control, Communications, computer, Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (C4ISR), FORCEnet, and Joint Battle Management Command and Control (JBMC2), which are the future concepts for U.S. Army, U.S Navy and Joint Forces. [5] The 3CE has become the network-centric virtual C2 platform that has allowed FCS experiments to operate on predicted capabilities of FCS. The FCS network is comprised of a common operating environment that provides ground truth for the commander. [6] Army Battle Command software assists in maintaining contact with all staff at lower and higher echelons. The military is responsible to merge strategic, operational and tactical environments into an entity where each environment will support the other with an incredible amount of information to make decisions. These three environments must provide interoperability in order to provide the network centric platform that is necessary for a commander to send and receive timely information. The 3CE provides a network platform that embraces this desired FCS concept. With models and simulations as the major enablers running over the 3CE, a primary focus of any given exercise is determining how effectively and efficiently command and control (C2) is facilitated up and down the chain-of-command. C2, in a real-time or virtual battlefield, encompasses the awareness and utilization of four primary elements: physical, information, cognitive, and social environment.[7] The simulations primarily recreate a real-time virtual battlefield that consider among many other physical attributes, implementation of autonomous robotic systems, management of indirect and direct fires, analysis of a plethora of information received from separate sensor platforms and executions of a tactical communications network.The physical domain enables collaboration and routine virtual teaming to include voice, video teleconferencing, and whiteboard applications. It allows all sites to handle administrative functions in a secure environment. The physical domain links Warfighting simulations and experimented events together. This integrates virtual and live force play.The information domain is directly associated with the data repositories and the web portal configurations that allow the sharing of information. The cognitive domain allows a commander to make decisions based on his/her vision of the institutionalized training and current real-time experiences in order to formulate a credible decision making process. Finally, the social domain displays the interaction between the commander and the staff elements. The commander’s interaction with his staff determines whether that commander has adequate and effective command and control.In reality, that commander will have global access to his staff and supporting units via the Global Information Grid (GIG). The GIG services are available to maintain C2 analogous to the primary services the 3CE: voice, video, and web portal. The excerpt below gives a futuristic description of the network that will be necessary for the warfighter to have command and control.“Our warfighting backplane will employ multi-mode data transport capabilities, including military and commercial satellite communications capabilities, multiple types of data links and radios, and commercial information services. These data transport capabilities will both provide the users with access to appropriate elements of a distributed computing environment, as well as providing the interconnecting fabric for a wide range of computational and storage capabilities. The backplane supporting the infrastructure will employ a multi-tiered architecture for information transport and processing to increase capacity and improve interoperability. By exploiting emerging technology for providing quality of service across Internet protocol (IP)-based networks, the architecture of the infrastructure will enable multiple stand-alone networks to be integrated into an adaptive and reconfigurable network-of-networks. This operational flexibility will enable commanders to plug and play sensors, shooters, command and control, and support capabilities into task-organized combat packages, including appropriate collections of sensors and weapons.”[8]4. Supported C2 ServicesThe 3CE allows secure IP telephony, video teleconferencing (VTC), and data repositories from multiple fixed and mobile sites nationwide. These three services are vital features that are widely used by participants during exercise planning and execution.4.1 VoiceThe 3CE uses Cisco Systems call-processing server software known as the Cisco CallManager (CCM) for an IP telephony solution. Its software extends enterprise telephony features and capabilities to packet telephony network devices such as IP phones, media processing devices, VoIP gateways, and multimedia applications. Additional data, voice, and video services such as multimedia conferencing systems interact with the IP telephony solution through CCM open telephony application programming interfaces (APIs). A CCM is installed on specified third-party servers at ATEC, TRADOC and Boeing. They are then interconnected via telephony trunk ports between each Command and Boeing.Each of the CCM software suites has integrated voice applications and utilities. Their functions include an analysis and reporting tool, the Real-Time Monitoring Tool (RTMT), the Tool for Auto-Registered Phone Support (TAPS), and the IP Manager Assistant (IPMA) application.The latest CCM version provides a scalable, distributable, and highly reliable enterprise IP telephony call-processing solution. Each Command has multiple CCM servers that are clustered and managed as a single entity. By clustering these multiple call processing servers on an IP network, it provides a unique capability across the WAN architecture. Such CCM clustering yields scalability from 1 to 5,000 IP phones per cluster, telephony load balancing, and call-processing service redundancy. By interlinking multiple clusters via telephony trunks, system capacity can be increased up to thousands of users in a fifty plus (50+) site system. Call Admission Control (CAC) helps ensure that voice quality of service (QoS) is maintained across constricted WAN links and automatically diverts calls to alternate CCM routes when WAN bandwidth is not available. Although bandwidth has not been an issue so far, a typical voice call across the WAN is configured with a 7.29 codec for an 8Kbps rate.4.2 VideoAt one time, running multiple interactive video channels over data networks was not a viable option because of the shared media characteristics of video, its connectionless nature, and its lack of guaranteed data flows. With the introduction of switched 10/100-Mbps networks, high-end routers, and multi-layered quality of service (QoS), delivering interactive video over IP is now customary. Today, there is still a large installed base of H.320 networks, but they incur large monthly access and switched usage charges which not include additional charges to provide a secure network.With the 3CE high-speed, broadband IP networks, it is now possible to run interactive multicast video over an existing IP network, thus saving customers thousands of dollars a month by converging voice, video, and data traffic over a common path. This is an added advantage for the Warfighter because videoconferencing terminals no longer need to support complex network aggregation devices such as Inverse Multiplexers (IMUXs) but can instead rely on simple Ethernet network interface cards (NICs) for network connectivity.The 3CE Videoconferencing System integrates multi-point conferencing, multimedia gateway, and data collaboration into a single platform for cost-effective deployment of IP-centric, converged networks. It is built upon industry-standard H.323 technology. Our configuration also enables a wide range of customized and fully converged voice, video, and data solutions, ultimately saving money and scaling to larger deployments. The inexpensive replacement to the H.320 terminals with H.323 terminals has caused a significant increase in the number of H.323 terminals (cameras) positioned on the network. This allows our 3CE customers to move videoconferencing assets from shared areas (such as conference rooms) to the user desktop or to remote field locations.The 3CE uses both Cisco and Polycom series videoconferencing products that enable federation participants in multiple remote locations to attend the same video teleconference (VTC) meeting with full, near real-time interactivity. They allow end users to connect their IP-based H.323 video camera systems to the IP-based H.323 network. For scalability, the 3CE videoconferencing equipment includes the combination of a Multipoint Control Unit (MCU) and a videoconferencing Gateway (with trunks to each peering-point), a rate matching module, and a data collaboration server. The 3CE video network uses voice-activated conferences (for small 1-3 participants) or it can support continuous presence formats (for or better) to manage bandwidth. It can also allow data sharing (presentations) as part of a multipoint conference. This combination allows for the integration with any H.323- compliant endpoint running any where on the IP network.During normal 3CE operation, VTC usage is roughly 5-10 sessions a week. However, during an event or exercise VTC usage often exceeds 5-10 sessions a day, depending on the number of remote sites participating. 3CE’s videoconferencing service is also integrated with its voice over IP (VoIP) telephony system.4.3 Web PortalAs of now, 3CE end-users use TRADOC’s BLCSE Portal. The BLCSE Portal is a real-time, federation-wide data repository (web-based) used for C2 planning, collaboration and data analysis. The Portal provides a central point-of-presence (POP) for all data sharing services throughout the BLCSE federation. The Portal is used as a powerful collaboration tool that allows users to share information across demographically diverse locations. Authorized users are able to upload mission critical information to a documents library where other members can make necessary revisions and/or comments. [9] The Portal supports all experimentation and information dissemination needs within the BLCSE and 3CE community. The Portal runs on a Lotus (IBM) QuickPlace Server platform and is a highly customizable tool that is based on a hierarchical structure. The QuickPlace Server allows for many different collaboration capabilities. The Portal documents can be organized into many different areas, i.e. rooms, folders and pages, which are mostly used as a structuring tool for the BLCSE Portal. The Portal has the capability to allow documents to be dragged directly from a user’s desktop onto the Portal and vice versa. Along with the integration of Microsoft Office, the Portal also gives the end-user the capability to create, view, and edit Office documents within a Team Workspace. The QuickPlace Server has the ability to provide discussion forums, task tracking, and calendar functions. The QuickPlace Server has numerous other capabilities such as e-mail integration on a Domino Server platform. [10] However, end-users mostly utilize the Lotus Sametime Server to perform these particular functions within the 3CE community.The overall purpose of the BLCSE Portal is to provide the experimentation community with an information dissemination management tool. For the Warfighter, the Portal’s web-enabled tools provide easy access through limited end-user training since it runs through various supported web browsers. The Portal allows data to be shared federation-wide or enables different entities to only view information on an as-needed basis. The Portal is very easily organized to meet individual site preferences either for security purposes or to make things easier for the end-user. Security parameters are easily controllable if you are the creator of the individual room, folder, or page.The BLCSE Portal meets a baseline objective which is to provide a data repository for planning, execution, and collaboration during experimentation and exercises. It provides exercise planners and controllers a central point for all data collaboration and ‘pre and post’ coordination during small and large-scale exercises. All three services voice, video, and web portal are heavily utilized for every experiment for design, implementation, and final data analysis. [11]5. Simulated ExperimentsThe simplification of M&S integration and event collaboration was the driving force behind the initial existence of the 3CE. The 3CE is prepared to support 2-3 large distributed simulated experiments every year. These experiments support ATEC, RDECOM TRADOC, Joint Agencies, and industry partners. The Cross Command Collaborative Effort (3CE) is the industry partners’ connection into the ATIN, MATRIX and BLSCE. The full mesh architecture connects and all four peering points use Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE) tunnels and is encrypted by E-100 TACLANEs (KG-175). Default configuration settings are used for the GRE tunnels and backside Local Area Network (LAN) connections to peering point routers. Static routes are used to identify tunnel destinations; Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) was used as the routing protocol. The connection to the 3CE network required the most significant network configuration implementations.6. FutureThe major functionality of Network Operations (NETOPS) for FCS includes Information Assurance, Network Management, and Information Management. [12] Currently the 3CE focuses on the deployment of Information Assurance and Network Management functions as required by Department of Defense (DoD) regulations. In the future, Information Management will become an increased focus as the commander’s information capability and enhanced situational awareness continues to increase exponentially with only a small amount of time for analysis. The 3CE will be responsible for implementation of an information management tool, Information Dissemination Management – Tactical (IDM-T), to systematically organize the amount of information that a FCS commander would be responsible for. IDM-T would be a standardized information management tool that would be utilized during future assistance in planning, executing, and analysis for TRADOC experiments.7. Conclusion3CE has formed a federation of Army, Joint, and Industry test centers with connectivity to establish a distributed network infrastructure of varying assets and resources. At inception, the federation included only separate Army Lab nodes, and now it encompasses over fifty (50) Army and industry partner nodes with ad-hoc joint connections as well. The U.S. Army is going through a modular transformation that will affect the way that it fights. Developing communications and networking models and simulations that accurately portray the network effects is critical to the achievement of NCW. Models and Simulation will continue to be the primary method of defining the concepts for the NCW, and the 3CE is a network-centric platform for the U.S. Army’s virtual environment. The 3CE will continue to proliferate into network-centric platform that supports the FCS generation and sustain flexibility in order to support ATEC, RDECOM and TRADOC with a growing population of models and simulations experiments. Also, it will continue to be the bridge between the U.S. Army, Joint Forces, and industry in order to excel in concept and development for an evolving service.“Commercial information technology is driving the convergence of technologies for voice and data services. This technology will enable data traffic to be provided wit the reliability and quality of service associated with dial tone, as well as new and exciting capabilities that we have not yet imagined. The technologies that emerge from the commercial sector, went augmented with specialized information technologies develop by the DoD, such as high end encryption, low-probability of intercept and detection communications, and specialized intelligent agents will provide the brick an d mortar for our Global Information Grid (GIG).”[14][1] From Director, Force Transformation, Office of the Secretary of Defense. “The Implementation of Network-Centric Warfare”. January 5, 2005.[2] Johnston, William E. “Distributed, Collaboratory Experiment Environments (DCEE) Program: Overview and Final Report”, February, 1997. http://dsd.lbl.gov/~johnston/Overview.fm.html[3] From Department of Defense High Performance Computing Modernization Program. “High Performance Computing Modernization Program”, 1997-2006. http://www.hpcmo.hpc.mil/Htdocs/DREN/index.html [4] Sauer, Gary. Molz, Maureen. “Future Combat Systems (FCS) Command and Control (C2) Experiment 4 Phase 2 Analysis Report”, VOL 1. March 2004.[5] Dunn III, Charles. Pressley, Corey. Sheppard, Arthur. “Battle Lab Simulation Collaboration Environment (BLSCE): A Multipurpose Network Platform”, Command and Control Research Technology Symposium, San Diego, 2006.[6] Alberts, David S., Hayes, Richard E., Power to the Edge, 3rd Ed., CCRP Publications, April 2005.[7] Ibid.[8] Ibid.[9] Dunn III, Charles. Pressley, Corey. Sheppard, Arthur. “Battle Lab Simulation Collaboration Environment (BLSCE): A Multipurpose Network Platform”, Command and Control Research Technology Symposium, San Diego, 2006.[10] Ibid.[11] Ibid.[12] Dunn III, Charles. Powell, Gregg. Martin, Christopher. Hamilton, Michael. Pangle II, Charles. “Information Superiority/Battle Command (Network Centric Warfare Environment)”, Command and Control Research Technology Symposium, San Diego, 2004.[13] Ibid.[14] Alberts, David S., Garstka, John J., Stein, Frederick P., Network Centric Warfare Developing and Leveraging Information Superiority. 6th Ed., CCRP Publications April 2005.Author BiographiesARTHUR SHEPPARD is a Principal Engineer for Wireless Facilities Inc., at the US Army Capability Development Integration Directorate/TRADOC Integration Office (CDID/TIO) Experimentation Division (formerly Battle Command Battle Lab-Gordon), where he has been employed since 1997.  He is currently the Team Leader of the Battle Laboratory Collaborative Simulation Environment (BLCSE) Network team.  In addition, Mr. Sheppard leads the Network Engineering Group for the Cross Command Collaboration Environment (3CE).  His research interests and expertise are in network configuration and control management, and WAN/LAN network design.  Mr. Sheppard holds a B.S. Degree in Electrical Engineering from South Carolina State University and an M.S. Degree in Business Administration & Technology Management from the University of Phoenix.3CERDECOMATECFCSTRADOC