Creating a Distributed Synthetic Battlespace for Joint Warfighter TrainingMaj. John GrevinDirector of OperationsUSAF Distributed Mission Operations Center (USAF DMOC)4500 Aberdeen Dr., SE, Building 942Kirtland Air Force Base, NM 87117505-853-1039, DSN 263-1039john.grevin@kirtland.af.milMr. Joseph Sorroche Jr.ASRC Communications, Ltd.USAF Distributed Mission Operations Center (USAF DMOC)4500 Aberdeen Dr., SE, Building 942Kirtland Air Force Base, NM 87117505-853-0372, DSN 263-0372 HYPERLINK "mailto:joe.sorroche@kirtland.af.mil" joe.sorroche@kirtland.af.milThe U.S. Air Force Distributed Warfare Group located at Kirtland AFB in Albuquerque, New Mexico provides realistic training to warfighters using a relatively new concept known as Distributed Mission Operations (DMO). For this distributed training to be as realistic and effective as possible, it incorporates not only Air Force assets and personnel but Army, Navy, Marine and coalition force resources as well. To accomplish this extraordinary feat, a synthetic environment is created in the form of a virtual “battlespace” which is then distributed to warfighters throughout the U.S. and overseas using real-world equipment, various virtual simulations, and Computer Generated Forces (CGF). The synthetic battlespace provides the warfighter tactical to operational-level, sensor-to-shooter training during VIRTUAL FLAG (VF) exercises, and operational training encompassing integration of all Air and Space Operations Center (AOC) divisions in BLUE FLAG (BF) exercises.  These award winning events have also been merged with Exercise RED FLAG (RF) to create the first Live, Virtual, and Constructive (LVC) synthetic battlespace in joint force training. These are some of the most successful applications of Modeling and Simulation (M&S) for warfighter training. The applications span the full spectrum of warfighter training beyond individual and mission qualification training toward mission rehearsal. The training concentrates on team, inter-team, large force, and theater-level employment  and can concentrate on smaller, focused scenarios involving Combat Search and Rescue (CSAR), Close Air Support (CAS), Time Sensitive Targeting (TST), etc or simply incorporate these into much larger, more complex training exercises. Additionally, modeling and simulation is used to create a similar virtual and constructive environment to train warfighters who plan and execute wars from an operational perspective. These exercises enhance the readiness of AOC operators and help develop proficiency and familiarization for the many augmenters required in large scale combat operations. Individual flight simulators have been available for several years, but technological improvements and successful application of these advances have allowed the creation of synthetic battlespaces for distributed, integrated warfighter training.1.	IntroductionDistributed warfighter training capability has improved significantly to create a synthetic battlespace that, in some cases, allows training not available other than while at war.  Parallel developments in joint operational procedures and simulation technology have progressed to create a synthetic battlespace representative of a real world, joint and collation operational environment.  A training venue of this size and complexity would be next to impossible to recreate in a live fly exercise due to resource constraints, cost, and scheduling conflicts with real world operations.  However, this venue is created and used for warfighter training by the U.S. Air Force (USAF) Distributed Mission Operations (DMO) program.  This program has evolved from separate, stand alone simulators and limited live fly operations to a complete, immersive theatre that identically duplicates real world operations.  Even though these training events are USAF-centric, they also include participants from other U.S. services and coalition partners.  Individual simulators from the other U.S. services are also starting their DMO-like training events.  This enables the other services to build on the lessons learned from integrating with the USAF.  The USAF benefits from having this broad environment; it allows for Joint services and coalition training events.  For example, the United Kingdom with their Mission Training through Distributed Simulation (MTDS) Program also sees the value of creating a synthetic battlespace and conducting distributed training events.  This immersive theater would not be possible without the advancements in simulation and network technologies, and distributed simulation standards.  Joining several large capacity networks and connecting high fidelity virtual and computer generator forces simulations provide the capability to create this joint, synthetic battlespace.  The resources that populate this synthetic battlespace are classified into three categories:  Live, Virtual, and Constructive (LVC).  Integrating these separate resources into a singly, synthetic battlespace requires careful planning and preparation.The following sections describe how LVC resources are joined together, how a synthetic theater of operation is created, and how it is used to fulfill warfighter training requirements.2.	Synthetic Battlespace Definition and PlanningCreating a synthetic battlespace requires both technical and operational planning, coordination, and careful execution of a warfighter training program.  Each requires Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) not only in networks and simulators, but operational experts that define specific training requirements for each participant.  The technical and operational plan developments start with general, top level requirements and parameters.  These are documented at an event planning conference, where technical and operational personnel meet to request and define specific training requirements.  As the planning progresses, the technical and operational SMEs continuously meet in a unique process to ensure all requirements are documented and understood.  2.1		Synthetic Battlespace DefinitionThe synthetic battlespace requires two elements to create a synthetic environment.  They are 1) a seamless integration of LVC simulation assets, and 2) a highly distributed, but tightly coupled environment.  Unlike many other Department of Defense (DoD) initiatives, the synthetic battlespace is still growing, from the initial implementation of a few key creative facilities, such as the Distributed Missions Operations Center (DMOC).  However, this synthetic environment has lacked the process control and monitoring of a development cycle typically used in other DoD programs.  Separate, tailor made synthetic battlespaces are created based upon warfighter needs and participation.2.2		Live, Virtual, and Constructive Simulation AssetsSynthetic battlespace simulation assets are classified into three groups:  Live, Virtual, and Constructive.  Live assets are the air platforms themselves, and they offer the highest level of realistic training to the warfighters from the “touch-and-feel” point of view.  However, these systems can provide better, realistic training if they are stimulated with realistic scenarios that adequately meet all warfighter training requirements.  The scenarios should be rigorous, yet flexible enough to adjust the environment to push the training audience beyond what they might encounter in other training venues, and yet, meet all of their training objectives.  Unlike other simulation devices, live assets must be stimulated with real-world protocols and interfaces just as they would in real combat.  The synthetic battlespace network is designed to support most, if not all real-world tactical data link protocols including Link-16, NATO-EX, Hook 112, Intelligence Broadcast Service - Interactive (IBS-I), IBS-Simplex (IBS-S), and Surveillance Control Data Link (SCDL).  Because of these factors, Command and Control (C2) assets in these synthetic battlespace training events can provide a highly realistic tactical data link “picture” to virtual or live assets.    Virtual assets are usually defined and known as flight simulators, which are the most common types of virtual simulators throughout the USAF.  These include air to air shooter platforms, such as the F-15C, and F-16, Air to Ground, or F-15E and A-10, and the USAF bombers B-52, B-1B, and B-2.  Also included are Command and Control Virtual simulators, such as the AWACS, JSTARS, and the CRC.  Other USAF and U.S. Army Special Operations Forces aircraft include the Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) simulations known as Hunter, Predator, MQ-1 and MQ-9, and the C-17 and C-130 aircraft.  Warfighters have been training on these virtual simulators for years.  The typical training has been cockpit familiarization, basic procedures, flight tactics, weapons employment, emergency procedures, and flying in adverse weather conditions, if the virtual simulator has that level of fidelity.  Recently, virtual simulators have been used for mission rehearsal, and takes place where mission crews can train for future missions in their simulators using realistic terrain and threat representation.  Future platforms will include the F-22 and F-35.  Constructive assets are defined as forces or platforms created by a computer simulation, also known as Computer Generated Forces (CGF).  Computers can also simulate battlefields consisting of friendly, opposing and neutral entities: aircraft, ground offensive and defensive forces, and fixed targets as well as realistic airborne and ground threats and countermeasures.  Enemy forces are usually created using constructive simulations, but to provide a higher fidelity training environment, virtual platforms can now be reconfigured as either friendly or enemy forces.  Additionally, friendly constructive entities are also created because there are simply not enough virtual simulations and live assets available to create an entire theater-level synthetic battlespace.DMO uses many CGFs to create a synthetic battlespace.  Some have very specific capabilities, with a narrow focus, while others support a wide range of applications.  However, no single CGF currently satisfies all requirements of a synthetic battlespace training event.  There are about a dozen different CGFs used in DMO alone.  Each has its strengths and weaknesses, thus the right mix is required to achieve an adequate level of fidelity and realism.  For example, the DMOC uses the Scenario Toolkit and Generation Environment (STAGE) CGF to supplement the friendly airborne forces commonly referred to as “blue air.”  The blue air scenario follows a published Air Tasking Order (ATO), which can be pre-scripted depending on specific training requirements.  The DMOC also uses the Next Generation Threat System (NGTS) CGF to create enemy forces.  NGTS creates a high fidelity airborne threat environment, known as “red air.”   To enhance the ground portion of the synthetic battlespace, the Distributed Information Warfare Constructive Environment (DICE) CGF, provides a high fidelity integrated air defense systems (IADS) modeling necessary to realistically conduct the suppression of enemy air defenses (SEAD) missions.  Its high fidelity modeling of IADS creates a high fidelity air defense representation for the virtual shooter and sensor platforms.  Two other “ground: CGFs are used as well, the Extended Air Defense Simulation (EADSIM) CGF, which offers a very specialized tactical ballistic missile (TBM) simulation, and the Joint Constructive And Tactical Simulation (JCATS), which can provide up to 50,000 separate friendly or enemy ground entities.  Interoperability using either one or all the three distributed simulation protocols is key in creating this unique battlespace.  The CGFs described above communicate using the Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) standard.  Other commonly used CGFs that connect to the synthetic battlespace use either High Level Architecture (HLA) or the Test Enabling Network Architecture (TENA) distributed standards.  The synthetic battlespace is constructed such that any one standard or protocol does not limit or exclude any required resources.2.2		Synthetic Distributed NetworkTo determine the exact configuration and design of the synthetic distributed network, the first and foremost objective is to determine the event training requirements.  From there, operational and technical requirements can be determined, and then the synthetic battlespace configuration can be designed, created, and implemented.   2.2.1	Training Objectives DefinitionTraining objectives for distributed training events are specifically “made to order” based on the warfighter training audience and their specific training requirements.  Careful planning of each training event allows the exercise planning staff to prepare specific synthetic environments and tailored scenarios based upon these training objectives.  During an Exercise Planning Conference (EPC), planners discuss the location of the synthetic battlespace (often based on higher headquarters guidance), and then all participants submit training objectives and requirements.  From this, exercise designers create training vignettes representative to satisfy the participants’ objectives.  	The challenge for the exercise planning team comes when units of varying degrees of fidelity have a requirement to train together in the same mission thread.  The exercise planning team must completely understand the capabilities and limitations, both real-world and simulation,  of the systems in question in order to integrate them into the synthetic environment,  For example the F-15C, which is a fully capable and high fidelity simulator with the ability of having 360 degree visuals, full motion and completely functioning datalink systems, may need to work with the B-52H which is only capable of displaying a single entity other than its own aircraft, has no motion or datalink and other than via radio has no ability to interact with other simulations.   The exercise design team must create an environment where these two training audiences can interact without any awareness of these limitations.Additional challenges arise when one training audience has very basic requirements but must work with and around participants with more advanced requirements.  Here again it is dependent on the sill of the exercise planning staff and the White Force to ensure these needs are met.2.2.2	Synthetic Battlespace Operational Requirements    Operational requirements are derived from the training objectives presented during the EPC.  Each participating site provides their training objectives to the exercise planning team.  The training audience is divided into planning groups appropriate to their primary mission areas.  Typical categories include; C2, Offensive Counter-Air (OCA), Defensive Counter-Air (DCA), Space, Theater Ballistic Missile Defense (TBMD), Army, Electronic Warfare (EW), Intelligence Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR), and Information Operations (IO).  Additional working groups can be established to accommodate new and additional participants and mission areas.  The C2 working group includes the Combined Air Operations Center (CAOC), Control Reporting Center (CRC), Air Support Operations Center (ASOC), E-3C Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS), E-8C Joint Surveillance and Targeting System (JSTARS), Battlefield Coordination Detachment (BCD) and any joint C2 agencies such as the Army Tactical Operations Center (TOC).  OCA participants include A-10C, AC-130U, F-15E, F-16C, F-16CJ, B-1B, B-2A, and B-52H.  The DCA working group typically involves F-15C, F-16C, and PATRIOT.  TBMD participants are RC-135S (Cobra Ball), Space, PATRIOT and Army Joint Theater Air to Ground System (JTAGS).  The Army working group will include all Army participants, but focus primarily on the participating maneuver units and their associated Fires Brigade(s).  EW players are the RC-135V/W (Rivet Joint), E-3C, EP-3E, EA-18G, and F-16CJ.  The ISR group includes E-8C, RC-135V/W, EP-3E, Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV), and Space.  Lastly the IO group includes IO representatives, Space, CAOC, RC-135V/W and UAV.  As illustrated, many participants are required to be in multiple meeting throughout the course of the EPC.  It is essential that information is shared between the disparate working groups in order to ensure that no training objectives are omitted.  Some meetings are common to all participants such as intelligence scenario development and communications planning.For synthetic Battlespace creation, there are two “prime objectives”.  They are:a.	No one is a ”training aid” during a VF event.  The DMOC philosophy is if a participant doesn’t derive any training value from participating in a VF, then we will replicate their mission constructively.  In this current age of high operational tempos, we don’t need to occupy the time of high-demand units just to provide a stimulus for another unit.b.	We don’t do anything “just because”.  The DMOC has thoroughly demonstrated many concepts involving and supporting DMO, we don’t need to turn a high-fidelity training event into a well-meaning science project.   2.2.3		Synthetic Battlespace Technical Requirements Once the EPC is complete, the technical requirements for the VF synthetic battlespace are created to ensure all sites will receive the required data for the training event.  There are several different types of data that require separate, virtual networks.  Each network varies in type, bandwidth capabilities, and each have limits as to how much data can be sent to each participating site.  Because of this limitation, each simulation site must determine the simulation data they require, and the simulation data they will transmit.  Once this determined, the technical requirements can be defined as to what, how much, and how the simulation data will be connected.3.	Synthetic Battlespace ConstructionOnce all operational and technical requirements are complete, the synthetic battlespace can be constructed.  There are four phases to creating the synthetic battlespace: Network Design, which includes setting up initial connectivity, one-on-one integration tests, multiple site integration tests, and the event system acceptance test.3.1	Network DesignThe network design involves creating several “virtual” Local Area Networks (LANS) that send different types of data.  For example, a DMOC run Virtual Flag event would require network connections to each participating site that uses a variety of network connections, such as T-1s, the DREN, the JTEN, the ARCNET, and the CAF DMO Network (DMON).  A typical Virtual Flag network configuration is shown in Figure 3.1 SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 3.1:	Typical Virtual Flag Network ConfigurationThe combination of T-1 lines and Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) networks provides the Virtual Flag event several features of centralized exercise control and distributed simulation capabilities. Each network link is tailored to carry specifically the types of traffic needed by the participating sites, without exceeding bandwidth limitations.  One specific and important type of data is tactical data link traffic.  The tactical data link network and data types are shown in Figure 3.2. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 3.2:	Tactical Data Link NetworkEach event usually includes various types of tactical data links, including:Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data System (AFATDS)IBS-IIBS-S SCDL, using the NATO EX formatTactical Digital Information Link – Joint (TADIL-J)This data is sent to each site based upon what is required to fulfill their training objectives.  Each is described below.3.1.1		Intelligence Broadcast Service (IBS)	Synthetic battlespaces could be configured to use IBS-Interactive messages to support missile launch and impact reports and threat position and emitter reports. IBS-I messages are generated by MDST and Cobra Ball. The event site lead then distributes the received data via network socket connections in the TAB-37 format to remote consumers such as the EP-3 at Whidbey Is, WA. VSTARS at DMOC is connected via a serial connection using TDIMF formatted data. The event site lead uses the Joint Data Translator (JDT) to change formats and make all connections. In support of Rivet Joint training requirements, the 705 CTS has also obtained access to the live IBS test channel for use during the exercise.  Virtual Flag also uses IBS-Simplex (IBS-S) messages to support missile launch and impact reports, emitter reports; Hook 112 downed pilot messages and Blue Force Tracker (BFT) messages. Missile Defense Space Tool (MDST) and ASSET at SIDC will generate these IBS-S messages. The event site lead then distributes the received data via network socket connections in the TAB-37 format to remote consumers such as the EP-3 at NAS Whidbey Island, WA. IBS-S data will not utilize the live channel during Virtual Flag. However, some IBS-S data will be sent over the IBS-I live channel to simulate this feed3.1.2		Surveillance and Control Data Link (SCDL)NATO EX is an unclassified version of the Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (JSTARS) and Common Ground Station (CGS) SCDL. Each synthetic battlespace event where JSTARS participates uses NATO EX messages to connect JSTARS simulators to CGS and Joint Service Workstation (JSWS) systems. NATO EX supports Moving Target Indicator (MTI) and Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) messages one-way from JSTARS to ground systems. Two-way messages include free text messages and messages that support Radar Service Requests.Because of issues unique to the use of IP network systems, DMOC has developed the TACCSF Software Router (TSR) application Ref [4] to buffer large messages from the JSTARS simulators to the ground systems. Without the TSR, SAR images in particular are broken up, leading to incomplete images at CGS and JSWS sites.3.1.3		Tactical Digital Information Link – Joint (TADIL-J)Each synthetic battlespace C2 event uses TADIL-J (Link 16) messages to convey time-critical tactically relevant data between C2 systems. Objectives for this exercise related to TADIL-J include:Expanded use of TADIL-J J28.2 free text messages between C2 systemsDemonstration of Link 16 with F-16CJAs with IBS, to the extent possible, socket connections will be used to build the TADIL-J network. Virtual Flag only connects to over-the-air (live) TADIL-J systems through ground-based gateways at participating sites.  Assignment of Link 16 JTIDS Units (JUs), track block assignment and other information relevant to Link 16 operations are contained in the OPTASKLINK.3.2		Voice Communications Simulation ArchitectureThe voice communications simulation architecture consists of a variety of voice systems. The synthetic battlespace principally uses the ASTi Digital Audio Communications Simulation (DACS) product, although there are Simphonics, eMDee and other systems in use at some sites.3.3		Site Integration TestsThe purpose of site integration testing is to confirm the participating simulation systems comply with all technical requirements set at the event planning conference. During site testing, specific first time participating sites conduct one-on-one testing with specified systems with the event lead site. Site testing focuses on determining the capabilities and limitations of virtual systems with respect to constructive simulations. Normally, site testing is conducted with either empty scenarios or an Engineering Test Scenario (ETS).Site test events typically verify the following objectives (in priority order):Basic connectivity Voice communications DIS and data link interactionsBrief/Debrief capabilityOnce all tests have been conducted that verify all technical objectives, then operational testing begins.  During operational testing, sites with live or virtual assets conduct testing with other live or virtual systems. While some tests may be performed against constructive simulations, the focus of ops testing is to test critical interactions between warfighters and their tactical systems within a scenario representative of what may be expected during the exercise.  Normally, operational testing is conducted with a combination of an Engineering Test Scenario (ETS) and a scenario developed for use during Virtual Flag execution. Each OT period is allotted one half-day and involves only those participants expected to support the given mission. For example, F-15C would be expected to support the Offensive Counter-Air OT period, but would not normally be expected to participate in the Special Operations Forces period.  The operational and technical integration test process and problem resolution process is shown in Figure 3.3 below. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 3.3:	Synthetic Battlespace Integration Test ProcessThere are specific functions and tests performed by the Event Site lead personnel, and these functions are:In conjunction with site personnel, Event lead operations personnel establish test requirements. These requirements include a matrix identifying test points to accomplish during integration testing.Event Site lead Engineering ensures that the plan is testable and add test items to the matrix based on know technical problems. Each Event site team (operations and engineering) develops site test procedures and publishes a site test plan. Each site team is responsible for coordinating tests with a specific site.Each Event site operational test team (operations and engineering) develops ops test procedures and publishes the ops test plan. Each OT team is responsible for developing plans for a specific operational area, e.g., Offensive Counter-Air and Time Sensitive Targeting.Site teams review each OT plan to ensure that all test points are covered by scheduled site and ops testing plans.Site teams conduct site and ops testing as scheduled.Event site engineering records test results.Event site operations determine site status based on test results. Site status choices include Fully, Partial and Not Mission Capable.3.4		The Event System Acceptance TestThe Event System Acceptance Test (ESAT) verifies simultaneous operation of all systems in the exercise without negatively impacting other systems.Normally, the ESAT is conducted with an operational scenario. All training event sites are expected to participate in the ESAT.  All participating sites are ready 30 minutes prior to ESAT start.  Figure 3.4 shows a typical ESAT milestone and test timeline.  During this time, network connections are verified, and simulations are readied for the ESAT. EMBED Visio.Drawing.11  Figure 3.4:	Event System Acceptance Test Milestones and Timeline.All sites report their status.  Also, the ESAT plan is reviewed with all sites and any deficiencies or changes are discussed.A typical detailed event execution schedule is as follows:Prior To In Brief:Comm Leads activate voice systems and begin voice checks between sitesSystem Leads begin activating systemsT-30:Test Director starts technical briefing at the designated lead site, outlining test objectives, modifications to the test plan, known deficiencies and limiting factorsT-15:Lead site system engineers report readiness to MAYTAGSite Ops Leads report readiness to MAYTAGData Analysis Systems Engineer starts logger on Ground LANSystem Leads conduct comm check with MAYTAGRecorder sets exercise clockSTARTEX for Red IADS (DICE/DIADS) and Blue AirT-10All event participants signal readyT-1:To avoid a network traffic jam, specified systems begin early start without sending a start messageOn Call:Site Leads reports new deficiencies and limiting factors to TDIf start time is to be delayed, MAYTAG 1 announces a new estimated start time to all units on the test control frequencySTARTEX:Test Director Calls STARTEXSystem designated as sending the start message broadcasts the event startData loggers on all WANs begin recording upon receipt of Start messageENDEX:Test Director Calls ENDEX and Debriefing DetailsThe event site lead usually does not issue a event stop message at ENDEX. The Test Director conducts the technical debriefing as announced, but usually within thirty minutes of ENDEX. During the debriefing, the TD conducts a roll call. The recorder notes attendees and updates the availability chart. Each Site Lead submits an email bullet summary to the TD within 24 hours of completion of the test. 4.	Event ExecutionThe Synthetic Battlespace is now complete, and is ready to support the training event.  Event Execution is the cumulating of all planning, preparation, and integration tests with all participants.  One site is designated as exercise control for the event, and has the operational and technical experts ready to address any problem or issue that may arise.  The problems that arise are either technical or operational in nature, and are addressed by the appropriate personnel.4.1		Battle RhythmRegardless of the duration of the event Vulnerability (Vul) period, the true value in conducting a theater-level training event is the ability for participants to fully participate in the Plan, Brief, Execute and Debrief (PBED) cycle.  Unlike real-world operations where time is rarely available to examine the successes and failures of today’s events in adequate detail, these virtual training events are designed to allow participants to do precisely that.  Arguably since a theater-level event is not specifically designed to train the basic “blocking and tackling” aspects of warfighter training, the real training occurs during the briefing and debriefing portions of the daily activity.The necessity to conduct briefings and debriefings at multiple echelons and often in a distributed format tends to drive the length of the duty day for the participants.  The training event schedule consists of mission planning and briefs, the event execution, and mission debriefs, and usually follows the following schedule:Mission PlanningMass BriefPackage BriefsMWS BriefsVUL (vulnerability period) ExecutionOperational Assessment BriefingMWS DebriefPackage Reconstruction/DebriefMass DebriefThe day begins with a Mass Brief for all participants followed by mission-type or Package Briefings (i.e. Offensive Counter-Air (OCA), Defensive Counter-Air (DCA), Suppression of Enemy Air Defense (SEAD), individual missions from the ATO, etc.), and finally each weapon system conducts any unique briefing required to execute the event.  Participants then execute the day’s event, notionally a three-hour period.  The debriefing process is essentially the briefing process in reverse with the exception of a technical debrief that happens immediately after the VUL and an assessment debriefing to provide some higher level inputs to help guide the debriefings that follow. In addition to the operational briefings discussed above, a series of technical briefings and debriefings must be intertwined during the same time period.  The challenge is to de-conflict the use of brief/debrief equipment (most sites only have a single device) and not overloading some of the more restrictive networks integrated in the overall event network.4.2		Exercise ControlTo ensure all training objectives are met for the entire training audience it is essential that event execution is closely monitored by the event control staff or White Force.  The complexity of this task far exceeds that of conducting the same or similar event in the “real world” since not only are the actual events being monitored, but all the constructive or virtual events that stimulate them being watched as well.  Everything that just happens in reality has to be created virtually to ensure training occurs.The amount of events that need to be created for training dictates that there is no room in the event for unnecessary and extraneous activities.  Everything that occurs during the training period must happen to stimulate a specific participant-derived requirement.  All events are listed in a Master Scenario Event List (MSEL) and are closely tracked by a number of individuals within the Exercise Control Group (ECG).At the top of the ECG organization is the Exercise Director (ED).  The ED is responsible for overall planning, execution and after-action reporting of the event but during the execution phase he/she involvement is critical to the success of the day’s activities.  The ED must be completely familiar with eth unit training objectives, weapons system capabilities, network architecture and limitations, environment generator capabilities and in the interrelationship that each participant has to other participant’s training objectives.  If a system, network or EG were to “go down” the ED must instantly assess the situation, evaluate the training impacts and direct corrective actions so that the overall training audience is not aware of the malfunction and that training impacts are avoided or at least mitigated.4.3		Technical SupportAll technical and operational issues and problems are recorded and either solved immediately, or noted for the technical debrief.  During event execution, an event problem reporting process is followed for the Maintenance Cell (Figure 6-2). When a problem is reported during an event, MAYTAG 1 ensures the problem is documented in the problem log maintained by the Maintenance Cell and assigned to the appropriate organization for resolution. All hardware, software and operation issues are reported to the DO&M Exercise Engineer and/or TSC Lead Systems Engineer as appropriate. At the end of each day, problems recorded in the log are reviewed and status is updated. If additional unrecorded problems occurred, these problems are added to the log. 5.	Joint LVC Training EventThe first ever Joint Coalition forces LVC event was Joint Red Flag (JRF) 05.  Joint Red Flag 05 (JRF 05) was a Joint Services approved training exercise involving Army, Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps and Special Operations Forces (SOF), and three coalition countries in a combined theater of operations.  U.S. Air Force Air Combat Command was the executive agent for planning and executing the joint services training event.  JRF focused on horizontal and vertical interoperability among functional components and tactical forces.  The services selected specific Joint Tactical Tasks (JTTS) for emphasis during JRF05.  JRF05 was conducted to enhance joint interoperability and training by providing joint context and enhancements for the selected JTTS.  JRF05 combined several distributed exercises.  They were:  Red Flag 05-3.2, Air Warrior 05-5, Virtual Flag 05-3, Roving Sands 05, Joint Service Training Exercise (JSTE), and a Combined Air Operations Center (CAOC) exercise [Ref (2)].  The exercises were combined into a single transformational joint event.  In addition, forces from other nations were provided opportunities to train in the joint environment.  This event has been documented in paper 05F-SIW-106 (Ref[5]).7.	AcknowledgmentsWe thank the DMOC for sponsoring this paper and making the Joint Synthetic Battlespace a reality.  Also, we thank Lockheed Martin Corporation, Arctic Slope Regional Corporation (ASRC) Communications, Scientific Research Corporation (SRC), and Northrop Grumman, for their support to the DMOC.  From DMOC, we thank Chief Engineer Mr. Tom Brown, Technical Advisor Mr. Jeff Wakefield, and DMOC’s Commanders that have supported these events throughout the years:  Col James “Boomer” Henry, Col Ron “Opie” Weigand, Lt Col Gordon “Gordo” Phillips, and Lt Col Don “Drex” Drechsler.8.	Author BiographyMajor John Grevin is the ADO/Ops and exercise director for Exercise Virtual Flag at the 705th Combat Training Squadron located at Kirtland AFB, NM.  He is responsible for daily operations and the organization of multiple exercises.  Highlights of his career include earning instructor status in three major weapon systems in two services, standing-up the first counter-space squadron, and serving on the NATO staff.  Major Grevin has been awarded several Air Force Decorations.  Major Grevin has a bachelors degree in Aviation Maintenance Management from Lewis University, attended Squadron Officers School, and has a Masters of Science degree in Aerospace Management from Embry Riddle University. Mr. Sorroche is a Senior Engineer with Arctic Slope Regional Corporation Communications (ASRCC), and has 19 years professional experience; 12 years experience in the Modeling and Simulation field. He currently works at the DMOC for the System Architecture Group, and has been the Engineering lead for the DMOC for JEFX 06, JEFX 04, Millennium Challenge 02, JEFX 2000, JEFX 99, EFX 98, and many Blue Flag and Virtual Flag exercises. He is the Chair for the SISO TADIL TALES Product Support Group, the Link 11/11B Product Development Group Chair, and the SISO Liaison for the NATO Tactical Data Link Interoperability Testing Syndicate.  Mr. Sorroche is a co-recipient of the Fall 2002 SIWZIE Award for paper 02F-SIW-119 titled “TADIL TALES.”, a co-recipient of the Spring 2006 SIWZIE Award for paper 06S-SIW-074 titled “A Mixed Architecture for Joint Testing”, and a co-recipient of the Spring 2007 SIWZIE Award for “Directed Energy Modeling and Simulation Experiment Results”.  He has Bachelors and Masters of Science Degrees in Electrical Engineering from New Mexico State University.  He is a member of Tau Beta Pi and Eta Kappa Nu Honor Societies. 9.	ReferencesSzulinski, J., Sorroche, J., “The USAF Distributed Missions Operations –A Premier Application of Distributed Modeling and Simulation in Training the Way We Fight,” NATO Modeling and Simulation Group, October 2004Sorroche, J., Atkinson, J. “Building a DMO Network,” Paper 05S-SIW-105, Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization, April 2005.Scientific Research Corporation, “Virtual Flag 07-2 Exercise Plan”, Prepare for the USAF Distributed Missions Operations Center, 2 March 2007Sorroche, J., Szulinski, J., “Bandwidth Reduction Techniques Used in DIS Exercises:  An Update,” Paper 05F-SIW-105, Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization, April 2005.5.  Sorroche J., “Live, Virtual, and Constructive Asset Merge for Joint Red Flag 05”, Paper 05F-SIW-10.PAGE  PAGE  1