The History of the Army’s Research and Development for Medical Simulation TrainingMichelle MayoU.S. Army RDECOM-STTC12423 Research ParkwayOrlando, FL 32826407-384-5407Michelle.L.Mayo@us.army.mil Keywords:Medical Simulation, research, development, wireless, interoperability, training, HLA.ABSTRACT:  Over the past ten years, the Army’s research and development community has changed the way the Army trains Combat Medics and Combat Lifesavers.  In 1997, the Simulation, Training and Instrumentation Command’s (STRICOM’s) technology base, now part of  the Research, Development and Engineering Command (RDECOM) Simulation and Training Technology Center (STTC), developed the first distributed medical simulation training system called Combat Trauma Patient Simulation (CTPS).  The CTPS system was the first attempt by the Army to introduce simulation products into the military medical training community that up to that time had relied heavily on didactic and live tissue training.  The first year of the CTPS system was successful and continued for nine consecutive years, fielding a total of four systems to: Ft. Gordon, GA, Ft. Polk, LA, Camp Pendleton, CA, and the Defense Medical Readiness Training Institute, TX. After several successful installations and user evaluations, the CTPS system became a highly visible Congressional program and started receiving more momentum from the Army.  The Army funded two Science and Technology Objectives (STO) to build upon the CTPS architecture and developed medical training technologies for Combat Medics and Combat Lifesavers.  The most recent technological development and future of medical simulation lies in the prototype wireless patient simulator from the last STO:  the Stand Alone Patient Simulator (SAPS).  The SAPS is changing the way the medical simulation community conducts training and finally gaining appropriate support from the Army that CTPS started ten years ago.    This paper describes the technological advances over the past 10 years of medical simulation training devices. It will describe the changes from a full integrated system like CTPS to smaller trainers such as the SAPS and the reasoning behind the need for such changes.  1. IntroductionCombat medical readiness has become imperative training for the United States Army and in even more demand with the onset of modern warfare.  The Simulation, Training and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM) now the Research, Development and Engineering Command (RDECOM) Simulation and Training Technology Center (STTC) had the foresight to know modeling and simulation could positively impact this training and helped develop the Combat Trauma Patient Simulation (CTPS) system in 1997.  The CTPS program yielded significant research and user data for its time that guided an additional ten years of research and development for Combat Medic training.  This paper will further describe the history of the CTPS system, the components and architecture of the system and the results of several user tests that directed over ten years of ongoing research.  Furthermore, the paper will explain the changing approach to combat medical simulation and the road ahead for the United States military and these lifesaving training devices.1.1 Goals and HistoryThe CTPS system was developed with congressional funding by a commercial vendor, Medical Education Technologies Incorporated (METI).  Supporting academia, industry and government partners included the University of Central Florida Institute for Simulation and Training (UCF-IST), Tekamah Corporation, National Center for Simulation and the US Army Medical Research and Materiel Command (MRMC). RDECOM-STTC has provided oversight and management for this government initiative over the past ten years and nine congressional awards.  The purpose of the CTPS program was to provide a simulated capability to more realistically assess the impact of battlefield injuries.  Commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) and government-off-the-shelf (GOTS) components provided a network infrastructure to simulate medical handling and treatment for combat injuries through every echelon of care on the battlefield.  Capabilities include simulating, replicating and assessing combat injuries by type and category, monitoring the movement of casualties on the battlefield, capturing the time of patient diagnosis and treatment, and comparing interventions and outcomes at each military treatment level.1.2. Phased ResultsUser-based design has guided development throughout all phases of the CTPS Program.  Early phases yielded a component test and evaluation that ensured functionality and usability of the components.  By phase four, a full system test and evaluation was implemented that measured training efficacy of the system in a simulated operational environment.  Currently, user tests are still ongoing at Ft. Gordon, GA, Ft. Polk, LA, Camp Pendleton, CA, and the Defense Medical Readiness Training Institute, TX. Considered ahead of its time for successfully integrating live, virtual and constructive domains via High Level Architecture (HLA), the first phase of the CTPS system was a technology demonstration showing the value of the working CTPS system’s components.  The Multiple Integrated Laser Engagement System (MILES) and Electronic Casualty Card (ECC) (both GOTS systems) provided the data to instantiate virtual casualties on the system.  These virtual casualties were then assigned to CTPS federates containing physiological models capable of responding to medical intervention.  One federate used in the system was the Human Patient Simulator (HPS) (COTS technology) which allowed hands-on training of medical skills.  With this successful demonstration, a decade long program in medical simulation training was produced.  The next two phases of CTPS started user tests on the system with non-active duty military personnel.  Such assessment identified the weaknesses of the CTPS components, the need for After Action Review (AAR) capabilities and a way to triage patients as part of mass casualty scenarios.  Data was documented through monthly reports of the program.  The fourth CTPS phase continued research and development efforts to improve the reliability, scalability and interoperability of CTPS which subsequently supported the install at Ft. Gordon, GA for the first independent test and evaluation.  The intent of the test and evaluation of the CTPS system was to focus on the efficacy of a collective simulator system in contrast to the traditional military training tactics, techniques and procedures [1].The goal of phase five was to continue to demonstrate the system through the ongoing test and evaluation at Ft. Gordon since a single test would not suffice for a complex system such as CTPS.  This phase was successful at gaining momentum for the program and installing subsequent systems for more Army users.Phase six delivered a beta system to Ft. Sam Houston, TX.  The system was the direct result of the user feedback experiences from previous phases.  Users at Ft. Sam Houston were comprised of the 68W student population at the Department of Combat Medic Training (DCMT). This user test proved that the DCMT did not need a full robust system to train hundreds of students a day.  Partial task trainers that could withstand several iterations of intervention were ideal solutions for the program of instruction.  Thus, the system at Ft. Sam Houston was later moved to the Defense Medical Readiness Training Institute to match the program of instruction with the capability.The seventh phase of the CTPS program delivered a pre-production system to Ft. Polk, LA.  After the lessons learned from DCMT, the program team conducted more research to make sure the capability would match the training needs at the Joint Readiness Training Center (JRTC) prior to installation.  The system was then extensively tested in a realistic simulated battlefield environment.  Users at Ft. Polk included active and guard medical units getting ready to deploy to the combat zone.     Ft. Polk was a breakthrough user test as this was the first time the CTPS system was used in harsh environments such as field training exercises.  Although, the CTPS system was a strong training tool in the field, especially at the Combat Support Hospital (CSH) level, users at the JRTC need a capability that does not contain the logistical footprint associated with CTPS.  This feedback helped define the requirement for the Stand Alone Patient Simulator (SAPS) which will be discussed further in section 3.2.The last and final two phases of the CTPS program finalized product research and development.  Specifically, the AAR system was updated, the SAPS was integrated into the network as another virtual casualty federate and wireless connectivity and web-based simulations were evaluated and integrated into the final system. 2. CTPS System ArchitectureThe CTPS system was designed as an open system architecture to allow interoperability with any simulation system to include other patient simulators, distance learning systems, constructive simulations, instrumentation systems and etc.  The system in its installed configuration consists of six treatment nodes, a casualty transfer network, pre-programmed clinical scenarios and an After Action Review (AAR) capability.  Section 2.1 will further describe the system components and section 2.2 will address the significance of the network infrastructure.2.1. System ComponentsInitially as the only way to instantiate patients, the MILES-ECC was used in the Phase I technology demonstration of the CTPS program.  After a Soldier was hit in MILES by direct or indirect fire, the ECC established the casualty’s condition based on the data from the weapon fired.  In order for the HPS or any other federate to recognize the data from the MILES-ECC, a Run-Time Infrastructure (RTI) gateway was developed to read and translate this information into the RTI-layer of the HLA network for the HPS [2].  Virtual casualties were then assigned to CTPS federates containing physiological models capable of responding to medical interventions.Although important to show constructive warfighter simulations could drive the CTPS system, the Phase I effort of MILES instantiating patients became far less critical during later phases of the program.  The military community was not capable of utilizing this fully interoperable live, virtual and constructive medical simulation system to its maximum potential.  Thus subsequent phases of the CTPS program developed computer based applications capable and later the standard for instantiating casualties.  One such application is the PATSim which allows casualties to be held in a virtual state until transfer to a treatment node occurs.  While in this state, the casualty’s condition deteriorates as clinically and realistically appropriate.  Another application is the Casualty Handler which is similar to the PATSim but gives an instructor the ability to instantiate casualties at appropriate nodes of care.  Furthermore, the Casualty Handler stores data, drug responses and scenarios related to the CTPS system.Treatment nodes are the most recognizable CTPS components as they provide the main interface and hands-on training for users.  The HPS was the first federate or treatment node used to run the casualty state information.  Sophisticated physiological models drive the computerized mannequin to allow users to treat and assess a casualty as realistically as possible.  HPS simulators made up the majority of treatment nodes for the first installed CTPS system.  Although ideal for higher levels of care such as hospitals and forward surgical teams with doctors as users, the HPS proved excessive for initial point of care, casualty collection points and battalion aid stations with EMT or equivalent personnel.  So after five years of user tests, a more portable, less expensive Emergency Care Simulator (ECS) was developed and used as a node for the first three levels of care on the battlefield.  Another important component of the CTPS system was the Triage Controller.  This computer software allows a user to triage multiple casualties virtually.  Especially with modern warfare and Improvised Explosive Devices (IED) causing multiple injuries at once, casualty scenarios tend to have more than six patients (the maximum treatment nodes) to be treated and assessed and the need for triaging became important.  Users can determine which casualties in the virtual state need to be assessed immediately and can be easily transferred to a treatment node.  Other casualties stay in the virtual state via the PATSim or Casualty Handler and deteriorate as appropriate showing the effect of a mass casualty scenario on medical personnel.An AAR system has proven effective for military training and was developed for the CTPS system.  The AAR system is a computer based application that records the CTPS exercise to include all casualties, any treatments given and all casualty outcomes.  Phase nine of CTPS enhanced the AAR system by providing audio and video capturing abilities, a database of training objectives and a web server application.  The improved AAR system has enhanced instructors’ abilities to conduct an effective AAR.2.2. Network InfrastructureIn the CTPS System, casualties are not physically evacuated.  Instead, casualties are electronically transported from one echelon to the next, via an Ethernet network.  The user interfaces for the Triage Controller,  Figure 1.  CTPS Phase 9 Patient Transfer Diagram [3]Casualty Handler, and AAR run on Laptop PC’s which are linked to the CTPS System Network via 802.11B Wireless Ethernet.  This allows the instructor and students to freely roam while interacting with the CTPS System.  All system nodes are interconnected via wired 100 megabit Ethernet, resulting in a private local area network (LAN).The CTPS LAN is terminated with a High Level Architecture (HLA) Gateway.  A GOTS product, HLA is the U.S. Department of Defense interoperability standard for distributed interactive simulation.  Thus, CTPS System can be linked to simulation systems that are HLA compliant [4].In order to implement the SAPS into the CTPS Network Infrastructure, the patient transfer mechanism needed to be updated.  Previous versions of the CTPS system defined every node with a static name in a configuration file on the PATSim which could not be changed once the simulation started.  Under phase nine, the SAPS provided a capability to transfer patients both virtually and physically.  In order to allow the physical transfer of a patient, the network infrastructure had to allow nodes to change dynamically.  Figure 1 shows the final architecture of the CTPS system with SAPS implementation.  The structure, although invisible to the user, provides the means for accurate node transfers, patient data to be recorded appropriately for an AAR and the most realistic mass casualty simulation possible.3. Changing ApproachAfter several successful installations and user evaluations, the CTPS system became a highly visible Congressional program and started receiving more momentum from the Army.  The Army funded two Science and Technology Objectives (STO) to build upon the CTPS architecture and develop medical training technologies for Combat Medics and Combat Lifesavers.  The most recent technological development and future of medical simulation lies in the prototype wireless patient simulator from the most recently completed STO:  the Stand Alone Patient Simulator (SAPS).  The SAPS is changing the way the medical simulation community conducts training and finally gaining appropriate support from the Army that CTPS started ten years ago.    3.1. Smaller ComponentsThe CTPS system set out to develop the end-all medical simulation training solution.  Unfortunately, a large and costly footprint was not reasonable for training Combat Medics and Combat Lifesavers.  Thus, a STO was proposed and funded to look at specific technologies that would be smaller, lighter, cheaper, and faster for medical simulation training technologies.  The STO primarily developed the now commercial product, called the Emergency Care Simulator (ECS). The ECS had a smaller footprint, requiring only compressed air instead of several gases for operation.  Computer equipment was also reduced to just a single laptop for ease of transport and reduced cost.  The ECS was incorporated into the simulated battlefield footprint and subsequently led to non-traditional training lanes for the system.  For the first time, users were taking components into non-classroom settings for more realistic and effective training.  The CTPS user test at JRTC was one of the first Active Army field users of the full system with the ECS.  JRTC conducts all medical training in the field thus sterile classroom settings are nonexistent at JRTC.  Typically, a Combat Support Hospital (CSH) rotates thru JRTC prior to deploying to the combat zone.  The CSH unit would setup their field hospital for the simulated battlefield rotation and stage the CTPS components in the different areas of the CSH to simulate patients in the field hospital.  This user test was the first example of using the CTPS footprint in field environments as seen in Figure 2.  Soldiers are under simulated battlefield conditions while training at JRTC and identified a need to move simulated patients freely and as realistic as possible.  JRTC is also a harsh environment for training which led to some of the new requirements for a rugged, field capable wireless simulator which will be discussed in the next section.  SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 2. An ECS simulates an injured Soldier during a field exercise at JRTC.3.2 Field Capable SystemsThrough the CTPS user tests data and reports from instructors in the field, a need for a field capable medical simulation training device was apparent.  A second STO was proposed and funded focusing primarily on a wireless simulator prototype for field environments.  The SAPS blends physiologically accurate injuries, sensor technologies, miniaturization/packaging technology and wireless networking technologies, with state of the art patient simulation technologies.  Designed specifically to meet Army training needs from user test data, the SAPS is a rugged, full body patient simulator that is physiologically based and completely wireless, enabling Soldiers to move their patients to truly train as they fight as seen in Figure 3 below.  Soldiers must extricate a simulated patient from difficult terrain, buildings, and vehicles while constantly assessing and treating the patient’s condition. Figure 3.  Soldiers at Ft. Lewis carry the SAPS in a simulated training  field exercise.Even with just a few user tests and data captured, trainees and instructors were very receptive to the new technology.  One Soldier commented during the Ft. Lewis user test, “I had to reassess [the SAPS] throughout the lane just like a real patient.  I was never able to do that [with previous technology] before.”During phase nine of the CTPS program, an objective was to incorporate the SAPS as a federate of the system.  The system architecture was updated to include a new SAPS PATSim to allow wireless patients to be interoperable with the whole system.  This objective, although yet to be tested and evaluated in the field, is an important step toward the future of medical simulation training technologies.Inserting the SAPS into the lower echelons of care on the battlefield such as the point of injury, casualty collection point and battalion aid station will provide more realistic training.  Patients can be physically evacuated instead of relying solely on a virtual network transfer via Ethernet.  This enhanced capability will also allow for more accurate resource management data to be collected from the simulation.  For example, not only would the patient continue to deteriorate while en route to the next higher level of care but now medical personnel would be required to provide the necessary care while en route.  This capability opens a training realm that has not been conducted and has the potential to help better prepare the warfighter to save lives and resources.  4. The Road AheadThroughout the nine years of CTPS user tests, research and development, the Army has realized the positive impact medical simulation devices have on training.  In September 2005, LTG Kevin Kiley signed an Operational Needs Statement (ONS) for Medical Simulation Training Centers for Combat Lifesavers (CLS) and Tactical Combat Casualty Care (TC3) Training.Per the ONS, the Vice Chief of Staff of the Army (VCSA) directed the establishment of Medical Simulation Training Centers at 13 densely populated Army installations.  The Army leadership believes that the development of Medical Simulation Training Centers, augmented by Mobile Training Teams, will provide a properly resourced, standardized platform for training TC3 and CLS programs of instruction. [5] Section 4.1 will discuss the MSTC medical acquisition program and how the CTPS program and other efforts influenced its formation.  Section 4.2 will present a possible path forward of medical simulation training.4.1 MSTC Acquisition ProgramThe MSTC is the first medical simulation training acquisition program for the Army being managed by Program Executive Office Simulation Training and Instrumentation (PEO STRI).  Although, the military has been training with medical simulation devices for many years, the MSTC finally provides life cycle support for the fielded training devices.  Sites are also provided instructors, a building with all classroom equipment and the necessary training devices to conduct training for Combat Medic Advance Skills Training (CMAST), TC3 and CLS.  Some researchers could speculate that the CTPS program jump-started the MSTC acquisition program.  Without the likes of the CTPS system and its derivative systems being used at installations for user tests and training, Soldiers would not have known the capability existed.  Units and installations would not have procured and sustained systems on their own.  And subsequently, the VCSA would not have known the power behind the simulation technologies for training and seen the need to establish the MSTC.  Furthermore, the training device that was selected and fielded as the standard patient simulator for the MSTC was the ECS, which as mentioned in section 3.1 was a direct result of the CTPS program and other research and development efforts by RDECOM-STTC.   Is this a transition and success story for the CTPS program and other RDECOM-STTC research and development efforts?  Absolutely, but the work is not nearly finished.4.2 Looking Beyond CTPS and MSTCMedical simulation training is a complex area to say the least.  It often seems that simulating the human body was the easiest part of the training simulation program.  User tests have proven the need for a full spectrum simulation system such as CTPS and the state-of-the-art SAPS but it took almost a decade for the Army to stand up and say this need, documented through user test data, existed and would be funded.  The MSTC has gained the much needed support of high level Army officials and will hopefully open the doors for other medical simulation programs as well, since there is much more required in order for this growing area of simulation to best serve the warfighters.  The MSTC is a great transition path for technologies such as the SAPS and some components of the CTPS system, but the MSTC and rightfully so, has a limited focus.  The MSTC addresses one small aspect of medical training for the Army.  There is still a need for simulation training solutions for Surgeons, Doctors, Physician Assistants and Nurses.  Furthermore, all Soldiers receive first aid training during Basic Training and could benefit from simulation technologies to better prepare them for the battlefield.Joint medical simulation training programs are also a possibility for the near future.  Although some elements are inherently different among services and a simulation training program will have derived requirements, saving a life is the same no matter what uniform one wears.  5. ConclusionsThroughout the last decade, the CTPS program has changed the way the military medical community conducts training.  The Congressional program led to two funded Army Science and Technology Objectives and a funded acquisition program.  Medical simulation training devices are now the mainstream training tool for medical personnel.  Patient simulators are finally capable of being used in the field to allow warfighters to train as they fight.  Individual units are no longer required to support the maintenance costs associated with medical training due to an established acquisition program.  Even though it took almost a decade to be acknowledged, the CTPS program has proven to be a successful investment and yielded significant advancements in medical simulation training technology capabilities.  6.  References[1]	Pettitt, M. Beth, Rasche, Jeanette (2002 November). Independent Evaluation of the Combat Trauma Patient Simulation (CTPS) System.  Paper presented at the Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation, and Education Conference, Orlando, Florida, USA.[2]	Medical Education Technologies, Inc. (2001). Combat Trauma Patient Simulation (CTPS) Phase 4 Final Report. Sarasota, Florida.[3]	Medical Education Technologies, Inc. (2007). Combat Trauma Patient Simulation (CTPS) Phase 9 Final Report. Sarasota, Florida.[4]	 Carovano, R.G., Pettitt, M.B. (2002). The Combat Trauma Patient Simulation System: An Overview of a Multi-Echelon, Mass Casualty Simulation Research and Development Program.  Paper presented at the Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation, and Education Conference, Orlando, Florida, USA.[5]	Kiley, LTG Kevin C., Memorandum to Deputy Chief of Staff, G-3, "Operational Needs Statement for Medical Simulation Training Centers for Combat Lifesavers (CLS) and Tactical Combat Casualty Care (TC3) Training,'" April 2005.Author BiographiesMICHELLE MAYO is currently a Science and Technology Manager on the Medical Simulation Technologies Team for RDECOM-STTC.  She was the manager of the CTPS program for the final two years and helped manage the Stand Alone Patient Simulator effort.  She has over seven years experience in military simulation and training programs.  Ms. Mayo has a Bachelor of Science Degree in Computer Engineering and is working on her Master of Science Degree in Engineering Management.