Standardized Space Trainer (SST) Proof-of-ConceptLaura R. DietzRobert P. CostelloDavid S. ColemanSonalysts, Inc.215 Parkway NorthWaterford, CT 06385860-326-3701, 860-326-3864, 860-326-3761dietz@sonalysts.com, costello@sonalysts.com, colemand@sonalysts.comKeywords:Satellite training, PC simulation, standardized space trainerABSTRACT: Currently, a number of different training systems are used by the Air Force for satellite command and control (C2) training in Initial Qualification Training and Unit Qualification Training.  Many of these training systems are “stove-piped” with different hardware, operating systems, proprietary software, and maintenance contracts.  As a result, they are costly to sustain and administer configuration control.  To address this problem, the Air Force Space Training Acquisition Office has established a vision for a single Standardized Space Trainer (SST) for C2 operator training that employs commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) hardware and operating systems, and one common training system architecture which will launch system-specific simulations developed to execute space operations training for a number of different satellite systems.  Sonalysts, Inc., pursuant to a Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase II enhancement project, is currently developing a proof-of concept SST.  Under sponsorship of the Air Force Research Laboratory, the Air Education and Training Command, and the SBIR program, the proof-of concept training application provides simulation support for a subset of the Architectural Evolution Plan (AEP) and Defense Satellite Communications System (DSCS) satellite systems using advanced modeling, simulation, and visualization technologies. The simulation-based trainer runs on a personal computer with an XP operating system and emulates two command and control consoles:  one for the DSCS and one for the AEP.  The training system architecture can be expanded to support the full SST vision, so that all of the training features and content required to fully train a satellite operator can be incorporated incrementally as additional funding is identified.  A preliminary version of the proof-of-concept SST is scheduled to be completed by October 2007.1.	IntroductionIn the world around us, the technology revolution continues for those in the civilian and military venues.  Today, in many instances, training is accomplished in the same ways as it has been done for generations.  Increasingly, learning centers are becoming convinced that not only can we do better, but we must do better.  All of the armed services are engaging in a training revolution, because the old approaches have some recognized deficiencies.  For example, training in a live environment, which might certainly be considered the “gold standard” of training, often has a price not unlike gold itself.  On the other hand, legacy trainers are burdened by high hardware and maintenance costs and these trainers lack flexibility, mobility, and sometimes, fidelity.  In addition, the “per seat” cost often creates bottlenecks and precludes meeting student throughput requirements.Given these limitations, many are interested in the efficiencies that can be gained by replacing the large and antiquated physical training infrastructure with PC-based training technologies.  The revolution in training comes down to two key variables:  cost and training effectiveness.  The cost variable is easy to understand.  Learning centers are constantly being asked to do more with less, and training is always an enticing target when dollars need to be found.  Revolutionary ways to reduce costs are receiving high-level attention and funding, and one attractive option is using personal computer (PC) -based training technologies.It is important to remember that reduced costs are not the only factor under consideration.  The armed services are also interested in improving training effectiveness.  By applying the science of learning, more effective training can be developed, allowing students to achieve higher levels of mastery, and to do so in a way that is more accessible, more portable, more powerful, and much less expensive.  In fact, training effectiveness is a key.  If a new strategy is adopted that decreases training effectiveness, costs will not be reduced, just shifted as performance and safety decline.This white paper focuses on how the Air Force is investigating the use of PC-based simulation to be employed in a standardized system for training command and control operations and procedures across multiple satellite systems.1.1	The RequirementCurrently the 533rd Training Squadron (TRS) and the 50th Operations Support Squadron (OSS) are using up to eight different training systems and simulators for Satellite Command & Control (C²) Initial Skills Training (IST) and Unit Qualification Training (UQT).  Each of these training systems or simulators is “stove-piped” in that they use different hardware, operating systems, networking capabilities, and proprietary software, and have different price ranges.  In addition, each system has its own maintenance concept and contract for sustainment.  Since many of the training systems are replicas of the operational systems, the sustainment of the training systems is frequently very costly.Unless a different approach for acquisition and implementation of satellite command and control training support is established, the introduction of new Air Force satellite and space systems will lead to even more “stove-piped” training systems and increased sustainment and configuration control costs.1.2	The VisionTo address this problem of multiple, stove-piped training systems, the Air Force Space Training Acquisition Office has established a vision for a single Standardized Space Trainer (SST) for C2 operator training that employs commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) PC hardware and operating systems, and one common training system architecture which will launch system-specific simulations developed to execute space operations training for a number of different satellite systems [1].  The SST would be ultimately used to support IST and UQT - specifically to teach fundamentals of behavior of common military satellites, sub-systems common to all satellites, space flight, orbital mechanics, and satellite operations (contact procedures, ground systems basics, troubleshooting, anomaly resolution, etc.).1.3	The SolutionAs a first step toward realizing the vision of an SST, the Air Force Research Laboratory, Mesa, AZ (AFRL, Mesa), and the Air Education and Training Command (AETC) provided augmentation funding to Sonalysts, Inc. under a Phase II Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) contract to develop a satellite operator proof-of-concept instructional simulation that supports multiple systems.  Specifically, this proof-of-concept SST will provide instructional simulation support for a subset of the Architectural Evolution Plan (AEP) and Defense Satellite Communications System (DSCS) satellite systems using advanced modeling, simulation, and visualization technologies.  The proof-of-concept SST is being designed to be expandable to support the full SST vision, so that all of the training features and content required to fully train a satellite operator can be incorporated as a single system upgrade or incrementally as additional funding is identified.2.	SST Concept of OperationsThe functional design being proposed by Sonalysts for a production SST includes the following operational “modes”: Learning Center, Instructor Control, Replay, and Administration.  These modes are described in the following paragraphs.In the Learning Center Mode, a student receives individual training (one student per PC) using a Closed-Loop Adaptive Training (CLAT) approach that includes:Adaptive Interactive Multimedia Instruction (IMI) – With IMI, the student receives multimedia instruction on the knowledge components of the course.  Adaptive learning technology is tailored in that it provides the specific instruction necessary to address a particular student’s deficiencies (as noted by the lack of mastery of specific learning objectives (LOs)).  The adaptive IMI will provide instruction as well as opportunities for the student to answer practice and assessment questions.Simulation-based Intelligent Tutoring – With this method, the student is presented with a simulated console for the appropriate satellite system.  The student will receive an appropriate stimulus that will prompt the student to action, and the simulation will then provide the information/interactions needed for the student to successfully resolve the situation.  The Domain Expert component of the tutor assesses the student’s actions (for coaching and mastery recording purposes) and provides immediate feedback on operator performance.  The simulation-based intelligent tutoring environment will provide the student with practice and assessment scenarios.In the Instructor Control Mode (ICM), the PCs in the SST system are networked together as required, allowing one PC to be designated as an instructor station and the other stations to be designated as student stations.  The instructor performs similar tasks, as currently performed when using the high-fidelity simulators (for example; scenario control, role-playing, etc.).  In this mode, the instructor provides coaching as appropriate, and assesses student performance.The Replay Mode supports student and/or instructor replay of ICM session files using a viewer specifically designed for that purpose.  Session replay could include all display and voice interactions.The Administration Mode is available to provide instructor/system administrator access to SST administrative functions; such as user management, group management, course management, and performance reporting.The proof-of-concept SST (currently under development) implements the ICM for a subset of the DSCS and AEP curriculum: the fundamentals of the Basic Operators Course (BOC).  The proof-of-concept simulation does not emulate all aspects of the DSCS and AEP systems, but instead will provide a subset of functionality that will sufficiently demonstrate the modeling capability and the ability for one software application to support two training systems.  In addition, a subset of the Administration Mode functionality is provided, specifically, user management functions to support controlling access to the proof-of-concept SST training application.The functional design described above is based, to a significant degree, on the training system implemented in the Antisubmarine Warfare/Anti-Surface Warfare Tactical Air Controller Intelligent Training Aid (ASTAC ITA).  The ASTAC ITA is currently being used by the U.S. Navy to train shipboard air controllers in the knowledge and skills required to tactically employ and direct helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft assigned to Naval units for the surveillance and prosecution of surface and subsurface threats [2].The simulation component of the ASTAC ITA and the SST both leverage the powerful simulation engine resident in Sonalysts Combat Simulations – Dangerous Waters®.  Sonalysts has been designing and producing sophisticated military gaming simulations for more than 10 years.  This high fidelity, micro-simulation supports not only the sophisticated modeling of vehicles and entities ranging from ships to missiles to satellites, but a number of control functions such as mission/scenario generation and editing, instructor-student console monitoring, and instructor vehicle control.In the Learning Center mode of the production SST vision, the simulation-based intelligent tutoring is supported by Sonalysts’ intelligent tutoring engine, ExpertTrain™.  ExpertTrain provides real-time student coaching, feedback, and performance recording in a dynamic simulation environment.  This specific technology has been proven as an effective instructional approach for skill-based training for radar operator training, artillery targeting and counter-fire operations, tactical maneuver of armored units, and operational employment of the multiple-launch rocket system (MLRS) [3].3.	Addressing the Deficiencies of Current Space TrainersThe proof-of-concept SST is designed to address a number of deficiencies in current USAF satellite C2 trainers.  Specifically:The current trainers are extremely expensive to maintain and often there is a separate trainer for each satellite system - each with its own costs and maintenance issues.  The proof-of-concept SST addresses this deficiency by establishing one integrated application to simulate multiple console interfaces.Many of the current trainers are difficult to set up, involving a time-consuming pre-configuration/setup before actual training can begin.  The proof-of-concept SST provides a simple and easy initialization phase, in which the instructor can select a scenario and begin a training session within minutes.The current trainers are difficult to shut down, often involving a time-consuming exiting process.  Since the proof-of-concept SST does not have any dependencies on real system hardware, the SST has a single function, instantaneous shut-down procedure.The current trainers do not have an instructor monitoring function, in which the instructor can view a student’s screen on his computer.  The inability of the current trainers to view the student’s actions increases the instructor workload and also increases the number of instructors required to monitor a training session.  The proof-of-concept SST provides the instructor with the ability to view any student’s console during a training session, with a quick and easy user interface.The current trainers require more instructor “hands-on” interaction when running the labs.  In particular, the instructors must remember to insert failures at the appropriate times for a given lab.  The proof-of-concept SST removes this burden from the instructors by providing scenarios that already have the failures and events pre-planned, so the labs are more consistent and do not involve as much instructor interaction to facilitate the scenario (thus allowing the instructors to focus their time on interacting with the students).Certain aspects of the current training systems are too dependent on the real-world operational system.  For example, with the DSCS training system, only one student can be communicating with a particular satellite at the same time.  The result is that in order to train multiple students each student has to communicate with a different satellite.  This makes it difficult for the instructor to present training information that is applicable to all the students in the class, which makes it challenging to teach a group of students on the same concept.  The proof-of-concept SST is not integrated with a real hardware system, so real-world constraints do not apply to this simulation.  Using the SST, the instructor can run a scenario with any satellite configuration that is appropriate for the training need.The instructors do not have the ability to pause, rewind, or fast-forward in the current training systems.  In the proof-of-concept SST, the instructor is able to pause or fast-forward time in the training session.Some of the current trainers have modeling inaccuracies or deficiencies that can confuse students or cause negative training.  The proof-of-concept SST will be engineered to model the behavior of the operational equipment as accurately as possible, thereby removing any negative training ramifications.In addition to overcoming the above deficiencies, the proof-of-concept SST:Accurately represents the screens and consoles of the DSCS and AEP command and control stations.  The representation looks and operates like the actual consoles.Does not rely on any real world hardware, the application can be configured to run in an unclassified mode.  Therefore the SST can be portable to use in a standard classrooms or labs, without the limitations of a secure area, or special hardware requirements.Presents several of the scenarios in the BOC for DSCS and AEP training.Provides a High Level Perspective (HLP) window that presents the effects of the student’s actions in a 3D representation of the satellite.  This feature enhances the student’s understanding of the operational environment by providing a visual representation of the ramifications of the student’s actions.  The HLP will aid in training space operations concepts by providing the students with a visualization of the consequences to the satellite vehicle based on the actions performed on the satellite console.4.	System Components4.1	HardwareThe SST system consists of a PC server and PC workstations.  The PC server functions as the primary instructor station.  For the purposes of the proof-of-concept SST, the hardware for the PC server and workstations are identical (the server has a slightly different software configuration).  The PC hardware configuration for each server/workstation includes:Intel® Core™ 2 Duo Processor E4300 (2MB L2 Cach,1.8GHz,800FSB);2 GB RAM;160 GB Hard Drive;CDROM Drive;nVidia GeForce 8800Video card;Matrox TripleHead2Go (This is an external piece of hardware that splits the display feed from the video card to three additional monitors.);Microsoft mouse (or compatible pointing device);Keyboard;Four 19” LCD Monitors, capable of 1280 x 1024 resolution;Network support (on motherboard or card) capable of operating on a 1 GB LAN; andSpeakers and Direct X capable sound support (onboard motherboard or card).4.2	SoftwareThe listed SST proof-of-concept software represents the recommended configuration to support optimum performance.SST PC server software requirements are:Windows XP Professional;Microsoft Office 2003 (Word/Excel/Access/PowerPoint);Microsoft Internet Explorer (IE) 6.0 (Service Pack (SP) 2) or greater;Microsoft Internet Information Server (IIS) version 5.1;Microsoft .NET Framework versions 1.1 and 2.0;Adobe Acrobat Reader 5.0 or greater;Microsoft Windows Media Player 10.0 or greater;Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP);File Transfer Protocol (FTP) Server; andOpen Database Connectivity (ODBC) Drivers.SST PC workstation software includes:Windows XP ProfessionalMicrosoft Office 2003 (Word/Excel/Access/PowerPoint);Microsoft IE 6.0 (SP 2) or greater;Microsoft .NET Framework versions 1.1 and 2.0;Adobe Acrobat Reader 5.0 or greater;Microsoft Windows Media Player 10.0 or greater;DirectX 9.0c or greater; andODBC Drivers.4.3	Operational ModesWhen the proof-of-concept SST is installed in a network configuration, all operational modes can be accessed to support instructor participation and administration.  PCs on the network are designated as instructor or student stations for operational and administrative purposes.The proof-of-concept SST can be operated in the Instructor Control and Administration modes:The ICM mode supports traditional SST training.  As described in section 2, the PCs in the SST network would be grouped as required, each group consisting of one PC designated as an instructor station and multiple PCs designated as student stations.  In this mode, all students undertake the same scenario individually, and the instructor provides coaching as appropriate and assesses student performance.  For the proof-of-concept SST, three PCs have been purchased.  This hardware configuration will allow for a 1 instructor to 2 student ratio.  The proof-of-concept SST will demonstrate the ease with which additional student stations could be connected to support a 1 instructor to 6 student ratio, if additional hardware were available (see Figure 4.1).Figure 4.1. Expanded Instructor Control Mode ConfigurationThe Administration mode for the proof-of-concept SST provides user management functions to support controlling access to the proof-of-concept SST training application.The system has been designed to ensure that features required to support the Learning Center Mode and additional ICM and Administration Mode functionality can be fully implemented in future versions of the SST.4.4	Modeling and SimulationThe SST simulation leverages the use of existing core micro-simulation technology resident in Sonalysts’ commercial game products.  Specifically, it employs:Components that provide 3D visualization, and audio support;Multi-user and network connectivity support;Interface modules (DLLs) – to define a GUI or interface from which the user can perform any number of actions; andProprietary database support.The proof-of-concept SST provides satellite console emulations representing the actual DSCS System and AEP system.  The consoles of the SST are designed to emulate the actual consoles as accurately as possible.  The SST includes, typical mouse/user input to the system; all displays necessary for the fundamentals of the BOC; and typical telemetry values and indications.For the SST proof-of-concept, the satellite and orbital mechanics are modeled.  However, fidelity will be limited to that required to provide support for the BOC scenarios and to properly display the satellite’s orientation in the HLP view.  More robust modeling can be implemented, as required, in future versions of the simulation.4.5	DisplaysThe DSCS emulation for the student station is displayed on three monitors, to emulate the current system.  One additional monitor is provided to display the HLP view.  The AEP emulation employs a similar display allocation approach.The instructor can monitor any of the student stations and their associated displays at any time during the training session.  Instructor monitoring and interaction with the students is implemented using an Instructor Control Screen (Figure 4.2).  This interface was specifically designed to provide the instructor with enough tools and functionality to allow him/her to monitor and assess six students simultaneously.By using indicators on the screen, the instructor can monitor only those students who are falling behind the expected scenario timeline, and provide targeted instruction as needed.  In addition, the instructor can change the operational situation on the fly by inserting faults or dynamic events during the simulation run.By enabling one instructor to effectively train six students, the instructor control screen should effectively increase training throughput and efficiency.Figure 4.2.  Instructor Control Screen5.	Transition to a Production Standardized Space Training SystemA description of Sonalysts’ proposed concept of operations for a production SST is provided in Section 2.  The underlying architecture of the proof-of-concept SST provides a solid baseline for a direct transition to a production system that can accommodate increased instructional support capability and an expanded inventory of supported satellite and space systems (Figure 4.3).5.1	Increased Instructional SupportThe proof-of-concept SST supports student practice and test in satellite C2 operational skills for the DSCS and AEP systems and allows instructors to monitor and assess multiple students.  The Sonalysts SST architecture also supports the addition of: adaptive IMI; real-time, simulation-based intelligent tutoring; and multi-station team training.The adaptive IMI capability offers the potential to support knowledge-based, individualized student training alleviating the need for hours of classroom lecture time and training in such specifics as displays, controls, and indicators.  It can also employ dynamic animations, video, and graphics to support instruction in satellite and geospatial theory and principals.Real-time, intelligent tutoring (or coaching) can also be integrated in the proposed Sonalysts SST architecture and provides the capability for students to receive “supervised” practice (without requiring the presence of an instructor) in tactical decision-making required to execute correct C2 procedures given a particular operational scenario or situation.  This has the potential to save many hours of instructor supervision, and allows lagging students to receive additional practice and advanced students to practice more challenging scenarios.Finally, one of the inherent capabilities of Sonalysts’ commercial simulation engine is the ability to support interactive play and communications between multiple stations in the same tactical scenario.  This unique capability facilitates realistic, effective inter-station training of satellite operations teams.Figure 4.3.  Production SSTSonalysts has implemented these instructional support capabilities in a number of other advanced training systems over the past several years.  Consequently, there is little or no technical risk.  Our experience in implementing these capabilities has also enabled us to accurately assess implementation costs when given an adequately detailed requirements specification.5.2	Expanded Satellite/Space System SupportBy virtue of our design and implementation of the proof-of-concept SST to support both the AEP and DSCS, we have validated that our trainer architecture can support the simulation and instructor monitoring for multiple satellite systems.  The architecture for our system was designed to be flexible and robust so that modifications to existing satellite simulations can be done easily, and new satellite systems can be integrated as plug-ins into the SST software architecture.  In fact, our architecture enables us to add simulation and instructor monitoring for virtually any satellite or space system given adequate technical documentation of console and display functionality and interfaces.  Source code for the system is not required – reducing dependence on the prime contractor.  And, because the simulation (and any associated instructional support) for each satellite system is provided with a separate set of files, changing training system simulation and instruction for each satellite system is literally a matter of selecting and loading a different file set.6.	SummaryThere are a number of new satellite and space systems either planned or under development.  The training technology being implemented with the proof-of-concept SST and proposed by Sonalysts for use in the production SST offers a quantum improvement, with minimal risk, over current satellite training support systems in terms of:Increased student throughput,Significant savings in hardware and software,Flexibility to rapidly accommodate satellite system updates and modifications,Cost-effective and timely development/addition of training software for new satellite/space systems,Increased instructor support, andPotential for increased training effectiveness through the addition of intelligent tutoring and/or adaptive IMI.The net result is a significantly improved and effective training capability for multiple Air Force space systems at a fraction of the cost of current space training and simulations systems.7.	References[1]	Sather, D., SME/SN Chief Engineer: “Standardized Space Trainer (SST)” Presentation, May 2006.[2]	Wayne, J.: “Embedded Training in an Optimized Manning Environment (N01-116)” Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Program, 2006 Annual Report.[3]	Wisher, R., McPherson, D., Abramson, L., Thornton, D., Dees, J.: “The Virtual Sand Table: Intelligent Tutoring for Field Artillery Training” U.S. Army Research Institute Report 1768, March 2001.Author BiographiesLAURA R. DIETZ is an Instructional Designer with Sonalysts, Inc.  She holds a Bachelors Degree in Psychology from the University of Connecticut, and has more than 7 years of experience in the design and development of advanced training systems and interactive courseware products for military training applications.  Ms. Dietz is the Project Leader for the SST proof-of-concept development effort.ROBERT P. COSTELLO is a Senior Software Engineer with Sonalysts, Inc.  He holds a Bachelors Degree in Mathematics from Holy Cross University and a Masters in Computer Science from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.  Mr. Costello has more than 14 years of experience in the design and development of commercial military computer games and DoD training simulations.DAVID S. COLEMAN is the Manager for the Training Systems, Operations, and Technology Group at Sonalysts, Inc.  He holds a Bachelors Degree from the U.S. Naval Academy, and has more than 27 years of experience in the management of military training system and interactive courseware programs.