The Transformational Potential of Modeling and Simulation Technology When Applied Across the Lifecycle of Large Scale Systems of Systems (SoS) EnterprisesPaul N. LoweThe Boeing Company HYPERLINK "mailto:paul.n.lowe@boeing.com" paul.n.lowe@boeing.comMark E. RieckenSAIC HYPERLINK "mailto:mark.e.riecken@saic.com" mark.e.riecken@saic.comPaul WatsonU.S. Army Program Executive Office for Simulation Training and Instrumentation (PEO-STRI) HYPERLINK "mailto:paul.watson@us.army.mil" paul.watson@us.army.mil Keywords:System of Systems (SoS), Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA), FEDEP, TransformationABSTRACT:  What is the potential benefit achieved by using M&S throughout the entire lifecycle of a system or System of Systems (SoS)?  We consider the case of an ongoing U.S. Army Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) program, Future Combat Systems (FCS), and how M&S has been used, and is planned to be used, throughout the lifecycle of this System of Systems (SoS).  Specifically we focus on the early stages of the System Development and Demonstration (SDD) phase, the software / system development lifecycle (SDLC) in use (Win-Win Spiral), with M&S fine-tuning using the Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP), and examine specific probe points at which it is considered beneficial to collect M&S insights.  We examine the nature of this interaction during Requirements Development, Design, and Integration and Test.  We explore the difficulty of maintaining coordinated interfaces between M&S and the transforming enterprise, and the need to establish probe points that foster the ability of M&S to Pace the evolution of the enterprise.  We learn from this examination the need for a higher degree of standards convergence between M&S software and Operational software.  We examine the relationship between enterprise transformation and M&S, and the potential for M&S technology to dramatically contribute to the transformational benefits of the enterprise.  We further extrapolate from this particular case study and offer some generalizations about the promising trends for application of M&S to other large scale enterprises – especially those with intangible or difficult to quantify parameters, embedded among more easily quantifiable parameters, and those enterprises undergoing transformation.  Finally, we propose to examine several additional probe points of the lifecycle of the FCS program in future papers using this same methodology.1. Introduction	The U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) has decades of experience in applying Modeling and Simulation (M&S) technology to a broad range of military purposes.   The US Army has adapted the concept of Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) within the Simulation and Modeling for Acquisition, Requirements and Training (SMART) initiative.  SMART capitalizes on M&S tools and technologies to address the issues of system development, operational readiness, and life cycle cost through the combined efforts of the requirements, training and operations, and acquisition communities.  SMART is expected to yield three significant benefits to the Army that are of paramount importance to the Army Transformation: Reduced total ownership costs and sustainment burden for fielded systems throughout their service lives; reduced time required to explore concepts, develop and field new or upgraded systems; and increased military worth of fielded systems as we simultaneously optimize force structure, doctrine, tactics, techniques and  procedures; and facilitate concurrent fielding of systems with their training devices [1].The Future Combat Systems (FCS) Program has incorporated the SMART initiative within its Acquisition Strategy, and has incorporated SMART principles within the execution plans for the System Development and Demonstration (SDD) phase of the program.  This paper will provide an overview of how SMART is being applied to FCS, and will introduce many topics of specialized M&S technology application to a complex enterprise.  It is the intent of the authors to use this paper to launch a series of related papers regarding M&S application to FCS.  This series has already begun [2].1.1 FCS BackgroundThe US Army is in the midst of an ongoing process of transformation with a broad mandate to change across many domains.  The FCS Brigade Combat Team (BCT) is the material solution for the future force.  FCS (BCT) is the Army’s premier modernization program, consisting of a family of manned and unmanned systems, connected by a common network, that enables the modular force.  The FCS(BCT) provides soldiers and leaders with leading edge technologies and capabilities allowing them to dominate in complex environments.  It is a joint (across all the military services) networked (connected via advanced communications) system of systems (one large system made up of individual systems, the network, and most importantly, the soldier) connected via an advanced network architecture that will enable levels of joint connectivity, situational awareness and understanding, and synchronized operations heretofore unachievable.  It will operate as a System of Systems (SoS) that will network existing systems, systems already under development, and systems to be developed to meet the requirements of the Army’s Future Force.  Specific FCS (BCT) capabilities will be spun out of the FCS (BCT) program to provide enhanced capabilities for the entire modular force [3].1.2 FCS and M&S Transformational EnterprisesThe art and science of M&S is often called upon to conceptualize, investigate, and assist in developing insight into complex enterprises, especially enterprises under transformation – which is to say most enterprises of interest.  The term enterprise is used here simply to mean a collection of resources that share some common goals.  It is noteworthy, although not surprising,  that the M&S used for such purposes is often undergoing transformation itself.  The M&S used in the SDD phase of the FCS program is an example.  The development of the FCS (BCT) is unarguably a complex enterprise.  What makes the M&S used to support the development of the BCT especially interesting is that, by necessity, this M&S must be developed during the same time frame as the FCS (BCT) itself.  The complex FCS Enterprise relies upon the maturation and application of a broad collection of advanced technologies by a large number of people and organizations representing the requirements, training and operations, and acquisition communities.  During the SDD phase of its lifecycle, the end-state of the FCS Enterprise (to include Doctrine, Organizations, Training, Leader Development, Materiel, Personnel and Facilities (DOTLMPF)) can only be conceptualized, with this conceptualization maturing over time as more and more of the systems that make up the SoS are matured and realized.  The conceptualization of FCS is occurring across many levels such as contributory technologies, engineering disciplines, individual systems, critical “ilities” (survivability, lethality, supportability, reliability, etc.), and ultimately these concepts coalesce at the SoS level.  Proper conceptualization within and across these enterprise levels requires specialized knowledge of how these levels contribute to the shared common goals of the enterprise.  This knowledge specialization often correlates to specialized M&S applications that aid in the conceptualization.  For instance, advanced Computer Aided Design tools produce models used by the specialized engineering and design knowledge professionals, while network analysis and modeling tools support specialized network engineering professionals.  Thus, the M&S Enterprise organizes itself to support the FCS Enterprise.Good top-down systems engineering processes are applied to both of these inter-related enterprises: the development of the System of Systems (SoS) itself; and the development of the M&S environment that supports its development.  Keeping these two transformations synchronized and harmonized is a daunting task.  The original SBA intent was to develop a somewhat closely coupled framework of interlocking M&S intended uses.   As the SoS development has progressed, and taking stock of the state of the M&S Enterprise in particular, it is observed by the authors and others that, while the integral framework of a single, unifying structure is not in place, there is a coherent set of Communities of Practice (COP) of M&S specialization.  These COP have emerged in an orderly fashion through local good M&S engineering practices.  In other words, COP have naturally formed around key M&S intended uses, each having its own somewhat distinct business model.  Often these M&S COP have a corollary within the FCS Enterprise, although this organization is not essential. The keys to harmonizing these COP is in recognizing their boundaries; in identifying their principal technical contributions to the overall enterprise (both the M&S and the SoS); and in identifying and facilitating the interfaces between these COP.  These interfaces are often in the form of core assets – a term familiar from the product line literature.1.3 Application of SMART within the FCS ProgramSince the inception of the FCS program, the Army has recognized that FCS will rely heavily upon M&S technology in order to achieve the systematic conceptualization of the complex FCS Enterprise, both within COP of specialized technology and at the broader SoS level.  Along with this recognition came an understanding that careful stewardship of the Army M&S community would be required to fulfill the vision of the scientific and efficient application of M&S to a host of challenging problems across FCS.  This stewardship is embodied in part by several Army commitments to FCS SMART: the FCS operational requirements include explicit requirements for Embedded Training – a capability that relies heavily upon the successful application of M&S technology; in 2004, PM FCS(BCT), US Army Test and Evaluation Command (ATEC), US Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC), and US Army Research and Development Command (RDECOM) signed a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) to establish the Cross Command Collaboration Effort (3CE) to provide a set of consistent M&S tools, data, and business processes used by each organization [4];  and early in the FCS program, the Program Manager, Future Combat Systems – Brigade Combat Team (PM FCS(BCT)) incorporated explicit requirements for SMART tasks and activities within the SDD contract for the FCS Lead Systems Integrator (LSI).  This paper will focus primarily on the application of SMART during SDD, but the authors expect other papers to address 3CE and Embedded Training.  Further, these other two Army commitments will be shown to have a direct impact on the programmatic decisions being made within the FCS SMART arena.PM FCS(BCT) and the LSI are closely partnered in the effort to implement SMART for FCS.  The PM and the LSI have established a combined M&S Office (MSO) to serve as the program-wide M&S authority.  The MSO has the prime responsibility within the program for the management of all FCS Modeling and Simulations, which means it must:Establish program priorities, plans, and processes for M&S acquisition, development and integration, leveraging of ongoing M&S research, and emerging prioritiesProvide standardized M&S policies, processes, procedures, standards, tools and trainingEnsure proper linkage of M&S derived requirements and architecture to program requirements and architecture This last responsibility is where we examine the relationship between enterprise transformation and M&S, and the potential for M&S technology to dramatically contribute to the transformational benefits of the enterprise.  The transformational characteristics envisioned for FCS span across all aspects of DOTLMPF.  The application of M&S technology to FCS within the SMART paradigm similarly transcends DOTLMPF.2. The FCS M&S EnterpriseThe FCS M&S Vision is to have an integrated M&S capability that facilitates and enables all aspects of the development, procurement and fielding of the FCS (BCT), throughout the lifecycle of the program.  The FCS M&S Strategy is to achieve this Vision through the application of M&S management approaches that enable the development of a set of common, integrated Live, Virtual, and Constructive (LVC) simulation capabilities that are used across the program and throughout the program lifecycle.  The MSO has recently evolved the M&S management approach for the FCS System of Systems Simulation Framework (S2F) from a Product Line approach to an Enterprise Management approach.  The Enterprise Management approach is believed to be a better choice to facilitate the maturation of the extant communities of M&S practice and application across the complex FCS Enterprise.  This section will describe the S2F and the rationale supporting the transition to Enterprise Management techniques.2.1 The Framework DescriptionThe S2F, as a framework, is defined as the top-level collection of models and simulations, battlespace environments, tools, and execution environments required to support the lifecycle of the FCS program.  These four categories of S2F assets were chosen principally to describe the modes of variance in M&S intended uses across FCS.  That is, intended uses will differ from one another in the particular models and simulations employed, the battlespace environments (terrain, forces, scenarios, etc.) these models and simulations operate within, the tools used to apply these models and simulations to particular problems, and the execution environments (computing hardware) they will reside and execute within.   REF _Ref161798919 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 1 provides a notion of the S2F organization, and provides some examples of assets that can be collected within these broad categories. SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1: S2F Notional OrganizationThe purpose of the S2F is to influence the development of simulation across the program to facilitate reuse and integration.  S2F as a framework is both an organizing principle and a collection of assets that can be used in a variety of combinations to meet the needs of users for a variety of usages.  The S2F is sometimes referred to as the M&S Library.  S2F is intended to be composeable or configurable to satisfy a broad range of M&S intended uses.  Different instances of S2F can be referred to as Event Configurations, although this description may not be appropriate for all instances.2.2 S2F Enterprise Management RationaleWithin a Product Line management approach, the focus is on identifying the Commonality & Variability across the products within the product line, and then capitalizing upon the commonality while still supporting the variability important to different product customers.  Product Line management and control is accomplished by developing and applying cohesive Product Line Engineering processes and artifacts at the outset of the development effort.  The necessary up-front investment in Product Line Engineering can be a significant barrier to organizations interested in pursuing the Product Line approach.The transition to an Enterprise Management approach for FCS S2F was based in large part on the recognition of extant, mature, and cohesive COP of M&S specialization within the S2F scope.  It was further recognized that there are native/organic S2F enterprise laws that can be applied across and within these COP.  In the Enterprise Management approach, the focus is on enabling community efficiency while managing cross-COP enterprise commonality.  COP contain cohesive M&S engineering processes and artifacts, but the requirement for a single set of cohesive Product Line Engineering processes and artifacts supporting the entire scope of S2F is somewhat relaxed.  There is still a high degree of systematic reuse anticipated across COP within this approach, but it is achieved through the management of easily identified (due to the mature nature of the extant COP) cross-COP common (or core) assets.The primary trade-off involved in the decision between Product Line and Enterprise approaches is between up-front cost and time to create processes and assets in the Product Line model, and reduced potential for long-term software reuse in the Enterprise model.  As was noted earlier, though, the Army commitments to the 3CE process and the mandate for Embedded Training are mitigating factors when considering long-term software reuse potential.  The LSI’s contract with the Army requires the M&S team to first consider reuse of Government Furnished Software (GFX) for M&S capabilities needed by FCS before developing some new M&S capability.  The rationale for this is that there is an extensive M&S capability base already available within the Army and DoD community involved in the FCS program.  The result of this requirement has been the selection of extant and mature GFX to satisfy critical FCS M&S needs.  In fact, in many cases the same GFX has been chosen for use within different COP of specialization within the program.  Thus, long-term M&S software  reuse on FCS appears to be driven more by the availability of reusable GFX than by the systematic Product Line Engineering activities first envisioned for the program.  Given the limited resources devoted to M&S management on the program, the trade-off between Product Line and Enterprise approaches is biased towards Enterprise.2.3 S2F Enterprise Management ExplainedThe S2F Enterprise is defined as the collection of applications of M&S technology that have a direct bearing on supporting the lifecycle of the FCS program.  These applications allow S2F enterprise users to study, investigate, understand, analyze, train, or support complex aspects of the FCS SoS.  While the Framework concept organizes FCS M&S around asset types (models and simulations, tools, etc.), the Enterprise concept organizes FCS M&S around extant communities of M&S practice on the program.  Both organizing concepts have utility for FCS, and both will continue to be employed as appropriate.We noted earlier that the S2F COP we consider are organized around extant and mature communities of M&S practice.  These M&S communities share common or closely related M&S technology applications, schedules, budgets, and close-in technical objectives and contribute to the overall objectives of the S2F Enterprise.  COP have evolved and, to some degree, self-formed around the basic M&S challenges of the program.  The identification of distinct COP is meant to facilitate S2F Enterprise Management and Control focus on issues that are both critical and pervasive across the FCS program and its lifecycle.   REF _Ref161800150 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 2 describes the COP the MSO is currently considering for this purpose.  The designation of COP will vary and  evolve over time.  The Enterprise Management and Control emphasis placed on particular COP will also vary and evolve depending upon the criticality of specific COP in relation to program priorities and objectives.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2: S2F Enterprise Communities of Practice2.4 S2F Enterprise-wide M&S Engineering ObjectivesAll successful Product Line endeavors start with a set of clearly defined Product Line objectives that frequently translate to Product Line Architecture objectives.  Typical objectives are expressed again in terms of “ilities”, and might include usability, scalability, extensibility, etc.  A successful M&S Enterprise endeavor must have similar top-level objectives that can be translated into Enterprise-wide M&S engineering objectives.  The MSO has identified two critical M&S capabilities necessary to support the SDD phase of FCS: our M&S must be Predictive in each use; and our M&S must be Adaptive to multiple uses.  Predictability is essential to FCS M&S so that M&S-based results can be used to judge the maturity of the FCS SoS Enterprise as it evolves through SDD.  Since the FCS material (a full FCS (BCT) set of FCS platforms) will not exist until post SDD, M&S-based events are the only viable alternative to investigate FCS at the FCS (BCT) and above scale.  The large-scale M&S-based events conducted throughout SDD must have some measure of verified and validated predictability in order for their results to be relied upon by program decision-makers.  Predictability applies to small scale M&S applications within many important COP of specialized engineering within the FCS Enterprise as well.  For instance, critical network technologies required to realize the FCS SoS are rapidly evolving within the specialized network and radio engineering communities.  These communities must have M&S capabilities that are predictive in nature to allow them to make intelligent trades between candidate designs.Adaptability is necessary to allow FCS M&S to rapidly change to meet the evolving interface and functional response needs associated with the evolving FCS operational capabilities.  In particular, the SoS-level test approach for FCS is to integrate incrementally realized operational capabilities (primarily operational software) with virtual-fidelity platform simulators in order to exercise and evaluate that operational capability.  The resultant Integrated Platform Simulations (IPSs) are then federated together in the SoS Integrated Laboratory (SoSIL) with the FCS Simulation Environment (FSE) (a constructive-fidelity federation) to provide  a rich operational context for the SoS tests.  The evolutionary nature of the operational capabilities under test demand that both the IPSs and FSE be adaptive to accommodate changing operational interfaces and functional response to increasingly mature and complex operational stimuli.  Closer inspection of the functional response requirements within this SoS-level Integrated Lab and Range COP reveals the need for another mode of FCS M&S adaptation.  That is, at this SoS-level the appropriate representation of network and radio phenomena is essential to achieve predictive results, just as these representations are essential within the Network Analysis and Modeling COP.  This means FCS M&S must be adaptive across COP where these COP share a similar M&S technology application.Predictability and Adaptability objectives can be translated into Enterprise-wide M&S engineering objectives.  That is, Predictability is translated to Credibility (or perhaps Accreditability using a more familiar M&S term), and cross-COP Adaptability is translated into Consistency.  Feedback enabled abstraction can be used to achieve cross-COP M&S Consistency.  For instance, in the case of network and radio phenomena, we will use relatively more detailed representations in the focused Network Analysis and Modeling COP than those used at the SoS-level.  In managing Enterprise-wide Consistency, we will utilize feedback from the more detailed models to verify that results obtained in SoS-level abstractions of these phenomena are on average consistent with the more detailed models.  Achievement of verifiable consistency will then support findings that our models are Credible within both COP.Over the lifecycle of the program, the S2F Enterprise Management Approach coupled with the S2F Enterprise-wide body of evidence regarding the Credibility and Consistency of core assets will support other “ilities” more commonly associated with Product Lines.2.5 S2F Enterprise Management FundamentalsThe fundamentals of M&S Enterprise Management are straightforward and can be applied with minimal program perturbation during the midst of the SDD phase of development.  The first principle is recognition and agreement on the identity and scope of the COP.  It should be recognized that not all COP need to persist throughout the development phase, nor do all COP require equal attention at the Enterprise level.  It should also be recognized that systems engineering, development, and integration methods and processes need not be identical across COP.  Some COP may make heavy use of the Federation method to integrate, while others may rely upon a single simulation (such as a closed form analytical model) to meet their needs, thus avoiding the added complexity associated with creating and managing a federation.  Identification of COP is complete once the Enterprise Management team has agreed on their identification and definition – and COP leads have been identified and committed to the concept.  The second principle is identification of key metrics or capability maturity levels within the COP.  These are the dozen or so major contributions that this COP will make over its lifetime – contributions to the overall M&S Enterprise, and ultimately to the development of the SoS.  These metrics should be easily understandable within the M&S community as well as SoS leadership.  As with any metrics, they should be measurable, but the measurement methodologies may need to be negotiated between Enterprise Management and the COP leads.  The third and final principle is the identification of the major input and output flow between COP.  In the case of M&S, this flow is often in the form of validated data or core assets shared between COP.3. Using the FEDEP in the FCS ProgramThe High Level Architecture (HLA) FEDEP is a structured, generic systems engineering approach to the development of distributed systems. The specific intent of the FEDEP is to guide federation developers through the series of steps necessary to design and build HLA federations. Rather than dictating a one-size-fits all solution for all users, the FEDEP provides a common overarching process framework into which lower-level domain-specific management and/or engineering methodologies can be easily integrated. The FEDEP was originally developed under DoD sponsorship. However, with the approval of the IEEE 1516 series of specifications in September 2000, an effort was initiated to incorporate the FEDEP into the IEEE 1516 standard. The primary rationale for this effort was to improve the quality of the document through an open standards process designed to capture the ideas and experiences of a much broader user community. Initial standardization efforts were conducted under the auspices of the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO), but responsibility for standardization was formally transitioned to the IEEE in June 2002. The IEEE version of the FEDEP (IEEE 1516.3) was successfully balloted in November 2002, and formally approved by the IEEE Revisions Committee (RevCom) in April 2003. [5]The HLA FEDEP is defined according to a set of seven major steps. An illustration of the seven-step HLA FEDEP is provided in Figure 3. Figure 3: FEDEP Top Level View3.1 The FCS SLM Overlay to the FEDEPExperiences with SBA programs have shown that event federations are often not treated as first class objects, i.e. not having sufficient resources allocated to the federation itself prior to the event.  The FCS Program is tailoring the FEDEP, mapping it with a spiral lifecycle model to help assure that the key stakeholders are involved in the development of a core set of federation processes and artifacts that facilitate reuse of resources.  Central to this tailoring process is the identification of a spiral lifecycle model (SLM) and the SoS-level review processes conducted through each phase of that lifecycle, as applied to the SBA programs which will use these processes.The Win-Win Spiral Lifecycle Model described by Boehm [6] and others identifies the merit of key stakeholders collaboratively conducting product reviews throughout the lifecycle of a product.  For large SBA SoS programs the number and frequency of those reviews becomes increasingly important.  At regular anchor points throughout the lifecycle of a spiral phase, collaborative reviews that look at the work planned and the work completed at the point of the review serve as a decision gate for whether or not to proceed forward.FCS has tailored the SLM processes and artifacts to meet their specific development needs, creating the FCS SLM Overlay to the FEDEP described by Lowe, et.al. [2]  The tailoring process begins using the spiral lifecycle described by Boehm and its focus on a Life Cycle Objectives (LCO) and a Life Cycle Architecture (LCA) review, each occurring at the beginning of sequential phases.  Over the span of each phase, key stakeholders collaborative conduct reviews to carefully evaluate the status of the work done to that point in time.  At the SoS-level, the SLM is tailored to include the following reviews that will occur during each phase of the Program:Definition Anchor Point (DAP)Guidance for a particular build flows down from the SoS level engineering iteration Definition Anchor Point (DAP) to the prime item level and then down to the suppliersPlanning Anchor Point (PAP)During the Planning Anchor Point, horizontal integration at the SoS level across all of the applicable suppliers is a key focus.  The goal is to ensure consistency of plans and schedules to ascertain that there are no mismatches in terms of supplier identified build dependencies.Readiness Anchor Point (RAP)The RAP is the most significant checkpoint associated with each build.  The RAP represents a commitment across all levels of a program that the software build can be successfully implemented within the build budget and schedule using the documented architectures and designs, and that risk mitigation plans exist for all potential shortfalls.Assessment Anchor Point (AAP)The AAP is conducted after program stakeholders review lessons learned and identify process improvements that can be made in subsequent phases.Each review is conducted collaboratively between key stakeholders such that the review is not narrowly focused on a single product, but considers the progress across the entire program.Each of these anchor point reviews assume a collection of input artifacts from the previous phase and the generation of output artifacts that mature through the next phase as evidence of readiness to proceed.  This collection of artifacts can vary depending on the needs and focus of the enterprise COP utilized for developing an event configuration following the SLM Overlay to the FEDEP processes. 4. The S2F Enterprise Pacing the FCS EnterpriseThis section will explore S2F Enterprise adaptability needed to support the evolution of the FCS Enterprise as it evolves during the SDD phase of the program.  Two potentially conflicting considerations are predominant in S2F Enterprise Management with regard to adaptability:  the requirement to first consider reuse of GFX for FCS M&S needs; and the Transformational nature of the FCS Enterprise.  While the catalogue of existing DoD and Army M&S products is extensive, these products are most often developed with Current Force or soon to emerge capabilities in mind.  FCS M&S must be predictive across a broad range of transformational technologies and capabilities that have not yet been realized.  Adaptability must be achieved within each part of the framework.  That is: models and simulations must adapt to faithfully represent physical and behavioral characteristics associated with the evolving systems and SoS design concepts (e.g. a model of the FCS network); tools must adapt to evolving investigative needs to conceptualize, study and understand the complex FCS Enterprise (e.g. a tool to collect and analyze network performance data); operational environments must adapt to provide adequate operational context (e.g. a model of a complex urban environment that might challenge the nominal performance of the radio frequency network); and all of these must adapt to execute in increasingly constrained computing environments (e.g. the operational FCS must have an embedded network modeling capability suitable for network planning while deployed).  To manage in the presence of these considerations you first must select existing GFX (and commercial) M&S assets that can provide an enduring and flexible foundation, and then isolate and focus upon those components in that foundation that will be most subject to adaptation and change to keep pace with the evolution of FCS.4.1 The FCS Battle Command System and Service Oriented Network Transactions – the FCS M&S ChallengeEarly in the FCS program, modeling of the network was identified as a pacing problem.  The S2F Enterprise-wide pursuit of credible and consistent network models has been underway for several years.  This pursuit has yielded a rapidly maturing set of core assets that are enabling the comprehensive conceptualization of the network.  It remains a constant challenge to keep this set of M&S assets up to date, or in pace with the evolution of network topology designs, waveforms, protocols, quality of service mechanisms, and other network management concepts. The collective and broad network analysis and modeling community of practice associated with FCS is on the threshold of achieving a robust M&S capability base that will provide the fundamental infrastructure required to investigate the transport layer of the network.  We are now poised to apply this capability base to complex studies of how all layers of the network will perform and behave in an integrated fashion.   REF _Ref162250257  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 4 depicts the layered view of the FCS network.From a SoS perspective, we would like to have insight into the integrated FCS Battle Command System (BCS) in use by a full complement of FCS (BCT) soldiers within various realistic operational contexts with all layers of the network under representative load.  Unfortunately, we can only approximate these conditions during SDD.  Section 2.4 briefly described the strategy for SoS-level integration within the Integrated Lab and Range COP.  This strategy relies upon an evolving and maturing federation of constructive and virtual simulations within a lab environment that can serve as a test harness of sorts for the investigation, analysis and evaluation of incremental builds of operational BCS software and capabilities.  Integrated Platforms are first delivered as Simulations (IPSs) by each of the FCS platform integration teams.  Over time, these teams will enhance these IPSs to add Emulations of specific platform systems, and eventually Integrated Platform Prototypes (IPPTs) that can be utilized in a Range environment.  This evolution is already occurring within the Experimentation portion of the program, thus we have introduced Live simulation (prototypes on a range) to this Integrated Lab and Range COP.Figure 4: FCS Layered NetworkThe BCS is by design a Distributed System, consisting of platform-specific instances of BCS distributed to every system or platform in the FCS (BCT) all working together utilizing Service-Oriented mechanisms.  The IPSs provide a robust system-level context for each platform-specific instance of the incremental BCS software.  That is, we instantiate the BCS software designed to operate on each of the FCS platforms, and we then interface that instance with the associated Platform Simulation to provide stimuli for that instantiation.  As the BCS design and incremental capability evolves through SDD, so must the IPS evolve and pace the BCS.The IPSs delivered to represent the FCS Manned Ground Vehicles (MGVs) are unique in that they include accommodations for each crew member associated with the type of vehicle they represent.  This allows a subset of the soldiers in an FCS (BCT) to interact as a unit within the SoSIL.  There are insufficient MGV and other platform IPSs in the SoSIL to represent a full FCS (BCT), so we utilize the FSE to represent additional FCS platforms as well as Current Force and Threat systems and forces included in the operational context.  In order to preserve the correct Service-Oriented interfaces for the instances of BCS associated with each IPS, the FSE must stimulate and respond to Service-Oriented network transactions at the platform level.  The Computer Generated Force (CGF) representations of FCS platforms must appear on the network as though they are themselves carrying instances of the distributed BCS.  The concept of using CGFs to stimulate complex C4ISR systems is certainly not new, but the Transformational nature of the FCS (BCT) poses significant new challenges for the CGF models.  The mix of CGF and IPS representations must also address new mixed fidelity fair fight concerns associated with FCS.  For instance, a key use of the network in FCS is to distribute information from a wide collection of battlespace sensors to gain superior situational understanding.  In the SoSIL federation, the FCS sensors of concern are split between IPS and CGF platform representations.  The M&S experts must be careful to ensure that these representations present their sensor data to the BCS using the same interfaces, similar fidelity, similar reporting frequency, with appropriate interactions with other battlespace entities and the environment.Figure 5: Example FSE-IPS Federation REF _Ref162243687 \h Figure 5 shows an example federation configuration that utilizes the FSE, the IPS and other systems.  There are two networks from a functional perspective, although they may share the same physical network: the Simulated Tactical Network and the Simulation Support Network.  Major components of the FSE are shown on the bottom of this figure.4.2 Convergence of Operational and M&S StandardsExperience on FCS serves to further the growing body of evidence that supports the need for greater convergence between M&S and operational standards within DoD.  The need to pace the evolution of the FCS Enterprise is a strong motivator to have common standards when it comes to how both M&S and BCS access the tactical network.  FCS supports the longstanding economic argument for greater convergence in data models used within M&S and operational systems, to include the most pressing problem of geospatial data modeling and formats.  A new need for convergence is due to the requirement for embedded simulation.  While embedded, FCS simulation applications are required to operate within the same computing environment as the BCS applications, and they must rely upon the System of Systems Common Operating Environment (SoSCOE) for the computing services typically required for a simulation to operate.  We expect future papers to deal with these topics in greater detail.5. Transformational Potential of M&SWe have recognized that successful execution of SBA to support the development of a System of Systems requires significant effort in and of itself.  This effort need not be overwhelming, especially if the M&S Enterprise makes the effort periodically to compare with an open mind, the M&S plans and strategies in contrast with how the M&S Enterprise itself has actually evolved.  The investment remains non-trivial, but can be considered a necessary one to keep pace with the complexity of the enterprise it seeks to model.  M&S has the potential to greatly serve the SoS enterprise in the development of FCS operational standards.  This is especially true in the area of Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) with M&S serving to assist the transformation from the current force Army Battle Command System (ABCS) to the Future Force C4ISR Network.  M&S serves as a check and balance to the development of the operational SoS.FCS may be the most complex integration effort ever attempted within the US Army, and perhaps within all of DoD.  There are numerous transformational aspects of this program, and numerous rationales for embarking upon an effort of this scale to bring the benefits of these transformations together in the same time and material solution.  Careful study of FCS reveals many facets of how M&S is supporting the development and effective employment of critical technologies in a SoS context.  Army leadership has placed special emphasis on the importance of M&S to the success of FCS.  The authors have reached the conclusion that the continued and pervasive application of M&S technology to FCS is key to realizing many of the objectives for the program.  Our experience on FCS further leads us to conclude that M&S technology may be an essential ingredient in the success of many enterprises with similar transformational complexity.  It remains a challenge, we believe, for the M&S community (and SISO in particular) to build the business case for the continued pursuit of M&S as a fundamental scientific and technological capability.  Like many within SISO, we believe such business cases must be made in order to ensure that there are adequate M&S organizations, people, and assets available to meet the growing needs of transformational endeavors across our free society.  We are committed to sharing our experience on the FCS program as the program evolves to foster a more thorough understanding of how M&S may contribute to transformation.  We feel this topic may benefit from inclusion within some SISO forum, such as the Economics of M&S Standing Study Group [7]6. Additional Probe PointsSince both the M&S Enterprise and the SoS Enterprise are each enormously complex, and since we are looking for ways to determine how the M&S Enterprise can pace the SoS Enterprise, it is helpful to identify certain probe points that may provide such insight.  Probe points may be critical points in a process (such as an SDD milestone or a SLM anchor point), or examinations of specific intended uses of M&S.  The FCS program has already executed some significant M&S-based events that are providing insight into SoS development and is on the threshold of even more comprehensive M&S events.  One such major probe point will be at the completion of such events associated with the completion of the program’s first build, or Integrated Phase I (IP1).Additional such probe points to be considered in future papers include:Interoperability between assets within a COP and between COP.  Identification and use of a collection of key metrics that can be used to manage the design and integration of a SoS collection of federates.  7. ReferencesUS Army Modeling and Simulation Management Office, “Simulation and Modeling for Acquisition, Requirements and Training (SMART) Execution Plan”, 5 September 2000. Paul N. Lowe, Katherine L. Morse, Gary W. Fuller, and Mark E. Riecken: Enhancing the Simulation Based Acquisition Process Using a Spiral Lifecycle Model based Federation Development and Execution Process, 2007 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 25-30 March, 2007Program Manager Future Combat System (Brigade Combat Team) (PM FCS (BCT)), “Future Combat System (Brigade Combat Team) (FCS (BCT)) White Paper”, 11 April 2006, http://www.army.mil/fcs/whitepaper/FCSWhitepaper(11_Apr_06).pdf  [Note: This Whitepaper describes an earlier version of the Family of Systems.]Memorandum Of Agreement (MOA) Among The US Army Training And Doctrine Command (TRADOC) Futures Center (FC),  The US Army Test And Evaluation Command (ATEC), The US Army Research, Development, And Engineering Command (RDECOM) And The Program Manager, Unit Of Action (PM UA) [this organization is now named Program Manager Future Combat Systems (Brigade Combat Team)], 14 September, 2004.Robert Lutz, Roy Scrudder, Reed Little, and Katherine L. Morse: IEEE 1516.3: The HLA Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP), Proceedings of the Spring 2003 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 2003.Boehm, Barry, et. al.: Spiral Acquisition of Software-Intensive Systems of Systems, April 19, 2004.http://www.sisostds.org/, “Economics of M&S SSG Economics of M&S SSG SISO”, Chair: Dr.Tim Cooley USAF Academy, Vice Chair: Pierre Gauvin CDN CFEC/SECO Author BiographiesPAUL N. LOWE is the FCS IS&T MS&I Simulation System Engineer.  He received his B.S. in mathematics (1979), and his M.S. in Geography (1984) from the University of California, Riverside.  Paul has worked in the computer industry for over 30 years, specializing in the areas of high performance computing, simulation, image processing, geographic information systems, database management, and knowledge management. DR. MARK RIECKEN is the Chief Engineer for the FCS M&S Office (MSO). He holds a Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering from the University of New Mexico (1988), an M.S. in Physics from Vanderbilt University (1983), and a B.S. in Physics from the University of Evansville (1980). Dr. Riecken has worked in the information technology and engineering sectors for over 20 years, primarily in the areas of military systems modeling and simulation, test and evaluation, and analysis.PAUL WATSON is the Deputy Associate Director for the US Army Program Manager Future Combat Systems – Brigade Combat Team (PM FCS(BCT)) Modeling and Simulation Office (MSO).  He is a US Government employee for the US Army Program Executive Office for Simulation, Training and Instrumentation (PEO STRI) located in Orlando, FL.  Since 1988 he has held a wide variety of engineering and program management jobs in the Live, Virtual and Constructive simulation domains for the Navy and Army.   Mr. Watson holds a Master of Science degree in Electrical Engineering from the University of Central Florida, and a Bachelor of Science degree in Electrical Engineering from the Florida State University. Product Line management and control can also be applied after substantial development has already taken place, but not without significant cost, schedule disruption, and architectural re-alignment within the M&S Enterprise itself.Approved for Public Release, Distribution Unlimited, PM FCS 20 APR 2007,case 07-126. 