Automating Standardized Information for theVerification, Validation, and Accreditation Process:An Acquisition Community Sponsored M&S ProjectDavid. H. BroylesSpace and Naval Warfare Systems Center Charleston1 Innovation DriveHanahan, SC 29406843-218-4834 (DSN 588-4834)david.h.broyles@navy.milCurtis BlaisMOVES Institute, Naval Postgraduate School700 Dyer RoadMonterey, CA 93943-5001831-656-3215, DSN 756-3215clblais@nps.eduMarcy StutzmanNorthrop Grumman Defense Mission Systems3422 Londonleaf LaneLaurel, MD 20724301-317-9698marcy.stutzman@ngc.comKeywords:accreditation, ontology, templates, validation, verification, DDMS, DVDT, GIG, M&S, VV&A, XMLABSTRACT: The Department of Defense (DoD) Modeling and Simulation Steering Committee (M&S SC) approved and funded in Fiscal Year 07 an M&S Project titled, "Standardized Documentation for Verification, Validation, and Accreditation." The project involves two related efforts: the DoD VV&A Documentation Tool (DVDT) and a VV&A ontology for M&S. This project will be accomplished using the Integrated Product and Process Team (IPPT) approach. Members of the IPPT will include VV&A representatives of the Military Service M&S offices and the M&S Coordination Office, as well as representatives of the DoD Communities empowered by the use of verified, validated, and accredited M&S.Project participants include an Architecture and Software Development Team (A&SDT), a Taxonomy and Metadata Team (T&MT), and a Project Management Team (PMT). The Space and Naval Warfare Systems Center (SPAWARSYSCEN) Charleston leads the A&SDT and PMT. The Naval Postgraduate School (NPS) leads the T&MT. SPAWARSYSCEN will produce an operational and secure DVDT based on an open source architecture. The DVDT will implement the DoD standard templates for VV&A documentation. NPS will produce an XML schema and common ontology describing VV&A processes and records, with incorporation of DoD Discovery Metadata Specification (DDMS) best practices serving consumers and applications on the Global Information Grid (GIG).This paper will inform the Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW) VV&A Forum and M&S Community of this project by providing an overview of project scope, schedule, and deliverables. Additionally, the paper will describe required capabilities of the DVDT and the supporting VV&A XML schema and ontology development.1. IntroductionEffective application of modeling and simulation (M&S) resources requires confidence that the associated hardware, software, and data will provide the capabilities required for that use. Such confidence is established through experience in the use of the M&S. But what if someone is seeking out M&S resources to use to address a particular need? How does a consumer become confident in the application of M&S resources never before used? In business contexts, a customer obtains such confidence through the recommendations of trusted advisors or sources of information (e.g., consumer reports). In the complex context of military M&S, such evidence and certifications are obtained through the conduct of principled Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) processes. However, today such information, if it exists, is hard to find; and if found at all, it comes in various formats and detail.Department of Defense Instruction 5000.61 [1] sets policy requiring DoD Components to “establish VV&A policies and procedures for models and simulations they develop, use, or manage.” The Instruction requires Principal Staff Assistants and heads of DoD Components to hold M&S proponents accountable and responsible for “verification and validation of their assigned M&S, as well as the documentation of those activities.” This policy will be ineffectively implemented if the M&S proponents and DoD Components continue to unevenly apply VV&A processes and continue to produce inconsistent VV&A documentation.This paper describes a Department of Defense (DoD) Modeling and Simulation (M&S) project titled "Standardized Documentation for Verification, Validation, and Accreditation". The purpose for the project is to automate creation and publication of standardized documentation of the VV&A process applied to DoD M&S. This will be accomplished through three distinct, but related efforts: recommendations to update policy, guidance, and standards documents, development of the DoD VV&A Documentation Tool (DVDT) and design of a VV&A ontology for M&S. The paper provides an overview of the project including scope, schedule, and deliverables. The paper also describes required capabilities of the DVDT and the supporting VV&A Extensible Markup Language (XML) schema and ontology development.2. Project OverviewThe DoD M&S Steering Committee (M&S SC) approved the Standardized Documentation for VV&A project in Fiscal Year (FY) 2007. The project is sponsored by the Lead for the DoD Acquisition Community, the Deputy Director for Developmental Test and Evaluation in the Systems and Software Engineering in the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology & Logistics (OUSD(AT&L)SSE/DT&E). This office provides direct oversight of the project. The work commenced in April 2007 and will run through September 2008.The project uses the Integrated Product and Process Team (IPPT) approach. Members of the IPPT include VV&A representatives of the Military Service M&S offices and the M&S Coordination Office (M&S CO), as well as representatives of the DoD Communities enabled by the use of accredited M&S.The project team is organized into three teams: (1) an Architecture and Software Development Team (A&SDT); (2) a Taxonomy and Metadata Team (T&MT); and (3) a Project Management Team (PMT). The Space and Naval Warfare Systems Center (SPAWARSYSCEN) in Charleston, South Carolina, leads the A&SDT and PMT. The Naval Postgraduate School (NPS), Monterey, California, leads the T&MT.SPAWARSYSCEN will produce a secure operational DVDT within an open architecture construct. The DVDT will provide the infrastructure for VV&A information capture, as well as generation of metadata supporting searching and sharing across the Global Information Grid (GIG). Specific details of the DVDT and its capabilities are provided in Section 4.NPS will produce an XML schema and common ontology describing VV&A processes and records in the context of the GIG and DoD Discovery Metadata Specification (f). The development approach for those efforts is described in Section 5.The DVDT, XML schema, and ontology are based on information from DoD standard templates for VV&A documentation, discussed in the next section.3. Standard Documentation TemplatesThe primary product of the VV&A processes is information. This information … serves as the basis for communication between all those involved in the development and application of M&S, as well as the use of the M&S results [2].The need for a structured approach to documenting VV&A information becomes apparent when one starts collecting the various policies and guidance documents that have been produced on the subject over the past several years. DoD, the Services, and other individual organizations have all produced guidance for what information to capture when documenting VV&A plans and reports. Although the guidance is similar, there are differences both in format and in content. Each organization, no matter what level, had tailored its guidance for what it perceived as its own needs. In many cases, this tailoring left out information that could be valuable for future users of M&S to know. Additionally since VV&A information is not documented in the same way, it makes it virtually impossible to be cataloged for searching and retrieval over a global network. Using standardized terminology will make VV&A information easier to discover and share over the GIG. Using standard formats will help consumers better understand if an M&S can fully or partially meet their needs because they will know where to look in each document for the information critical to their decision-making.A DoD-led tiger team comprising representatives from all the Services and other DoD Components met from 2005-2006 to consider the above and various other documentation requirements. The team condensed those requirements into four templates that standardize the information captured in the VV&A processes:Accreditation Plan, identifying information needed to perform the accreditation assessment, including defining the acceptability criteria, and associated priorities, tasks, schedules, and participants;V&V Plan, identifying the objectives, priorities, tasks, and products of the V&V effort, establishing schedules and allocating resources in coordination with the Accreditation Plan;V&V Report, documenting the results of the V&V implementation effort specifically focusing on the V&V task analysis and V&V recommendations; andAccreditation Report, assessing the fitness of the M&S for the intended use against the acceptability criteria, and making recommendations for accreditation.These templates are described in the proposed DoD Standard Practice titled "Modeling and Simulation Verification, Validation, and Accreditation Documentation Templates” [3]. The M&S CO, which is designated the Lead Standardization Activity for the M&S Standards and Methodologies standardization area by the Defense Standardization Program Office, began processing the proposed standard through the defense standardization process in May 2007. Once approved, program managers and acquisition professionals will be able to specify the standard in requests for proposal and contracting documents. The government will know what it needs to acquire and the contractors will know what they need to document when capturing VV&A information.The DoD standard templates for VV&A documentation address the requirement in DoDI 5000.61 to document VV&A information. To understand the scope of the project, it is important to understand the nature of the information contained in the standard VV&A document templates. As an example, the template for the V&V Plan calls for the following information:Title PageDocument dateIdentification of Program, Project, Exercise, or StudyIdentification of the Sponsoring Organization or Program ManagerDocument Title, including M&S Name and Version, and Document Type (e.g., V&V Plan) and VersionIdentification of document preparer (e.g., Lead Investigator, Organization, Contract)Distribution StatementClassification (if applicable)Record of ChangesExecutive SummaryProblem StatementIntended UseM&S OverviewM&S ApplicationAccreditation ScopeV&V ScopeM&S Requirements and Acceptability CriteriaM&S Assumptions, Capabilities, Limitations, & Risks/ImpactsV&V MethodologyPlanned Data V&V Tasks/ActivitiesData Verification Tasks/ActivitiesData Validation Tasks/ActivitiesRequired Validation DataPlanned Conceptual Model Validation Tasks/ActivitiesPlanned Design Verification Tasks/ActivitiesPlanned Implementation Verification Tasks/ActivitiesPlanned Results Validation Tasks/ActivitiesPlanned V&V Reporting Tasks/ActivitiesV&V IssuesKey ParticipantsAccreditation ParticipantsV&V ParticipantsOther ParticipantsPlanned V&V ResourcesV&V  HYPERLINK \l "_Toc135727009" Resource RequirementsV&V Milestones and TimelineAppendix: M&S DescriptionM&S OverviewM&S Development and StructureM&S Capabilities and LimitationsM&S Use HistoryDataConfiguration ManagementAppendix: M&S Requirements Traceability MatrixAppendix: Basis of ComparisonAppendix: ReferencesAppendix: AcronymsAppendix: GlossaryAppendix: V&V ProgrammaticsAppendix: Distribution ListAppendix: Accreditation PlanDesign and development of the DVDT software and the underlying information model (XML schema and common ontology) focuses on effective implementation of these templates. This is discussed further in sections 4 and 5 below.Standardization provides an important means to effectively share VV&A information, but the ease of capturing that information and the ability to help others learn that the information exists are also essential elements. The DVDT implements the standard templates and automates the reuse of information common across the four core documents. The underlying XML schema establishes rigid content and structure to facilitate information storage, exchange, retrieval and processing. Further formalizing semantics of the VV&A information in the development of a common ontology will enable more effective search capabilities to be developed and will create opportunities for software to reason on the stored data to better assist consumers in seeking M&S resources that meet their particular needs.4. DoD VV&A Documentation ToolThis section provides a quick look at past efforts that formed the basis for requirements and design of the DVDT, describes the functional requirements for the tool, and provides an overview of the concept of operations for employment of the tool. Section 5 discusses design of the underlying information model for the tool and for making VV&A information available in the GIG environment.4.1 Tool HistoryThe Navy recognized the need for standardized VV&A documentation in SECNAVINST 5200.40 which focused on ensuring M&S developers produce credible models that fulfill a specific use and present accurate information to consumers so they can make informed decisions. A key objective was to migrate from informal de facto accreditation at the command level to using formalized standards that would be more readily understood across the broad DoD M&S community. This led to development of a prototype tool that was made available to the community for a short period of time for review and feedback.Development of the prototype tool included early work on a VV&A Markup Language (VVML) (described to the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization community in [4] and [5]) using XML. The use of VVML in the prototype tool, with its intuitive, user-friendly templates and user interface, addressed requirements for initial VV&A documentation and reuse standardization. The approach promised to provide adaptability to changes in VV&A structure and data, portability to enable universal, web-enabled collaborative entry and access to VV&A information (achieved using 3rd party tools), the capacity to link to the Modeling and Simulation Resource Repository (MSRR), and easy maintenance and reference.The prototype tool development and trial use provided valuable lessons learned and a technical foundation for the current project. The experience gained has led to a new concept of operations and requirements specification.4.2 DVDT Concept of Operations Learning from the earlier protoptype tool, the DVDT is a new effort to automate the standard DoD VV&A templates presented in the DoD Standard Practice [3]. Automation of the templates will save producers time by expediting the VV&A documentation production process and will ensure standardization of content and format across DoD. Additionally, automation provides several other benefits:Ensures compliance with policy and guidanceGuides producers through the VV&A processEnables content consistency and completeness across all communities enabled by M&SFacilitates and contributes to M&S reuseProvides quality and complete VV&A information to stakeholders faced with making decisions on the application of M&S resultsProvides standardized methods to communicate VV&A information at appropriate levels of detail and with appropriate restrictions on access and distributionFigure 1. Project Concept of Operations OverviewThe concept of operations in Figure 1 starts with a consumer's need to use M&S. The consumer employs the GIG to conduct a semantic search for VV&A information to locate resources that best meet requirements for the use of M&S. VV&A metadata transferred from the DVDT will be searchable in the M&S Resource Registry Domain. Based upon the information retrieved from the M&S Resource Registry Domain, the consumer is exposed to information that can inform the decision to reuse a legacy M&S "as is," to modify a legacy M&S, or to build a new M&S. The producer uses the DVDT to document VV&A planning, implementation, and reporting. The DVDT uses XML source data to produce printable documents. When the producer initiates a VV&A project in the DVDT and is ready to publish the information to the M&S community, VV&A metadata will be made available to the M&S Resource Registry Domain. When a VV&A document is finalized and approved, additional VV&A metadata can be made available to the M&S Resource Registry Domain. All of these activities happen within the general context of the network-centric architecture of the GIG and in accordance with existing and emerging policy, guidance, and standards governing the acquisition and employment of M&S.4.3 Functional RequirementsBecause the DVDT is a tool for use across DoD, requirements for the tool reflect the needs of a broad community of stakeholders enabled by M&S. High-level functional requirements include:Web-enabled with Secure Socket LayerCommon Access Card or Public Key Infrastructure certificate access to tool (for Government, Military, Civilian, and Contractors)Private VV&A project managementVV&A project owners grant access permission to other VV&A Team membersLog of producersLog of changes made to documentsSecure data storageRequirements traceability across all documentsProduce four different documentsCommon information update across all documentsM&S Word, PDF, and HTML formatsAutomatic numbering of sections and subsectionsUse of bold, italics, numbered and/or bulleted listsCapability to insert graphics, images, and tablesCapability to send metadata about final approved documents to M&S Resources DomainAdditionally, the DVDT will offer producers a guided wizard interface and a "what you see is what you get" display to facilitate information entry. The tool will provide capabilities for maintaining and modifying the VV&A documentation content as needed. The tool will also offer a context-sensitive help system that includes links to appropriate policy, guidance, and standards.5. VV&A Documentation MetadataEffective data sharing requires a commonly understood representation of the data. In a web-based, network-centric architecture, data sharing through a well-defined representation is facilitated through the use of XML and XML Schema standards. The XML Schema language is used to define the data structure and content of conforming XML documents. Design and development of the DVDT includes design of an XML Schema description of information contained in the VV&A documentation templates, as well as metadata supporting information discovery and expression of business rules for use of the information.5.1 VV&A Document ContentOne portion of the DVDT XML schema will describe data types and constraints suitable for ensuring the compliance of the structure and content of the VV&A documentation to the standard templates. The DVDT will read and write XML instance documents conforming to this schema. Data about particular VV&A resources entered using the DVDT (resulting in XML instance documents) can be made available to the M&S Resources Domain.Previous work on the prototype tool is being leveraged to define the XML structures and content for the current project. The DVDT XML schema will be developed in accordance with current Department of the Navy XML Naming and Design Rules [6]. To promote visibility of this structural metadata, the schema will be posted to the DoD Metadata Registry for community reference and use. To be responsive to consumer needs, the project will coordinate with GIG M&S Community of Interest (COI) activities defining standards and best practices for metadata, data mediation and services, relating this work to VV&A processes, data and services as applicable.Part of the VV&A documentation content will be used to create VV&A Document Records (see Figure 1) with key information to assist consumer determination of the suitability of the documented M&S resources to support the consumer’s needs. Such data include:Submitted bySponsorDocument TypeDocument TitleDocument VersionDocument DateDocument SummaryDocument Executive SummaryPoints of ContactM&S Name & VersionM&S Intended UseAdditional metadata will be encoded in XML to define VV&A roles and information access policies.The following paragraphs provide additional information about data sharing requirements in the GIG architecture. This project will comply with data sharing policies for widest possible dissemination and utility of VV&A information of interest to the DoD M&S community.5.2 VV&A Information on the GIGThe GIG is the globally interconnected, end-to-end set of information capabilities, associated processes, and personnel for collecting, processing, storing, disseminating, and managing information on demand to warfighters, defense policymakers, and support personnel [7].In the GIG, information must be discoverable and accessible across the enterprise, dismantling traditional stovepipes that have restricted information availability and exchange in the past. The DoD Net-Centric Data Strategy describes the vision for this net-centric environment through:ensuring data are visible, available, and usable when needed and where needed to accelerate decision-making;tagging all data (intelligence, non-intelligence, raw, and processed) with metadata to enable discovery of data by consumers;posting of all data to shared spaces to provide access to all consumers except when limited by security, policy or regulations; andadvancing the Department from defining interoperability through point-to-point interfaces to enabling the “many-to-many” exchanges typical of a net-centric data environment.The GIG will provide enterprise services that enable data tagging, sharing, searching, and retrieving in support of the data strategy.The Net-Centric Data Strategy also introduces management of data within COIs, “collaborative groups who must exchange information in pursuit of their shared goals, interests, missions, or business processes and who therefore must have shared vocabulary for the information they exchange” [7]. COIs address organization and maintenance of data within their domains, while tagging the data in ways that make the data available for use within the COI and across COIs. COI-specific metadata structures provide an extended level of data definitions and structures. A community ontology formalizes the business and technical vocabulary and concepts for understanding by humans and software. COI-specific metadata structures and the community ontology serve to improve interoperability of systems using the community data.Mechanisms supporting data sharing include metadata registries and metadata catalogs. A metadata registry contains information describing structure, format, and definitions of data. DoD has established the DoD Metadata Registry, containing document formats, interface definitions, exchange models used by systems, messaging formats, symbology, ontologies, and transformation services. The registry currently incorporates the DoD XML Registry, the Defense Data Dictionary System, and commonly used data reference sets. A metadata catalog contains instances of metadata associated with individual data assets. In XML parlance, the metadata registry contains XML schema files and the metadata catalog contains XML instance documents conforming to the respective schema files. In the above discussion, we have used the generic “M&S Resources Domain” to refer to the future metadata catalog in which M&S related information will be stored.To further promote data discovery, DoD created the DDMS. The DDMS “defines metadata elements for resources posted to community and organizational shared spaces…[and] specifies a set of information fields that are to be used to describe any data or service asset that is made known to the enterprise, and it serves as a reference for developers, architects, and engineers by laying a foundation for Discovery Services” [8]. Figure 2 provides an overview of the categories of metadata specified in the DDMS.Figure 2. DoD Discovery Metadata Specification Overview (from [8])This project will support the data visibility, discovery, and understandability goals of the Net-Centric Data Strategy in the domain of data relating to VV&A of M&S resources by leveraging the DDMS XML vocabulary (through reference to the DDMS namespace). A separate effort to develop a DoD M&S COI Discovery Metadata Specification is in progress to identify DDMS metadata applicable to DoD M&S products and resources and to identify additional metadata needed for M&S purposes that supplements DDMS requirements (and may be proposed as extensions to DDMS). That work is also being leveraged to identify M&S metadata that can be reused in the DVDT XML schema and in the document instances conforming to that schema. The T&MT is collaborating with the DoD M&S COI team to design a VV&A component to the M&S COI metadata specification.5.3 Strong SemanticsWhile defining an XML Schema specification of data structure and content for VV&A information goes a long way toward supporting goals of data visibility and discovery, understandability by humans and machines requires stronger expression of the semantics of the information. In particular, it is often not enough to just identify concepts but in addition to show how they relate to each other. XML Schema descriptions of data identify concepts applicable to a particular domain (in this case, M&S VV&A information), but fall short of describing how those concepts are interrelated or how certain information can lead to conclusions that provide additional information about the domain. To further promote the Net-Centric Data Strategy goal of enabling the data to be understood, this project is exploring application of other web-based standards for describing VV&A information. Tim Berners-Lee’s vision for the World Wide Web is creation of a web of knowledge, termed the Semantic Web [9]. This is being addressed through research and development of standards that provide representation of stronger semantics in web-based information, in line with the Net-Centric Data Strategy goal of enabling data to be understandable by consumers and applications, both structurally and semantically. Current and emerging Semantic Web standards include the Resource Description Framework (RDF), RDF Schema, Web Ontology Language (OWL), and Semantic Web Rule Language (SWRL), among others.An ontology is “a formal, explicit specification of a shared conceptualization” [10]. To explore the potential for greater automation of VV&A processes and information, the project is developing a formal ontology that can be employed by software and humans attempting to discover M&S resources and to assess suitability of those resources for the desired purpose. The project will investigate the current state of defined VV&A taxonomies (e.g., see [11] and [12]), processes, and artifacts to design an initial VV&A ontology describing important concepts, properties, relationships, constraints, and business rules. The ontology will be developed using OWL and other Semantic Web standards as deemed appropriate.The VV&A ontology work will establish a technical case for application of formalized semantics relating to VV&A processes and records. The formalisms will include the above metadata (concepts described in the XML schema) describing VV&A documentation of M&S data and products; but will extend the data modeling to provide deeper description of the concepts. For example, an M&S taxonomy may classify M&S resources by use as training or analysis, with possibly a third classification that can be used for both purposes. However, one M&S accredited for training may also be accredited for analysis purposes, but only under certain constraints and conditions in its employment. Such constraints and conditions are best expressed in formal constructs to enable software to make associations and inferences that can better assist the user. Stronger semantic representations can make searches and information processing more effective. In addition to the ontology itself, the work will produce a technical report on the ontology design, including design decisions and trade-offs made during the effort.More expressive ontologies can describe not only the classes and their properties relevant to VV&A information, but relationships across classes that cannot be represented in a strict hierarchical structure as defined by XML Schema. In the literature on ontology design, the importance of determining the domain and scope of the ontology, to include identification of questions that a knowledge base built from the ontology should be able to answer, is emphasized [13]. This level of semantic sophistication will be needed to enable humans and software to better access and employ VV&A information about M&S resources as the community moves toward GIG service-oriented and net-centric architectures.6. SummaryThis paper described the DoD M&S project, "Standardized Documentation for Verification, Validation, and Accreditation," sponsored by the DoD Acquisition Community Lead. The effort is on schedule to be completed in Fiscal Year 2008. The project will produce (1) a DoD VV&A Documentation Tool to assist producers in developing standard VV&A documentation and (2) a M&S VV&A XML schema and initial ontology supporting requirements for data sharing and discovery in the future GIG. Additionally, the project will contribute to updating related policy, guidance and standards for M&S, acquisition, and data.If the reader is interested in becoming a beta tester for the DVDT or using the DVDT to support a VV&A project, please contact any of the authors to obtain more information.7. References[1]	Department of Defense, DoD Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A), DoD Instruction 5000.61, May, 2003.[2]	Youngblood, S.Y., Bailey, M., Johnson, D., Oates, W., Park, J., Schwartzenburg, F., and Stutzman, M.: "Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) One Voice Unified, Common & Cross-Cutting.” In Proceedings of the 2007 Summer Computer Simulation Conference. International Society for Computer Simulation, San Diego, CA. 15-18 July 2007.[3]	Modeling and Simulation Coordination Office: Department of Defense Standard Practice Modeling and Simulation Verification, Validation, and Accreditation Documentation Templates (draft). Washington, DC, August 2007.[4]	Broyles, D. H., Quendenfeld, G., and Park, J., “A Proposed Standardization of the Navy VV&A Process through the Application of VVML & the VDT,” Paper 04S-SIW-027, Proceedings of the Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization, Washington, DC, April, 2004.[5]	Park, J., Broyles, D. H., Kawabata-Hara, H.: “Work Smarter Not Harder VDT v2.1: Standardizing VV&A Documentation through User Utility,” Proceedings of the Spring Simulation Multiconference, San Diego, CA, April, 2005.[6]	Department of Navy Chief Information Office: Navy XML Naming and Design Rules, Final Version 2.0, January, 2005.[7]	Department of Defense: DoD Net-Centric Data Strategy, May, 2003.[8]	Department of Defense: Department of Defense Discovery Metadata Specification (DDMS), Version 1.3. July, 2005.[9]	Berners-Lee T., Hendler, J., and Lassila, O.: “The Semantic Web,” Scientific American. May, 2001.[10]	Fensel, D.: Ontologies: A Silver Bullet for Knowledge Management and Electronic Commerce. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2001.[11]	Hartley, D.S. III: “Verification & Validation in Military Simulations,” in Proceedings of the 1997 Winter Simulation Conference, S. Andradottir, K. J. Healy, D. H. Withers, and B. L. Nelson, eds. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. Atlanta, GA. December, 1997.[12]	Yi, C., Brade, D., and Van Emmerk, M.: VV&A Global Taxonomy (TAXO), Common Validation Verification and Accreditation Framework for Simulation (REVVA), THALES JP 11.20-WE1100-TAXO-D1101. March, 2004.[13]	Noy, N. F. and McGuinness, D. L.: “Ontology Development 101: A Guide to Creating Your First Ontology,” 2002.Author BiographiesDAVID H. BROYLES is a scientist in the Command and Control Department at SPAWARSYSCEN Charleston, South Carolina. He is the Architecture and Software Development Team Lead for the Standardized Documentation for VV&A Project. He has 13 years experience in software development in the areas of geographic information, document management, and accounting systems. He has supported the Navy Modeling and Simulation Office for 5 years and led the software development of the Navy VV&A Documentation Tool. Mr. Broyles has a B.S in Geography from the University of Louisville.CURTIS BLAIS is a Research Associate at the Naval Postgraduate School (NPS) with the Modeling, Virtual Environments, and Simulation (MOVES) Institute. His principal research areas at NPS include agent-based simulation of non-traditional warfare and application of Semantic Web technologies to improve interoperability of Command and Control systems and Modeling and Simulation systems. Mr. Blais has a B.S. and M.S. in Mathematics from the University of Notre Dame, and is a Ph.D. candidate in MOVES at the Naval Postgraduate School.MARCY STUTZMAN provides management and technical services to the NMSO VV&A Lead as an Operations Research Analyst for the Northrop Grumman Space & Mission Systems Corporation's Defense Mission Systems Division. She served in the U.S. Army as a Senior Intelligence Research Analyst, Cryptologic Language Analyst, Reporter, and Voice Interceptor with five years duty at the National Security Agency. She is an active member of the SISO's VV&A Forum, VV&A Product Development Group, and the IEEE Standards Association, and the NDIA M&S Committee. Ms. Stutzman has a Bachelor's degree from Indiana University and has provided M&S and VV&A support to the DoD, Army, and Navy since 1990. The acronym "M&S" is used for both "modeling and simulation" and "model(s) and simulation(s). See http://protege.stanford.edu/publications/ontology_development/ontology101.html