The Virtual Arena for Crisis Management  going from an single player to a successful team leader with correctly designed conscious models in training and live C2 systemsAuthors: Anders Mattson, Lykke Silfwerbrand, Crisis Management Support, SwedenAnders MattsonLykke SilfwerbrandCrisis Management SupportPhone (Anders) +46 705 900 806Phone (Lykke) +46 739 807 35E-Mail: am@c4i.se; lykke@c4i.seThe authors are both participating in SISO and ISO TC 223. Anders Mattson is a long time member of SISO EXCOM and both Lykke Silfwerbrand and Anders Mattson have key roles in establishing TC 223, the ISO standardizing body for Societal Security.Key words: Societal Security, Leadership, Crisis Management, Emergency Management, Virtual Arena, Training, Command and Control, Interoperability, AwarenessAbstractComputer supported gaming is an accepted methodology for the training of decision makers on several levels in crisis management. Commonly these tools are focused on two levels of training. One of them is training managers and leaders as if they had to do everything themselves, like training a general as a tank driver or a gunner, or a politician taking care of a car fire. The other level is aimed at staff personnel. You feed the staff with information using models of terrain and objects involved in the accident. This will train the staff but not the decision makers.These tools results in training athletes and arena staff rather than training decision/policy makers. Focus are on multiple interactive actions/objects (duels), data models, data flow, bandwidth and refresh rate instead of policy making (i.e. ROE), awareness, prognoses, and high level intentions and goals.  This paper proposes a method of designing training models that interact by communicating and sharing intentions and awareness instead of just producing raw position data, high fidelity status and formal orders.Firstly, embrace the possibility of mixing hard facts with fuzzy logic in order to present a Common Situational Awareness rather than a Common Operational Picture, which is normally based on outdated hard facts. Secondly, focus on high level results (overall aims) instead of low level details, for example look at intentions like rough plans with a top-down perspective. Top management dis-aggregation (a good guess based on intuition instead of millions of details) and intentionally hiding of unimportant information is crucial.The design should aim at replacing “filtered interactive user interfaces” with “conscious interface agents” that are allowed to do mistakes but are intelligent enough to correct them over time.To train leaders and managers correctly, and to build efficient decision support for high level commanders, the design of models (and agents) should build upon interactions that facilitate awareness (“it’s dangerous to be there”) and the understanding of intentions (“Evacuate”).IntroductionComputer supported gaming is an accepted methodology for the training of decision makers on different levels in crisis management. Commonly these tools are focused on two levels of training. One of them is training managers and leaders as if they had to do everything themselves, like training a general as a tank driver or a gunner, or a politician taking care of a car fire. The other level is aimed at staff personnel. You feed the staff with information using models of terrain and objects involved in the accident.There are two main aspects for modelling “old fashion” war games and Societal Security Crisis Management Exercises. The military scenario consists of a limited number of objects, such as helicopters, tanks, mines, artillery, soldiers, guns, with quite predictable behaviour, on both sides in a game. The Societal Crisis consists of an “AdHoc” situation with a wide range of entities (among those military units) with quite unpredictable behaviour. The Military scenario is very much focused in solving the local situation (duels) while the Societal scenario consists of; a rescue mission, a business continuity task (keep the society going) and the start of a recovery phase, all in parallel. In military actions, the commanders traditionally train so that they are prepared for whatever crisis they will come across. They might be specialized for handling a certain kind of action/reaction, but they will also by training know what specialized unit he has to use in the current issue and will rapidly be able to get the right action started to solve the problem.  When it comes to crisis management, leadership training is not so common, except for a small number of specially trained personnel such as the fire brigades rescue leaders or the medical rescue team leaders. Due to lack of a solid organizational structure and shared C2-systems  it is not obvious for these teams to ask each other for help or to share the overall view of a situation. Crisis Managers have normally no training in solving complex tasks in an Ad-Hoc structure including resources from a wide variety of organizations and/or nations. In several major crises the crisis managers and leaders have not had a shared common situational understanding. That has allowed many decisions and actions to be contradictory. Disasters in the recent past have shown this to the public and it has unfortunately caused devastation in people’s lives. For military commanders training include use of semantics and metaphors for creating a shared understanding of the tactical picture, shared situational awareness.We would like to argue that leaders in a societal crisis situation also need to share the situational awareness in order for different services to cooperate with optimal results. The complex situation (AdHoc, multi-functional, multi-organizational, multi-cultural, and multi-national structures, and of course engaa huge number of civilians including politicians) makes it hard to create a common understanding of the situation. Cooperation has to build upon knowledge on the available abilities in certain situations. In order to present a valid situational picture, from which the crisis team leaders can make rightful decisions, the decision support systems need to be intelligent, adaptive and self learning. The system needs to learn from earlier faults, needs to be flexible so that the leader can choose how he/she wants the information displayed, different semantics and different metaphors. Different users and different teams have different abilities to handle different levels of uncertain information.This paper covers tools for training in interpersonal communication, creating ways to share situational awareness, through working in teams of leaders/managers. It also deals with training of decision making in situations with different degrees of unknown, or false, information.BackgroundFor training of crisis mangers and crisis management teams, role playing with a huge number of staff personnel has been the common solution. The ratio 10 staff to 1 trained is quite normal.Different ways to solve this using computer based gaming has had a lot of back lashes. On the market computer games doesn’t promote cooperation. Simulations of incidents tend to send precise information in real time to users, this is not the fact in real life. Computer games doesn’t present false, unreliable, contradictory and fuzzy information such as “migh be”. Every one of these factors is essential in crisis management.MethodsThe common computer game used today with training purposes is simplified and focused on leading one unit, or one rescue operation, in one incident/accident, where the leaders/manager can oversee the precise movements on every person and vehicle. This proposal is looking at more complex situations, where agents represent actions or events. Agents report facts about what happens and the outcome about the actions to add to the total picture. These agents can learn from their faults and they are, just like people, reporting their (somewhat fuzzy) view of the scene. This might imply vulnerability in using the system, because the total picture will not be perfectly clean. This is what happens in real life when people report what they see and what they understand from their (sometimes dangerous) point of view.In addition to this, another layer of agents will handle the communication between the “gaming agents” and the crisis management team. We have decided to call these agents “interface agents”.We propose in this paper four types of interface agents. One will handle victims and eye witnesses, we call them “reporters”. One will handle different kinds of rescue teams and other resources, we call them “actors”. The third one is for interaction with media and the fourth is for overlooking all other day to day activities, trying to find disturbances due to the crisis.The information agents will handle the information due to the level of skill, or training, in the crisis management team. A new team will have facts presented in a clear fashion. Skilled teams will have a lot of uncertainties and false information to handle.The interface agents will also impose time delays. The crisis managers do seldom get information in real time. The interface agents will have communication protocol according to its task.Questioning are an often not-enough-used method for finding information or for making uncertain information clearer. In computer games you can’t question, you have to look for the answers your self. Our interface agents will respond to questions in different ways. According to the aim of the training session and the skill of the trainees it can make everything from precise answers (if answers are available in the simulator) to “might be” and other levels of guessing. Active questioning has to be a crucial part of the life and training of a crisis management team.Expected ResultThe Interface Agents will probably change the design of both training systems and live command and control systems.Crisis Managers have to focus on gather information in order to create a shared common situational awareness instead of trying to find facts in an environment filled with chaos, troubles, danger, fear and grief. Agents will be able to present large amounts of facts, to ask questions to clear uncertainties, to present probabilities, to make prognoses and to make risk calculations to support the team members.Other agents (conscious agents) will be able to monitor the work (manual decisions and decisions made by interface agents) in order to “fail proof” the crisis management one step further. The conscious agent will also record the crisis management itself.  Future Work The methodology has been tested during large scale computer based exercises. Due to lack of good working interaction protocols most of the coding has been done the hard way by implementing filters and time delays on all messages. Different levels of reliability have been tested on other kinds of games.Fuzzy logic and Automated Cellular Agents has been tested in the STRATMAS-project.Manual “interface agents” has been tested using role players in various crisis management games.The coming task is to implement all these methodologies and technologies. The Virtual Arena is an “umbrella concept” focusing on gathering different aspects of Crisis Management training on one arena.ConclusionThe skill of a Crisis Management Team is built on its internal interactions and use of internal and external resources according to availability. Questioning is a major part of gathering information for a shared (and distributed) common situational awareness.The outcome of the management of a crisis is seldom connected to the “incident” itself bur rather to how they handle the rescue, the operational continuity and the restoration. Therefore a focus on the “incident” may be disadvantageous.By implementing interface agents in crisis management training we will impose the filters needed to distort facts, delay information and force the team to start asking questions, internally and externally. This will accelerate the team building and efficiency of the team for future crisis to come.ReferencesThe Virtual Command Post	MASEVR -95 and -97The Information SoldierMASEVR -99VIKING -99 and VIKING -01		PfP SIMNET ExercisesThe ROLF and AQUA projectThe STRATMAS-projectSwedish Defence College and GMU R&D projectThe Information Fire FighterAFCEA 2003The Tele Rescue DemonstratorR&D demonstrator 2001-2003The Virtual ArenaSISO EuroSIW and F-SIW 2006