“Harmonization” as an Approach to International Standards for Space Simulation Building Consensus for Space Exploration Simulation and the Rules of the GamePriscilla Elfrey, IT/C1Joni Richards, IT/C2,  NASA, Kennedy Space Center, Florida 32899321.867.9153 fax: 321.867.4241 HYPERLINK "mailto:Priscilla.R.Elfrey@nasa.gov" Priscilla.R.Elfrey@nasa.govJoni.Richards@nasa.govLuis Arguello  European Space AgencyBrussels, Belgium+31.71.56.53706Luis.Arguello@esa.int Key wordsInternational, space, harmonization, conceptual model fidelity, ABSTRACT. “Harmonization,” a term related to interoperability, seemed a possibly useful approach for discussing simulation for space focused on the need for humans, simulation, hardware, including robots, and data to work together and work together well. Harmonization connotes that we do not have to do everything the same way nor use the same words, but that what we do must come together in a positive and useful manner. In moving off the planet, we anticipate time spans of a century and more, with highly dispersed expert teams, systems that must endure or adapt as missions, teams and technology change. NASA uses simulation of varying degrees of fidelity for life cycle: planning, design, analysis, validation, verification, test, checkout, operations, review or evaluation and training. With space exploration as our goal, we have a grand stimulus for innovative thinking across traditional boundaries of industry practices and geography. This paper will describe discussions and activities underway with the European Space Agency and others to find commonalities in definitions, programmatic use and best practices and to begin work on the feasibility of defining conceptual models of the space domain.1. Moving off the PlanetWhen we speak of exploring space, moving off the planet, to live on the Moon, Mars and beyond-- we are anticipating an almost unimaginably complex activity, a massive, technical and cultural international challenge beyond anything we have done in exploration before, far more than the prodigious engineering achievement in building the International Space Station. It comes with equally significant and “wicked” challenges.  In addition to technical issues beyond measure, space agencies must address how they can, with simulation, help highly dispersed teams work together-- some scattered across the country and the world, some on their way out into Space and others who will have, truly, moved off the Earth. They will need to collaborate over long-periods of time, solving problems on the fly, developing plans, working with different degrees of simulation fidelity. Those who work with satellites in low earth or geo-synchronous orbits face parallel complexities. Growing multi-party participation activity requires increasingly complex teams, net-centric systems of systems, global information grids and space-ground communications.  Nothing stays in place. Humans, robots and satellites will, in space, be constantly moving relative to one another, the Earth, the Sun, the Moon and other bodies. To explore these issues, we sought an encompassing word.  We tried “Harmonization” However, even we could not agree on the term. Some see it strictly in terms of “ technical harmonization.”   The root of the word, harmony, related to the sort of “joint ness” that we seek. Harmony can be described as a pleasing tuneful combination of sounds, a melding of musical melody and rhythm. Harmonization seemed fitting to Space exploration’s need to have simulation, data, hardware and human beings all working well and all working together well.	The term may not, however, say to others what we hoped it would.  The goal was to imply that people from the more than 14 space-faring agencies [1] need not say things exactly the same way. Nor would we expect them to use the same terms. The idea was that by hearing one another out, we could understand that harmony can be achieved by allowing a certain amount of wind to flow between us.  Standards are essential but even international standards are not enough to ensure the sort of mutual agreement we require for space exploration. Interoperability is generally seen as links between one simulation and another or between one set of data and another.  It is not enough to have data be interoperable. It is not enough to have simulation be interoperable. Human beings are less robust than we would like for space exploration so the simulations, data management and systems must be robust, and they most work together harmoniously. Moreover, space travelers will need to trust their lives to robots and to people whom they may never see or meet. To make this work, we need and we want it all. If “harmonization” will not work as a word for this sort of congruency, its synonym “accord” might prove better.  Perhaps our venture is to achieve an “accord cordiale.” If so, so be it. 2. Seeking “Accord” This particular international space simulation journey began in Ste. Marguerite, Italy in June 2007 at the Euro/SIW where the SISO Space Community Forum offered an invited presentation [2] by the European Space Agency (ESA) complementing a plenary speech on “Moving Off the Planet” [3] and discussions with representatives from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and industry.  This encounter has led to action underway between NASA’ and ESA to find commonalities, a mutual task and “just do it.”  The focus on cooperation and collaboration was foremost, and no one said that it would be easy. All agreed it was imperative and that their different working practices and experiences suggest need for betterment. Both agencies tell stories of endless discussions on standards. Although the data is anecdotal, there is overwhelming agreement that arguments among engineering and operations team over rules have been too lengthy and unproductive and that too few--facing even non-critical decisions - were ready to change their ways.  Most problems, both affirm, occur at the engineering and operations level, not with the crew. At the crew level, both Agencies report less of a problem. The crews learn one another’s language and culture. This pays off and is a lesson all can use.  This also suggests looking beyond the technical issues to increase our network and information resources in order to advance our awareness, knowledge and understanding of what each is doing.As examples, ESA reports it is developing a virtual satellite to address life cycle issues. NASA has developed a Product Development Hierarchy [4] to integrate simulation through the entire life cycle development of a product or mission.  These parallel life cycle interests undoubtedly include lessons that each could use.  Both Agencies, too, have related interests in conceptual modeling and other technical issues. Fortunately, NASA learned as early as Spacelab 1 that it is easier to work internationally in space than anywhere else. International shuttle flights again and again underscore how astronauts initially notice and point out their own country as they orbit the earth but as the mission progresses they become increasingly aware and appreciative of the entire fragile blue planet.3. Widening the CircleOur circle is too small. Too few of us know our counterparts in other Space agencies and related organizations whether academic, government, professional society or industry. That means good ideas cannot get in. The first step is to enlarge our space simulation network and our information resources. It was in that spirit that NASA worked with SISO to establish a Space Community Forum (SCF) as a low-key continuous force for change. SCF has met since 2006 in Orlando, Florida, Huntsville, Alabama, Norfolk, Virginia and in Ste. Margherite, Liguria, Italy. The major purposes are to lay out a baseline of the special needs of the space domain and to strengthen professional simulation awareness and activity.Other international bodies are looking toward the space adventure but none with a similar focus on the central and unique role simulation can and does play. The world’s principal space faring nations met in May in Italy to set commonly accepted standards for communication, control, life-support and docking activities. [5} These are all, of course, dependent on simulation. The resulting agreement, Global Exploration Strategies (GES) --The Framework for Cooperation is a step toward agreement on standards for future robotic and human space exploration. The agreement rather than proposing a single approach recommends an international Coordination Mechanism through which to strengthen individual and collective projects.  The agreement recognizes the Moon and Mars as prime targets and also partnership among robots and humans as essential. It recognizes the significant social, economic and intellectual benefits, opportunities to strengthen international partnerships and educational advancement. The non-binding document, a coordinated conceptual plan of space exploration, is focused on exploration of the solar system. It will enable the agencies to exchange information and could support avoidance of overlapping programs. It may be a framework for a global approach to space exploration.Space News, quoting Simonetta di Pippo, director of exploration at the Italian space Agency, noted that addressing unspecified “cultural differences” is essential to success while citing value in introducing minimum standards of interoperability that can drive down cost and facilitate cooperation. The next step is the creation of a semi-permanent body to meet in Berlin in November 2007.The agreement anticipates growing entrepreneurial activity with new agencies joining. It recognizes that intellectual property rights and protection of sites of interest may arise. To address these and similar concerns, the group designed a GES Coordination Mechanism. Also June 2007, in Brussels, Belgium, the Object Management Group (OMG) and the Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCDS) Space Task Seminar met to discuss standards [6] the particular focus was on space/ground data systems and space mission application standards that stimulate interoperability, in large measure, to enhance international space commerce. Around the globe other and different organizations are working on these same issues. Generally, such groups and individuals have little knowledge or, even, awareness of one another. The fragmentation is evident but not necessarily bad. “Our capacity for adaptation is the key to our turning fragments and fragmentation into possibilities.” [7] These are factors in our minds as we endeavor to begin the correct story correctly. 4. Working with Varying Degrees of Fidelity   Wherever teams work, they need simple and robust means to share data, use time well, work together anywhere and anytime, and be able to have work accessible and safe.  Teams require tools and approaches, management and other systems--based on simulation-- that promote collaborative behavior and interaction. For space, with its additional complexities, this underscores the importance of having working environments--wherever they are- that are easy, robust and virtually transparent. Space exploration requires simulation of varying degrees of fidelity for life cycle activities. This is challenging because sometimes, the simulation must be of incredible fidelity, but sometimes not. Always the fidelity must enable people to do what they need to do whether it is planning, design, analysis, validation, verification, test, checkout, operations, review or evaluation.  In addition, simulation is necessary for training astronauts, engineers and technicians. It enables managers and others to share perceptions of a problem or opportunity and achieve informed consensus.  In NASA product development, simulation is at the heart of the matter in order to share ideas, frame the story, optimize the technology, develop and test prototypes, rehearse and finally realize the product (system, spacecraft or mission). The situation is complicated by a multiplicity of existing stand-alone simulation tools and systems that prove to be expensive and difficult to connect with one another. Even among government agencies that should be better at sharing information (for example, the NASA Space Act 1957 Revised mandates that the Agency share what it learns), people fail to communicate information and allow others to use their models optimally. This only leads to more ambiguity and separation and makes interoperability more difficult. Too often we fail to frame issues helpfully and continue to solve problems in a binary fashion. We demand this or that. We make it “yes” or “”no”. This limits the options we might consider and may shortcut serious attention to criteria. We might better ask how best can we work together to solve these “wicked” problems? Sometimes the answer is not “this or that” but rather “both this and that. “ We hold truths among us. Making them 1+1=3 is the challenge.  NASA has for example, approached simulation standards [8] from the view of ”ensuring the credibility of the results from models and simulation is properly conveyed to those making critical decisions, those that may affect to support exploration, human safety or mission success.” To reduce risk, a second purpose is to assure that M&S results meet mission requirements. ESA sees the purpose of its standards documentation [9] to be “to provide guidance to system engineers on how to use system simulation to support their system engineering tasks.” This includes best practices. This suggests different but similar experiences among us as well looking at simulation from slightly different points of view, but there is no real conflict. An international approach can encompass both.A significant step in the process is to identify the special needs that the space domain must consider such as daunting distances, a dark hostile environment, radiation, extreme temperatures, absolute vacuum and fragile human subjects. We prepare spaceships on Earth in normal gravity to withstand the force of a launch, operate in microgravity and face dangerous landing and recovery. Although video from Space shows activity to be agonizingly slow, spacecraft are circling the globe at 17,500 miles an hour as the galaxy hurtles on into space, we know not where. Things can go wrong very fast. Whatever we can do--through reliable simulation of appropriate fidelity-- to make it safer, easier and more efficient and effective is a good thing.We anticipate time spans of a century and more, people on different planets working with systems that must endure or adapt as missions, teams and technology change. Humans, hardware, including robots, data and simulation must be able to work together and work together well.  Space Exploration will require a great deal from simulation because when humans have to go where humans cannot go, simulation is the sole solution. A former astronaut, Roy Bridges, often reminded us that astronauts must be experts the first time they go to space. That is true for all space workers and will be true for those who will move off the planet to become inhabitants of the Moon and Mars and beyond in what will be defining moments of the 21st century. Imagine one day when people 34 million miles away will strain to see a tiny blue speck shining in the night sky, and they will say, “We are the Martians. For that to happen interoperability of all the elements --harmonization or accord or whatever we call it-- is a necessity not a nicety. 5. Taking ActionThe simulation community must engage with itself to establish common ground, clarify and advance both the technical and cultural aspects of the work. In Ste. Margherite, ESA and NASA identified interest in supporting standardization activity, system modeling and addressing engineering database, mathematical and analytical models. But of particularly critical importance, the workshop opened the door for work defining Conceptual Models of the Space Domain for international space programs and projects.  Conceptual Models [10] are an early abstraction of the outcome the simulation is to address. It captures basic information about the entities, actions and interactions and clearly requires authoritative information, rigorous application domain knowledge, reuse opportunities and compatibility--accord--among all the elements.The intent is begin with a s primary candidate, the Base Object Models [11] using the SISO BOM template specifications, a component-based standard for describing a reusable piece part of a simulation with reuse opportunities and ability to document complex interfaces and end-user activity. This project may begin with top-level partitioning of the whole domain with rules for subdivision, hierarchies including user groups such as space exploration specialists, Earth monitoring experts, propulsion, power, logistics, network, spacecraft and launcher designers and modelers, ground processing, testing and launch specialists, etc.,At the front end of design, simulation can surface and address uncertainties, cut through the fog of ambiguity and raise questions to both elicit data, and eliminate avoidable and costly changes. This provides opportunity to uncover solutions from others--often customers, technicians and people in other disciplines--and achieve management and project saving and success. A lot happens, or should, before we write requirements. The intense planning that this front end of design requires has its parallel in conceptual modeling and should be a means to enhance both.  This initiative to address the Conceptual model of the Space domain now actively in the planning stage is a hopeful example of “just doing it.”  When the Space Community Forum met in Ste. Margherite, it was only twenty miles from the birthplace of Christopher Columbus. -- the great explorer and equally gifted project manager. Despite all his incredible and successful planning, careful risk taking, skillful presentations, his stamina, flexibility, commitment and effort, he never achieved his grand goal. He never reached China. He discovered America instead. Some today, question the mission of Columbus, but he was working as best he could with what he knew. As are we.  That is a warning and an opportunity. With space exploration as our goal, we face a grand stimulus for innovative thinking across traditional boundaries of industry practices and geography, as well as ethnic, linguistic, economic national, and cultural backgrounds, to create multidisciplinary teams with a diversity of talent to make this all work. It matters that we do this, and it requires ideas outside our current knowledge and understanding as well as attention to disciplines and talents seldom valued and generally under-used in technological organizations. These include innovation, facilitation, partnering, verbalization, storytelling and aesthetics. It also demands that we be more open to new experiences and the story we are creating. Professional conferences, such as Simulation Interoperability Workshops, are essential simulation outreach activities. They enable us, literally, to go outside our area. They expose us to new people, new information, enable us to strengthen existing relationships, demonstrate the credibility of our work and enhance its visibility.  Space exploration is the ultimate outreach activity. Simulation for Space exploration encompasses an increasing number of disciplines: cognitive psychology, arts, entertainment and game technology. The mission here, as elsewhere, is to increase understanding of one another’s work as well as to advance ideas and practices that will improve the utility and use of simulation for Space exploration. Serious attention to international outreach must be framed and acted so we literally go outside our area.”We cannot know what Space exploration will bring us.  The view of Earth from Space did, as predicted, change everything but not necessarily what we thought would change. While Space is not so scary as it was 50 years ago, it is still odd. It proves to be, not merely stranger than we thought it would be, stranger than we imagined, but it proves to be stranger than we can imagine. That is part of the magic that is out there waiting for us. Endnotes[1] The 14 signatory agencies are the 17 nation European Space Agency, Australia, Britain, Canada, China, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Russia, South Korea, Ukraine and United States of America. Space agencies refer to government agencies responsible for Space activities[2} Arguello, L, ESA Standards Presentation, Euro/SIW, Ste. Margherite, Italy, June 18,2007[3] Elfrey, P, Plenary speech, “ Harmonization: Moving Off the Planet,” Euro/SIW, Ste. Margherite, Italy, June 18,2007[4] Elfrey, P Product Development Hierarchy and Opportunities with Front End Design, NASA white paper, 2006.  Plenary speech, “Imagine, Moving Off the Planet,” SCSC2006, Calgary, Alberta, July 2006[5] DeSelding, P, Space News, Space Agencies Agree on Need for Technical Standards, June 2007.[6] OMG Task Force Seminar, Cooperation in Space and Standards, Brussels, Belgium June 28,2007[7] Elfrey, P, The Hidden Agenda, John Wiley and Sons, Knew York, 1982.[8] NASA-STD- (1) 7009, 2005[9] ECSS-E-10 Part 13A, November 2006[10’] Arguello, L, On feasibility to start the work on defining “Conceptual Models of Space Domain” for international space programmes”, White paper, ESA, July 2007[11] SISO-STD-003-2006 Base Object Model (BOM) Template Specification   AuthorsPRISCILLA ELFREY is chair of the SISO Space Community Forum, leads simulation outreach--local to international-- to advance understanding and utility of simulation for Space exploration.  She was the original project manager and is liaison to the National Center for Simulation (NCS) leads the NASA M&S team, to accelerate use of simulation and represents NASA/KSC on SimSummit focused on simulation industry identity and recognition. She identifies and pursues special interest in simulation effectiveness and communication, the front end of design and product development. JONI RICHARDS is a NASA senior project manager in the Information Technology directorate who leads partnering activity with the Department of Defense’s National Defense University to advance NASA simulation technology development and application in government and education. She has extensive experience at NASA Headquarters and KSC in Space shuttle, payload development and operations, information technology development and deployment technology transfer and information technology development. LUIS ARGUELLO is a member of the Modeling and Simulation Section of the Technical and Operational Support directorate of ESA. He has extensive international experience in simulation and software engineering and is actively involved in distributed simulation activities and simulation in support of the International Space Station at the European Space Agency in Belgium. His background includes experience in HLA-based DIS activities, GRID-based Distributed Collaborative Environment, a