What Should Be in Human Behavior Represantation FOM(Gurkan HaznedarogluDepartment of Electrical & Computer EngineeringOld Dominion UniversityAeronautics And Space Technologies Institute ghaznedaroglu@jandarma.tsk.mil.trFrederic (Rick) D. McKenzie, PhDVirginia Modeling, Analysis and Simulation CenterOld Dominion Universityfmckenzi@ece.odu.eduAbstract— Especially in constructive simulations, there is a growing interest in the use of Human Behavior Representation (HBR) Models. Because of this interest many applications and models are developed. These are mainly from a human cognition and/or human interaction point of view. But most of these simulations are members of a Federation with a Federation Object Model (FOM) whose main task is not directly related with HBR but instead are focused on a weapon system, tactical scenario, moving platform or etc.  Because of the very high complexity and numerous nonlinear relationships between entities, it is very difficult to develop and implement a pure HBR FOM.  To develop a HBR FOM according to the Federation Development And Execution Process (FEDEP), first we should define federation objectives and determine what objectives drive “What should be in HBR FOM”.  In this paper we present a framework and it’s development methodology for HBR FOM. Index Terms—Human Behavior Representation. Cognitive Modeling, Human Interaction, Federation Object ModelIntroductıon	For a decade representation of the human behavior through simulations is a key component for modeling and simulation (M&S) community. To develope better model and simulations which represents human behavior,  first it should be answered “What is Human Behavior Represantation? ” There are several definitions of HBR in the literature. According to Pew and Mawor, “HBR refers to computer-based models that mimic either the behavior of a single human or the collective actions of a team of humans. ” [1] In their technical report, Ben P.Wise, et al define, “HBR again, is, at its most succinct, the representation of the decision-making processes and decision-related actions of humans represented within a simulation.” [2]In another technical report, according to Harmon, “All HBRs simulate some features of people. Many simulations represent elements of human behavior, ranging from the characteristics of large groups to the detailed behaviors of individuals and teams. Any situation in which the presence of people can affect its outcome requires representing some aspects of human behavior.” [3].  At the Department of Modeling and Simultion Office (DMSO) website it is defined as, “All HBRs model the behavior of people at some level.  The term HBR encompasses representations of parts of individuals (e.g., hands operating controls), individuals (e.g., a specific terrorist or equipment operator), aggregates of individuals (e.g., a crowd, a command staff), and aggregates of organizations (e.g., several organizations responding in concert to an emergency situation). An HBR may depict one or more classical cognitive functions (e.g., perception, inference, planning, control), human performance limitations (e.g., sensing bandwidth, decision latencies) and the effects of behavior moderators (e.g., stress, injury, fatigue, discomfort, motivation and emotion). ”And finally A. von Baeyer defines HBR as,“Human Behaviour is apurposive reaction of a human being to a meaningful situation, Representation implies observable concepts and parametric definition”	[21]		According to these and other definitions in literature,  we can say that HBR has two important components. Human Cognition and Human Interaction. Altough most of the models such as Soar, ACT-R, COGNET, deal with the Human Cognition side of HBR, Human Interaction, which is an inevitable result of Human Cognition, should be included in HBR.	The HBR community has not yet agreed upon a single description of a conceptual model of HBR, as a result of this most of the HBR models are employed as members of a Federation with a Federation Object Model (FOM) whose main task is not directly related with HBR, such as a weapon system, tactical scenario, moving platform etc. In this study we try to find the answer for “What should be in Human Behavior Represantation FOM”. Because one of the most important purposes of the High Level Archithecture (HLA) is to achieve and increase interoperatibility and reusability of simulations, there should be an HBR FOM which can be used as a reference in all user application domains such as Training, Analysis, Experimentation, Acquisition. The need for its use in all application domains, drives the need for an HBR FOM developed from the ground up.	The outline of this paper is as follows. The Background section provides information on HBR. The Framework and Methodology section provides information on a proposed HBR framework and its development methodology and finally the Conclusion section summarizes the paper.backgroundHuman Behavior Representation	Before providing information on HBR, we want to summarize HLA, “HLA is an architecture for reuse and interoperation of simulations. … An individual simulation or set of simulations developed for one purpose can be applied to another application under the HLA concept of the federation: a composable set of interacting simulations. The intent of the HLA is to provide a structure that will support the reuse of capabilities available in different simulations, ultimately reducing the cost and time required to create a synthetic environment for a new purpose and providing developers the option of distributed collaborative development of complex simulation applications. ... The HLA specifies two types of object models: the HLA Federation Object Model (FOM) and the HLA Simulation Object Model (SOM). The HLA FOM describes the set of objects, attributes and interactions, which are shared across a federation. The HLA SOM describes the simulation (federate) in terms of the types of objects, attributes and interactions it can offer to future federations. ... Both the HLA FOM and SOM are documented using a standard form called the HLA Object Model Template (OMT).” [4]	The terms computer generated forces (CGF), semi-automated forces (SAF), synthetic forces, automated forces (AFOR) and command forces (CFOR) all refer to different forms of HBRs.  According to the Harmon taxonomy[12]   HBR is partitioned into three branches: Non-Cognitive Factors, Cognitive Capabilities and Application Functions.  Harmon defines these as,  “Non-cognitive factors represent all those aspects of human performance and behavior that are not related directly to cognitive skills. The cognitive capabilities describe those aspects of behavior that manifest themselves as rationality.  The application-related functions describe the particular functions that the requirements sources wanted their HBRs to serve, in this study those were military functions.” .[12] SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT 	Harmon categorized Non-Cognitive Factors into two main subcategories Physical Factors and Psychological Factors.  According to Harmon, Physical Factors consist of Weapon Effects, Enviroment Effects, Sensing &Visibility and Human Factors. Psychological Factors consist of Undesired Events, Capabilities, Emotional Responses and Complex Factors.  	Harmon specifies two important subcateory of Cognitive Capabilities as Sitiuation Understanding and Plan Execution.  Harmon’s last category of application functions in this case is Military–Specific Functions which consist of Combat Support Functions, Combat Functions, Combat Service Support Functions” and Non-Combatant Functions[12]. 	Harmon also defines nature of HBR quite encompassingly as, “All HBRs model the behavior of people at some level of abstraction. So, HBRs can model any combination of the many different facets of human behavior including: Ability to reason (e.g., knowledge based systems), Ability to change the environment (e.g., operating equipment), Responds to comfort and discomfort (e.g., environmental safety), Susceptibility to injury and illness (e.g., injury models), Emotional responses (e.g., affective models),  Ability to communicate with other humans, Abilities to sense the environment (e.g., vision models), Physical capabilities and limitations. ” [3]  	Giordano et al in their research [5] define HBR characteristics as Constrained speech recognition, parsing and generation COA analysis, selection and implementation Rudimentary emotions, Human physiological characteristics Semi-automated coarse-grained behavior generation,  Probabilistic human performance simulation and prediction ….  		Both Harmon’s taxomony and Giordano et al HBR characteristics definitions make us understand better both the requirements of HBR and complexity of the effort. From these taxomony and definitions we can conclude that HBR can be divided into two main sub areas: Human Cognition and Human Interaction. Differing from Harmon’s taxonomy[12], we omit Military–Specific Functions and group this category and it’s subitems into Human Cognition and Human Interaction according to their features. Harmon’s taxomony[12] is a well designed and very detailed approach to HBR but as a source of HBR FOM input it is very diffucult to implement. We think to start the HBR FOM should be defined at the rudimentary level and as a final target it should achieve the requirements extracted from Harmon taxomony[12]. Human Cognition	In our point of view, Human Cognition is a series of mental processes which begin with the perception of stimuli and end with a decision-making process. Giordano et al define Human Cognition as the process of receiving,  processing, storing,  and using information in humans[5]. The most important component of Human Cognition representation is a cognitive architecthure. There are several cognitive architectures which are developed in the literature. 	Soar, one of the most important ones, is related in both cognitive psychology and computer science [6], but it is primarily a functional approach to encoding intelligent behavior [6]. One of the most important tasks of Soar is to create systems that model intelligent behavior [7]. Soar consists of Perception, Working Memory and Long–Term Memory and Action [8] modules. Working Memory describes the current situation which contains, data from sensors, results of intermediate production firing and active goals and operators. These are usually a collection of objects that are described in terms of attributes and their values. Long Term Memory defines how to react to the objects and their attributes in Working Memory.  By using current state values of objects in Working Memory and mappings between external world and internal representations, appropriate behavior selection process is completed. 	The Adaptive Control of Thought, Rational (ACT-R) is a computational cognitive architecture used to simulate the cognitive processes involved in human performance of a task [9]. The ACT-R theory assumes that there are two types of knowledge, declarative and procedural [10]. Declarative knowledge is knowledge that we are aware of and can usually communicate to others. It is sometimes referred to as factual knowledge or axioms. Procedural knowledge is knowledge that we are not conscious of, and is applied in our problem solving behavior using our declarative knowledge. Declarative knowledge is represented as chunks [19]. Human Interaction	Tegnér et al define Human Interaction as “decision-related actions of humans represented within the simulations”. [11] and divide Human Interaction into three group:	Acoustic representation (speech etc)Body movement, mimic & gesturesAppearance (clothes, hair etc)	Recalling  Human Cognition, which is a series of mental process, as beginnig with perception and ending with decision making process, we can say that Human Interaction is next step to or the inevitable results of decision making process.  For our HBR framework we assume the following as general Human Interaction  groups :CommunicationMobilityPhysical RequirementsEquipment UsingHBR Framework and Development Methodology.	In this study our main task is to define a HBR FOM, which can be used by all appliction domains. (Training, Analysis, Experimentation, Acquisition). Table 1 summarize general properties of application typesTrainingAnalysisAcquisitionExperimentationLess ScientificMore ScientificMore ScientificLess Scientific Few RunMultiple RunFew RunsMany RunsWarfighter InteractionVariying one parameter at a timeFocus on Operation and Use,  Less War Fighter InteractionsFocus on Mission useTable 1 General properties of application types	Entities which will participate in our HBR framework should be compatible with all application types, because of this we define the HBR FOM at a rudimentary level. Before developing the framework, we determine the HBR sources. Operational requirements documents (ORDs) of  simulation programs, conference publications and already developed  object models (FOMs&SOMs) at DMSO Object Model Library(OML) can be sources of HBR and we mostly used object models at DMSO OML and conference publications. 	Our first step is to define HBR categories which are mostly extracted from conference publications. Communication, Physical Requirements, Equipment Using, Mobility, Role, Personality, Culture, Task, Behavior Moderators and Cognitive Architecture are our main HBR categories and we defined HBR Feature Vector for each category.  HBR Feature Vector is a vector which represents main characteristics of HBR category. For example we use following words, (LifeForm live soldier human pilot civilian group individual leader operator civil officer commander… ) as data element for HBR Role Feature Vector.	Our second step is to define Model Feature Vector for each FOMs and SOMs in the OML. To define Model Feature Vector and select HBR related object and interaction classes from OML we developed a methodolgy. According to the methodolgy:Search a FOM or SOM in Object Model Library to find HBR releated Object Class and Interaction ClassCreate Model Feature Vector for each Object Class and Interaction Class in FOMs and SOMs and compare these Model Feature Vectors with our manually created HBR Feature Vectors. Group matching entities and classify them under a more general HBR category(e.g. Put soldier, lifeform, enemy, civilian etc. into Role category)Associate HBR categories with user application domains Training, Analysis, Experimentation, Acquisition and classify them as Required, Optional and Conditional To achieve step 1, 2 and 4 we develop a java application illustrated in figure 2We use database mining approach to create Model Feature Vector of object classes and interaction classes.   In this approach, we use the text in the definition column of the object class and interaction class definition tables and we apply following prodecures:Removing repeated wordsRemoving stop wordsStemming Figure 2 Application Algorithm		The removing repeated words prodecure removes all repeated words in the definition column and leaves this data area will all unique words. The second procedure removing stop words, removes words in the semantic data columm like “a”, “the”, “when”, “where”, “all” etc. Finally the stemming procdure stems words, by removing suffixes from words like “es”,  “s”, “ed”  etc. After applying these three prodecures we get a feature vector for all object classes and interaction classes. The application then compares feature vectors of object and interaction classes with our HBR feature vectors and provides a list of matching entities.  The interface during execution is illustrated in Figure 3. and sample results illustrated in figure 4.Figure 3. The application interfaceFigure 4. Sample resultsWe ran the application for FOMs and SOMs in the DMSO OML and collected the matching object and interaction classes in a list.  The matching list is checked to remove unrelated classes and we put them into the suitable category. There are a lot of FOMs and SOMs in the DMSO OML so this capability needs to be inspected. Before define HBR framework, by using experience gaining from literature search and inspection of DMSO OML, We specify following categories for the HBR related entities: figure 5 illustrates main level categories and Figure 6, 7, 8 illustrate sub categories.Human InteractionHuman CognitionAuxiliary SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 5 Main categories SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 6 sub categories for Human Interaction SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 7 sub categories for Human Cognition SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 8. sub categories for AuxiliaryProposed HBR framework consists of Communication, Physical Requirements, Equipment Using, Mobility, Role, Personality, Culture, Task, Behavior Moderator and Cognitive Architecture modules illustrated in figure 9.  figure 9 proposed HBR framework	This is a human-centric framework and it’s main task is to implement basic cognitive activities and their results such as Co-ordinate, Communicate, Compare, Diagnose, Evaluate, Execute, Identify, Maintain, Monitor, Plan, Regulate, Record, Scan, Verify etc.  	Human Interaction		Physical Requirements is in essence, requirements for humans to maintain daily life activities such as sleeping, feeding, dressing etc.  This category is mainly about physical status and performance limitations of a human at any given time in simulations. It is also related with resource consumption of a human in terms of time, energy etc. This module will mainly produce data about the phsyical condition of human at any given time and it will also produce data about consumed resources and required resources. Produced data will be used by Behavior Moderator module and this module will reflect effects of physical status to the decision making process.   	Equipment using is one of most important parts of Human Interaction. Humans can use infinite numbers of equipment.  The most important factor which restricts the numbers of equipment that can be used is Role.  This module does not intend to model any equipment and its usage such as infantry rifle or F-16. This is a huge task and not purpose of the HBR FOM. This module provides information about the basics of using equipment such as physical capabilities, individual skill and knowledge. This primarily basic information will be provided by the Role module. The Equipment Using module collects data from Physical Requirements and Behavior Moderator modules and evaluates them and responds to requests of the Role module. A Role-based logic and grouping equipment which have similar functions make this module more manageble. 	Mobility is another part of interaction side of HBR. Position, orientation and velocity are the basic data elements for mobility. Position can be represented with two possible coordinate systems: Flat earth and geocentric [13]. The location of the origin of the coordinate system generally also has at least two possibilities, at the feet of a human or at the center of mass. Orientation is basically which direction is positive and from which axes the angles are to be measured. Ground Vehicle Mobility Mode”[20] which  is also considers enviromental effects  can be applicable to human mobility.  	Communication module in our HBR FOM simply refers to communication without using devices. Verbal and hand signal communication is an example of this type of communication. Communication with devices is considered by Equipment Using module. Most important data elements for communication module are distance between HBR entities and enviromental factors. The Mobility module provides position and distance information and Behavior Moderator module provides enviromental information such as noise and eyesight. Human Cognition	Cognitive Architecture module is the core module of the HBR FOM which provides information to, and accepts information from, other models and simulations. The most important component of the Cognitive Architecture module is the decision-making process which directs the information flow inside the FOM. The basic decision cycle of main cognitive architectures (SOAR, ACT-R etc.)  is defined in the following terms from [10] and can be applicable to HBR FOM1. Use sensory systems to create a primitive representation of the current situation. 2. Elaborate the primitive representation by creating (or retrieving) additional elements that produce a set of beliefs or interpretations about the current situation (possibly simultaneously abandoning previous beliefs). 3. Use the current situation interpretation to identify, retrieve, and select a goal to pursue (possibly simultaneously abandoning a previous goal).4. Identify, retrieve, and select a primitive action relevant to the current situation and goal. 5. Execute the selected action (could be an external action, memory retrieval, a belief annotation, etc.).6. Return to Step 1. [10]	Auixiliary	The Auixiliary category consists of entities which are not part of human cognition and interaction, but directly affects HBR. Role, Personality, Culture, Behavior Moderators and Task-Plan modules form the auixiliary category.Figure 10 HBR FOM-Role relationship		The Role Module is the outer window of HBR FOM and makes HBR FOM usable by all types of simulation application (figure 10). In essence, the role can be divided into two main groups in terms of status:  Military roles and civilian roles. Another division can be made according to process type: Cognitive roles and Interactive roles. According to this classification we can say that a tank driver role is a military role and also participates among interactive roles because it is directly related with equipment using. A company CEO role is a civilian role and also participates among cognitive roles. Tasks which will be performed by each role are defined in the outer federations. Plans describe how these tasks will be performed. Modules in the HBR FOM evaluate the tasks according to their plans and reflect results to corresponding requests. In essence, general HBR related tasks and their plans defined in HBR FOM and role-spesific tasks and plans are taken from outer federations. If role has role-based decision-making mechanism or role-based equipment using feature, effects of these should be reflected to HBR decision making process and equipment using module respectively.	Personality is another important influence that affects the decision making process therefore it should be included in HBR FOM. Personality knowledge is often expressed in terms of linguistic variables that can describe concepts that usually have vague and fuzzy values [14]. There are sevral approaches defining personality effects on decision making process. Personality is specified as a function of thirty attributes each of which called personality facet. The personality facets are clustered in five groups –each called a personality trait [or personality factor]. The five personality factors are also referred to as the big five [15]. In the OCEAN model, the letters stands for the following meanings, “O: Openness, culture, originality, or intellect, C: Conscientiousness, consolidation, or will to achieve, E: Extraversion,  A: Agreeableness or accommodation, N: Need for stability, negative emotionality, or neuroticism. [15] Also following traits may be taken into consider in terms of personality: Stability, Anxiety, Anger, Humor, Acquiescence, Independence, Charisma, Knowledge [16] . Main task of HBR personality module is to reflect the effects of personality in terms of numerical values to decision making process.	Culture affects human interaction, especially in terms of communication with signals. (gestures,mimics). For example,   one culture’s sign for success (e.g., thumbs-up) can be another’s obscene insult. A person that is unaware of this cultural difference in how the literal action is translated may inadvertently give offense or misinterpret someone else’s action“[17]. 	One of the most important effect on accuracy of decision making process and related actions is behavior moderators. Behavior moderators can be divided into two main group Internal and external behavior moderator [3].  Internal behavior moderators include intelligence, expertise, cognitive abilities …” [3] external behavior moderators”include “Physiological Stressors (environmental factors,  physical workload, fatigue),  Cognitive Workload Stressors (sensor bandwidth limitations, computational limitations) [3]. The HBR Behavior Moderators module intends to reflect the effects of behavior moderators in terms of numerical values to decision making process	HBR Task module maintains the list of activities that will be represented inside the HBR FOM and also role-specific activities which is transfered from outer models. Modules inside the HBR FOM represent activities using definitions in plan module.   conclusıon	In this study we proposed a framework for a HBR FOM and software tool we used to developed it and can also be used tailor application specific versions of HBR FOM. This is a work in progress and we continue to design refinements. In summary, our HBR FOM does not intend to create human and human related entities for simulations or models, our HBR FOM intends to reflect the effects of HBR related entities to Human or human related entities which are developed by outer models. For future work this studies can be a source of HBR Server (figure 11.) Figure 11 summary of work flow in HBR ServerReferencesPew, R. W. and A. S. Mavor, Anne S. (Eds.) 1998. Modeling Human and Organizational Behavior: Application to Military Simulations. National Research Council. National Academy Press, Washington DC.Ben P. Wise, Mary McDonald, Lisa M. Reuss, Jesse Aronson,  ATM Human Behavior Modeling Approach Study, Technical Research in Advanced Air Transportation Concepts & Technologies (AATT), 2001Harmon, S.Y., Hoffman, C.W.D., Gonzalez, A.J., Knauf, R., Barr, V.B. Validation of Human Behavior Representations, (2002). http://www.msiac.dmso.mil/vva/Judith S. Dahmann, Richard M. Fujimoto, Richard M. Weatherly, The DoD High Level Architecture: An Update, Proceedings of the 1998 Winter Simulation ConferenceJohn C. Giordano,  Paul F. Reynolds, Jr. David C. Brogan , Exploring The Constraints Of Human Behavior Representation, Proceedings of the 2004 Winter Simulation ConferenceLaird, J. E., Newell, A., & Rosenbloom, P. S. (1987). Soar: An Architecture For General Intelligence. Artificial Intelligence, 33(3), 1-64.Brooke H. Mcnally, An Approach To Human Behavior Modeling In An Air Force Simulation, Proceedings of the 2005 Winter Simulation ConferenceLehman, J.F., J. Laird, and P. Rosenbloom. A Gente Introduction To Soar, An Architecture For Human Cognition, 2006 Cleotilde Gonzalez and Wai-Tat Fu, ACT-R Models Of Training Data Entry Skills, Proceedings of the Behavioral Representation in Modeling and Simulation Conference 2006 Randolph M. Jone,s An Introduction to Cognitive Architectures for Modeling and Simulation Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation, and Education Conference (I/ITSEC) 2004Jan Tegnér, Qi Huang, Botond Pakucs, Interaction of Human Bahaviour Models, , Proceedings of the Behavioral Representation in Modeling and Simulation Conference 2006 S. Y. Harmon,, A Taxonomy of Human Behavior Representation Requirements 11th Conference on Computer Generated Forces & Behavior Representation,Paper No. 02-CGF-024, 2002Paul T. Barham, Shirley M. Pratt, Deborah A. Fullford,The Development of the High Level Architecture (HLA) Human Starter Simulation Object Model (SOM)  11th Conference on Computer Generated Forces & Behavior Representation,Paper No. 8th-CGF-060, 1999Ören, T.I. and Ghasem-Aghaee, N. (2003). Personality Representation Processable in Fuzzy Logic for Human Behavior Simulation, Proceedings of the 2003 Summer Computer Simulation Conference,Montreal, PQ, Canada, July 20-24, 2003, pp. 11-18.Howard, P.J., Howard, J.M. The BIG FIVE Quickstart: An Introduction to the Five-factor Model of Personality for Human Resource,Professionals, 2001,http://www.centacs.com/quickstart.htmFrederic (Rick) D. McKenzie, Jean Catanzaro, Mikel D. Petty A Personality-Based Command Decision-Maker: Results and Recommendations, 10th Conference on Computer Generated Forces & Behavior Representation,Paper No. 01-CGF-020, 2001Simon R. Goerger, Validating Human Behavioral Models for Combat Simulations Using Techniques for the Evaluation of Human Performance, Summer Computer Simulation  Conference 2003DoD 5000.59-P, "Modeling and Simulation Master Plan," October 1995Maarten Sierhuis,. (2001). Modeling and Simulating Work Practice BRAHMS: A Multiagent Modeling and Simulation Language for Work System Analysis and Design, Ph.D. Thesis, Amsterdam UniversityDr. Paul A. Birkel, Terrain Trafficability In Modeling And Simulation, Technical Paper Sedris 2003- 1Dr. Alexander von Baeyer, The Relevance of Human Behaviour Representation in Future C2 Systems –Current and Future Research Approaches, April 2002Gurkan Haznedaroglu is an officer in Turkish General Command of Gendarme, August 1995 to present. Currently he is continuing MsE education in colaboration program at Electrical and Computer Engineering Department of Old Dominion University and Aeronautics And Space Technologies Institute of Turkey.Frederic (Rick) D. McKenzie is an Associate Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering at Old Dominion University. Prior to joining ODU, Dr. McKenzie held a senior scientist position at Science Applications International Corporation, where he was a team leader on a simulation system that encompassed the training requirements of all military services and joint operations. He has had several years of research and development experience in the software and artificial intelligence fields, including object oriented design in C++, LISP, and knowledge-based systems. Dr. McKenzie has taught courses in artificial intelligence, software languages, and data structures. He received a Ph.D. in Computer Engineering from the University of Central Florida in  1994 ability of a model or simulation, to provide services to, and accept services from, other models and simulations, and to use the services so exchanged to enable them to operate effectively together[18]PAGE  2HumanRepresentationCognitiveCapabilitiesNon-CognitiveFactorsApplicationFunctionsFigure 1.  Top Level Branches of the HBRRequirements Taxonomy.  [12]HBRHuman InteractionHumanInteractionHuman CognitionPhysicalRequirementsEquipmentUsingMobilityCommunicationHuman CognitionCognitive ArchitectureDecisionMakingAuxiliaryAuxiliaryRolePersonality TraitsCultureTaskPlanBehaviorModerators