The UK Process for Conducting VV&A for Synthetic Environments A Progress ReportJonathan ReadQinetiQCody Technology ParkFarnboroughHampshire+44(0)1252 392758jmread@QinetiQ.comKeywords:Verification, Validation, Accreditation, Synthetic Environment, Model, SimulationAbstract:  SISO paper 06S-SIW-120 presented the high level Verification and Validation (V&V) process and guidelines developed for the UK MOD under their Synthetic Environments research programme.  Since that paper was presented at the last Spring SIW, the UK MOD has moved the process forward and developed it into a draft Defence Standard (DEFSTAN).  In addition, a further case study has been conducted on the NITEworks Maritime ISTAR experiment building on the experience gained in the previous case study.  This latest activity had to address areas not covered in the previous study, such as V&V for optical sensors and sophisticated radars in the context of the experiment.  This paper will present the DEFSTAN in its draft form, give an overview of the latest case study and outline plans in the UK for the dissemination of the DEFSTAN into the wider SE community.1	IntroductionThe UK MOD has been actively pursuing a generic V&V process that can be applied to a wide range of modelling and simulation activities.  The latest research programme that finished in the middle of 2006 delivered a high level process, a description of associated activities and a case study, some of the detail of which was presented at the Spring SIW.  Since the completion of the research programme UK MOD has taken the decision to develop a Defence Standard (DEFSTAN) based on the high level process and associated guidance produced.  In addition to the DEFSTAN initiative the process has been applied to Warfighting Experiment (under the UK MOD NITEworks programme) in order to gain additional experience of its practical application and to provide a further case study for others to learn from in the future.  This paper describes the DEFSTAN in outline, the nature and some detail of the case study and discusses how the process and DEFSTAN will be migrated into the main stream of UK M&S activity.2	BackgroundBeing largely uncontentious and with a grounding in the firmly practical, the generic V&V process developed under the UK MOD research programme was generally well received when rolled out to the M&S community.  The creation of a DEFSTAN will ease application of the process and put it on a formal footing allowing MOD customers to specific use of the standard where appropriate, something that has been difficult in the past.  Defence Standards in the UK are managed by the UK Defence Standards Agency who have be proactive in developing the standard in conjunction with personnel from the MOD and DSTL.  Although not specifically part of the research programme there was a very real requirement to provide suitable test cases for the process by applying it to real life SE activities.  To meet this requirement the process was a plied to the Maritime ISTAR study under the UK NITEworks experimentation programme.3	The Defence Standard The Defence Standard emphasises the best practice nature of the process and guidance it offers that is built on several years of research activity and practical application in the UK.  It is aimed at a target audience of SE Users, Component developers and V&V Practitioners.  The process and guidance are designed to be tailorable to a variety of Modelling and Simulation activities and the DEFSTAN makes this point early to encourage users to approach the process with an open mind rather than looking for a doctrinal, ‘form filling’ or ‘box ticking’ method.The process itself is based on the principal of identification of a number of acceptance criteria for the SE activity by the User of the SE rather than by the developers; that is, acceptance of the SE as being fit for purpose is a subjective measure that will be based on a number of different techniques ranging from the deeply technical (internal verification through repeated iterations of particular processes or sub-systems) through to the purely subjective (face validity by subject matter experts).  A number of different stakeholders in the process are identified early in the DEFSTAN so that their role in the various activities can be clearly identified at the planning stage of the V&V process.Figure 1 is a summary explanation of the high level process and the associated activities extracted from the draft DEFSTAN.Figure 1 – An Overview of the Generic Process Steps and Associated ActivitiesThe main DEFSTAN document explains each step of the high level process whilst the detail of the various activities is contained in an Annex.  Best practice examples are offered throughout the guidance text with much of the guidance being drawn from the authors work on the UK NITEworks Maritime Airborne Surveillance and Control (MASC) activity reported at the Spring SIW of 2006.At each stage of the process and for each activity the information requirements are identified [figure 2] and the key stakeholders listed.  The intention is that all the necessary participants in the process receive recognition at the planning stage and are actively engaged from this point forward.Where appropriate external agencies, such as the Directorate of Scrutiny and Analysis, are named and their relevance to the process explained.  In this particular case the DG(S&A) recommendation for the use of V&V logbooks is introduced and brief description of how these might be used in the overall process is given.Throughout the document care is taken to ensure that readers/users are made aware of the fact that V&V activity should be planned, costed and executed just as any other activity in the delivery of a particular SE event.  This embedding of V&V within the overall development process (Systems Engineering process) is essential to the success of the activity as a whole; attempting to introduce V&V effort as an addendum to the development effort is doomed to failure, planning is essential as is management of the delivery of the V&V output.Figure 2 – An Overview of the Generic Process Steps and the Associated Information Requirements4	A Second Case StudyPart of the MOD research study that created the original high level process was the delivery of a worked example where the process was tested in a real life context.  The test chosen was the UK NITEworks Maritime Airborne Surveillance and Control study, examining equipment options for the Sea king Mk7 Air Early Warning platform upgrade programme.  The details of that case study were reported at last years Spring SIW.The author was fortunate enough to be asked to return to NITEworks in mid 2006 to participate in a follow on study to the MASC work, a programme known as the Maritime ISTAR (M-ISTAR) study.  This study was destined to examine the equipment options identified in the MASC study but in the context of Anti-Surface Warfare Force Protection and Littoral Manoeuvre.  As the lead SE designer for the study the author was also invited to lead the V&V activity.As ever in the NITEworks programme, timescales were tight; approval for the experiment to proceed was granted by the MOD on 3 Oct and the experiment dates were fixed as 4-15 Dec, allowing just ten weeks for integration, test and V&V.The SE planned for the M-ISTAR study reused many of the components from the MASC work but there were also several notable additions.  The intention was to create a Link 16 based environment for the creation of a force picture which would form the basis of target reporting and designation.   The context was that of a UK amphibious task group conducting operations that required insertion and extraction of a Royal Marines Commando some 100 nautical miles inland from a designated coastline.  The geometry of the event required the amphibious task group to remain within 20 nautical miles of the coast for the duration of the inland assault and it was during this period that the ASuW Force protection issues were explored.  In addition to protection of the amphibious task group there was a requirement for the Airborne Surveillance and Control capability to provide a recognised land picture in support of the Royal Marines activity.Core MASC components that were re-used were:ASAC (SK Mk7)/MASCType 45 Combat Management SystemGeneric Future Fighter MITL simulationLink 16 simulationVoice communications simulationAdditional components were:MERLIN helicopter sensor suite for use in the ‘No MASC’ caseSCMR (future Lynx) MITL helicopter simulationAttack Helicopter MITL simulationConstructive sensors for Type 23 and unmanned SCMR sensorsJSAF CGFUAV simulation including EO/IR and SAR sensorsEO/IR sensors for MASCSAR/ISAR sensors for MASCSAR/ISAR sensors for GFFImproved Data Modem datalink between AH, MASC and GFFAdditional Link 16 messagesWith only 10 weeks from approval to conduct the experiment to delivery of the verified and validated SE and the need to integrate a number of heterogeneous simulations (drawn, effectively off the shelf from a number of different suppliers), the 1278 DIS standard was used as a baseline with those HLA compliant simulations used invited to bring a DIS/HLA gateway to allow connection to the other components.  Although anathema to the dedicated system engineer, this did allow effective and rapid progression through a number of the early FEDEP steps.  An architectural overview of the final SE is at Figure 3.Figure 3 – M-ISTAR SE Architectural Overview Showing Logical Networks and HLA/DIS GatewaysThe V&V planning followed the same regime as that for the MASC programme; the key sensitivities were identified in conjunction with the experimental designers and a series of technical, objective and subjective tests designed at sub-system, system and system of systems level.The technical tests were generally conducted during the integration and test phase of the programme whilst the higher level objective and subjective tests were conducted during clearly defined V&V periods built into the 10 week development and experimentation timetable.  These periods comprised 5 days of component and whole system testing using draft versions of the experimental scenarios conducted 3 weeks before the actual experiment and 2 days of rehearsal and validation testing conducted the week before the experiment.  In total there were 7 dedicated days of V&V testing using the whole system, the associated technical support, the experimental design team, analysts and warfighters.  This represented just under 20% of the overall time allowed for integration and testing prior to the experiment itself.The approach and the tests were all documented in the V&V plan which was approved by the MOD scruntineers and issued to the development team early in the programme.Particular challenges faced by this programme were:Level of fidelity definitionRadar model creation and V&VEO/IR sensor calibration and testingSAR/ISAR testingUAV MMI integrationLink 16 and IDM message set selection and testingDatabase creation and testingJSAF model behavioursLevel of FidelityAs the specification process for the M-ISTAR SE developed it became apparent that there were a number of different levels of fidelity required of the components that would comprise the SE.  To ease specification and guide the level of V&V effort required, a matrix of level of fidelity was developed for a range of key capabilities (C2 Displays, MMI, Sensor Performance etc) of each component.  This matrix was refined to include a colour code that reflected the level required for any given capability of each component.  The level of fidelity was then used as a guide for where the V&V effort should be focussed during the integration and test phase of the programme.  Although a very simple notion the level of fidelity matrix became quite a powerful tool when conveying the specification to potential suppliers and in the working up of the V&V plan.Figure 4 – An Example of the Level of Fidelity Matrix Used in the M-ISTAR Programme.  Red indicates real systems or real people; Orange indicates High Fidelity Representations; Blue Medium Fidelity; Green Low Fidelity; White No RequirementRadar ModelsWith radar models in the ASAC/MASC/Merlin, SCMR, GFF, Type 45, UAV and constructive Type 23/SCMR there was clearly a requirement for careful control and scrutiny to ensure that the contributions to the force Link 16 picture were representative.  Independent verification and validation of the ASAC/MASC/Merlin, SCMR and GFF was provided by the RADSIM radar modelling team from QinetiQ Malvern.  The RADSIM team created suitable models of the various radars that could be implemented in real time in the ASuW and Littoral Manoeuvre contexts of the experiment.  Where possible, the models were based on actual sensor performances known to the RADSIM team; for future sensors the models were based on more complex models developed by the RADSIM team for the UK MOD.  The RADSIM team validated the implementation of the various models by analysing recorded data from V&V tests conducted during the integration phase of the programme.EO/IR Sensor Calibration and TestingEO sensors were fitted to the MASC, UAV, GFF, SCMR and AH representations in the SE.  These systems were supplied by three different companies each using their own image generation systems.The M-ISTAR team had access to sensor performance characteristics for a number of current generation sensors and these were used to help the component suppliers set any necessary parameters for their sensors.  Subject Matter Experts were then used to calibrate the sensors in the context of the synthetic environment.  The original intention had been to use a test target similar to that used by the RAF to calibrate their EO pods; the target consisted of a number of horizontal and vertical lines that could be reported by the players as the viewed it from a variety of ranges.  With a number of different suppliers each needing to render any visual models into their own IG format, it became apparent that this process was not going to work in the time available and, in fact, the SMEs expressed their own wish to conduct any calibration activities against targets that would be used in the experimental SE.Test runs were conducted by lining up all the various visual models that would be used in the experiment and allowing the SMEs to fly their aircraft against the targets.   The SMEs compared their ability to detect, classify and identify the targets with their knowledge of sensor performances in the real world.  Although lacking in the original intent to provide some rigour to the process, the results bore out the technique and ensured that no one system performed any better than another and that all the systems represented present or expected capability for the EO sensors.SAR/ISAR ModelsSAR/ISAR sensors were required for the MASC and UAV and a SAR sensor for the GFF.  Since the focus of the experiment was on the future capabilities of the MASC platform, a higher fidelity representation of the SAR/ISAR sensor was required than that in the GFF (a good example of the use of the LOF matrix).  The SAR/ISAR model in the MASC was, therefore, a physics based representation taken from an existing model from the MASC/UAV supplier.  In the GFF a much simpler model based on a manipulation of the visual database was used.The more complex model in the MASC and UAV proved difficult to implement in the short time available for the experiment.  The terrain database and all of the visual models had to have additional features appended to them to allow the SAR model to function and late delivery of the visual database to the SAR modellers meant that little time was available for extensive testing.  Technical tests proved that the system worked in terms of essential functionality, however subjective tests showed that the images produced were difficult to interpret and that the level of integration with the host system meant that the operators found it difficult to exploit all the capabilities of the new sensors whilst maintaining the force picture using the normal radar modes.  It became clear during the course of the experiment that decisions taken on the basis of the results of the experiment alone in this area would be high risk; this was therefore highlighted in the V&V report.The SAR model in the GFF was much simpler to implement and focussed solely on delivering an image that was representative of current or expected SAR systems.  Validation was conducted by SMEs and the model refined to provide the required stimulus to the experiment players.UAV Man Machine InterfaceThe UAV model and MMI was taken from an existing UK UAV programme, however there was a requirement to integrate the UAV control into the MASC and to allow control of the UAV to be transferred from a ground station simulation to the air C2 platform (the MASC).  Control of the UAV from the ground station was relatively straightforward and used a simple waypoint based planning system and once again, technical tests proved the functionality of the system and the performance of the sensors.  It became apparent during the experiment that tactical exploitation of the UAV capability demanded that the UAV operator should share the same force picture as the other key warfighters in the scenario and it was necessary to augment the ground station with additional situational awareness displays to provide this functionality.  In the MASC case the control of the UAV was integrated into the mission system, but the scenarios were sufficiently challenging that the operators rarely found the time to employ the UAV themselves and preferred to hand control to the ground station operator. All these factors meant that, as in the SAR case, acquisition decisions based solely on the findings of the experiment should be treated with caution and this too was recorded in the V&V report.Link 16 Message SetA full implementation of the J series message set by all the component suppliers was clearly not going to be possible in the ten weeks allocated for integration, test and experimentation and so a sub-set was defined that encompassed those messages that the warfighters required to build a suitable force picture and to control the blue force assets in that picture.  A test harness was provided to all the component suppliers by the Link 16 supplier and this was used in the initial integration period to determine that the various messages were in the correct format.  System wide tests were then performed to establish the propagation of targets across the link and to examine the track management, Reporting Responsibility (R2) and correlation.  Once again, the relationship between technical testing and warfighter validation was highlighted with the technical tests proving that data propagated as expected across the network but with the warfighters uncovering deep seated track management and correlation issues that required closer investigation.  The eventual link picture was reported by all the warfighters as being an excellent representation of real world Link 16.Database Creation and TestingThe pace at which NITEworks experiments are developed and delivered leaves little spare time available for the niceties of database creation and testing.  The requirement to pull suitable components off the shelf and use them with little or no modification results in a requirements for numerous database formats and projections.  The Littoral manoeuvre element of the M-ISTAR experiment demanded a reasonable terrain database in a number of different formats.  The base format was Openflight, but each of the systems with Image Generators required some degree of additional formatting to satisfy their needs.  JSAF also required its own CTDB variant.With no money available early in the programme to start the database ball rolling, the delivery of the Openflight version to all the various suppliers was always going to be critical to the success of the programme.  In the end, the final issue of the CTDB did not occur until the week before the experiment, whilst the database required for the UAV and MASC SAR models was delayed until the day before it was required in the Littoral Manoeuvre experiment.  This led to a very challenging test and acceptance regime that had to be conducted piecemeal as the various versions of the database became available.  It was fortunate that the different projections and formats turned out to be well correlated and, in the end, the tight timescales did not compromise the experiment as a whole.JSAF Model BehavioursThe decision to use JSAF as the experimental CGF was, in fact, an experiment within an experiment.  There was a requirement to better understand JSAF ability to support real time MITL warfighting experimentation.  The system behaved reasonably well, although a number of lessons were learned about scenario creation and management and about the human interface.  An additional lesson was the need to understand inherent JSAF behaviours for certain units, particularly if new platforms were derived from existing JSAF platforms.   Routing behaviour and reaction to fire/detonate events gave rise to occasional surprises that were not always appreciated by the experimental design team with their desire to control all the units in the scenarios (other than the manned units) and to have repeatability across the various experimental runs.    The analysis showed that, in fact, these nuances had little effect on the overall experimental outcome and could be relatively easily identified and allowed for. V&V of a tool such as JSAF is almost impossible and whilst it might be possible to verify the small bits that have been developed or altered for a programme like this one, full validation is unlikely to be achieved.Lessons IdentifiedThe following key lessons were identified during this case study:The V&V Plan has to develop with the SE RequirementsThe Level of Fidelity Matrix became a key tool in communicating requirements to suppliers and determining the level of V&V effort requiredAll component suppliers must accept the V&V plan and test regime proposedV&V testing periods must be clearly identified in the programmeApproximately 15-20% of the total integration period should be allocated to V&VSuitable Subject Matter Experts must be identified, booked and paid for as part of the V&V regimeIndependent V&V is good provided the subject matter expertise and technical knowledge is available5	ExploitationHaving created the DEFSTAN and provided a second worked example, the UK MOD is now well placed to exploit its investment in V&V research.  Modelling and simulation practitioners and customers alike can be pointed to the DEFSTAN and the associated guidance to help them better understand V&V issues.  The Integrated Modelling and Simulation Support to Acquisition (IMSSA) programme will offer both education and support to the acquisition community for V&V as well as more general M&S issues.  Further case studies are required; the two existing studies are both for NITEworks experiments and have their own limitations.  Studies from other acquisition programmes in the UK will be sought as well as experiences from the US and NATO.  It is anticipated that suitable studies will be captured and added to the guidance that already exists in the DEFSTAN so that future users of M&S will have a wide range of worked examples to help them better understand the challenges involved.  Continued participation in SIW study groups and conferences is anticipated in order to provide a two-way exchange of information between the UK and global community of practice.6	SummaryThe generic UK process for V&V of Synthetic Environments has been successfully developed into a UK Defence Standard.  A further case study, building on previous work, has been conducted during the NITEworks Maritime ISTAR study.  The results of this study will be incorporated into the Defence Standard in due course.  The UK M&S community now has a formal document on which to base its V&V activities and which can be specified by M&S customers in order to formalise a process that has, until now, been ad hoc.  It is anticipated that the IMSSA initiative in the UK will provide the forum for both education and information exchange that will allow the standard to be undated and mature as M&S technology develops.7	References[1]	M Simpson, M Dumble, “Development of a UK Process for Conducting VV&A for Synthetic Environments”, (05S-SIW-025) Spring SIW 2005.[2]	C Morris, “NITEworks Guidelines for VV&A” Sep 2005[3]	M Dumble, J Read, “Development of a UK Process for Conducting VV&A for Synthetic Environments”, (06S-SIW-120) Spring SIW 2005.8	AcknowledgementsThe development of the original V&V Process and associated guidance was conducted under the UK MOD research programme.  The Defence Standard is being developed by the UK MOD.The author would like to acknowledge the contribution made by Andy Goldsmith in the development and presentation of the Levels of Fidelity matrix introduced in this paper and the help and advice provided by Chris Morris in the development of the V&V Plan for the M-ISTAR study.