DIS PDG 30 March 2007IntroductionBob Murray, acting chair, convened the meeting at 0815.  He reviewed the agenda.  Frank Hill has resigned as chair of the PDG as of 28 March.  Bob will take over his duties as acting chair. There was no objection DIS PDG OverviewBob presented an overview of the DIS PDG and the rules under which it operates. The PDG is sanctioned to revise the 1278.l standard.The PDG chair is vacant.  Bob Murray is acting chairRob Byers is secretary.Graham Shanks is drafting editor.The PCR manager position is vacantThe SAC TAD (Technical Area Director) is Mark McCallFrank Hill, resigned as chair of the PDG on 28 March.  He has posted a message on the PDG reflector stating his reasons for resigning.  Bob Murray said that during this meeting he would not go into the details, but that the DIS PDG leadership is open and willing to discuss the issues with anyone who has questions.  Bob wanted it known that Franks efforts were appreciated and noted the hard work he had put in to advance the DIS standard.  Bob remarked on the conflict Frank faced in being chair but also being involved in the technical content of the standard.Bob provided an overview of the PDG’s web resources.  He noted the PDG web reflector (SAC-DIS-PDG-PVT) is restricted.  Membership in the PDG is required to see the copyrighted material.   Find it Fast guide was shown.  Membership was discussed.  Attending the SIW makes one a SISO member.  One becomes a member of the DIS PDG by requesting membership from the chair or by signing into the PDG meeting. Graham Shanks made a motion that all new members be allowed to vote at the PDG meeting today.  Rob Byers seconded the motion.  The motion passed unanimously.Bob discussed the PCR process.  The current version of the standard is nearly complete, but Bob emphasized that the PDG would continue after the current version was balloted and PCRs can continue to be submitted.Bob Reviewed voting rules.  75% consensus is required at face-to-face and telecon meetings, otherwise the issue goes to an electronic vote.  An electronic vote requires at least a ten day discussion period, followed by at least five days to submit votes.  In the case of the DIS  PDG these are secret votes, however, at the end of voting, Van Lowe had been publishing (at Frank’s request) the names of those who voted.  Alan Berry made a motion to change the electronic voting procedures to not publish the names of voters except to the officers of the PDG. Ralph Weber seconded.   During the discussion of the motion, Pat Merlet noted that at face to face the voting is not secret.  Also discussed that in electronic votes, a running tally is shown after an individual submits his/her vote.  Mark McCall said that it is a feature of the voting software and he did not believe it could be turned off.  Rob Byers noted that votes are cast by individuals who do not participate in the regular meetings.   Pat Merlet stated that he sees no reason for a secret ballot and is contrary to the spirit of open-ness. Rob Byers also favors an open ballot.  There was no further discussion and vote was held:  Two opposed. 14 in favor.   Seven abstain. The motioned carried.Pat Merlet made a motion that all electronic votes be non-secret open votes with identity and vote of each voter to be published as their vote is cast.  Alan Berry seconded the motion.  Mary Christopher asked for clarification and vote.  Rob opposed because of running tally problem. Ralph argued that we are limited to technology available.  He said there might be confusion if more than one vote is held at a time.  Will slow process.  Eric Watz says it would not change intent of vote.  Alan, avoid appearance of impropriety.  Graham Shanks called the question to end discussion and proceed to a vote on the motion.  Tom Mullins seconded Graham’s motion and it was passed unanimously (22 in favor, none opposed).   Pat Merlet’s motion was voted on:  6 abstain. 16 in favor. 8 opposed.  Since the motion failed to achieve a 75% consensus, it will be resolved by an electronic vote.  Bob Murray proceeded to review the product development process steps.    Mark McCall said he would review the IEEE balloting process during the afternoon session.  Ralph Weber noted that in order to be a member of the IEEE balloting group, one must be an IEEE member and IEEE standards association member.  This entails two separate fees, totaling about $200).   Graham Shanks noted that one can ask to be in the ballot pool without being a IEEE member while the ballot pool nomination period is open.  However, one must be a member by end of the 30 day ballot pool formation period.  The PDG Chair must pass a list to IEEE of PDG members as potential ballot pool members (provided they are IEEE members).  Further discussion deferred to until afternoon when there is a formal agenda topic. Bob Murray noted that the current DIS PDG product nomination must be updated to include review of IEEE 1278 .2, and IEEE 1278.3.  Although these documents do not need new PDGs, separate drafting groups must be formed. Bob Murray also presented information on the DIS Product Support Group (PSG) and on the “DIS: Plain and Simple” document, which is being lead by Dwight Dreggor.Status of IEEE 12781.2, IEEE 1278.3, and IEEE 1278.4Graham shanks briefed the status of the other IEEE 1278.x series. IEEE 1278.2 is a standard.  IEEE 1278.3 and IEEE 1278.4 are recommended practices.Status: IEEE .2—1995 (Communications Services and Profiles): A draft PAR for revision of this standard is currently under review by the SAC.  IEEE 1278.3—1996 (Exercise Management and Feedback) A draft PAR to review this under review by SAC.IEEE1278.4—1997 (VV&A) has been passed to the VV&A PDG for consideration.Graham noted that IEEE standards are reassessed every five years.  They may be retired, reaffirmed or revised.  The decision has been made by the DIS PDG to update IEEE 1278.2 and IEEE 1278.3 to correct errors and account for technology changes.  Bob Murray noted that in his opinion, IEEE 1278.3 is out of date and not particularly useful.   PARs for these documents are being reviewed by SAC.IEEE 1278.4 was passed to the VV&A PDG because the  DIS PDG does not have VV&A expertise.  Mark McCall noted that the PARs must be revised because Frank Hill is listed as chair.  The revision to the IEEE 1278.2 PAR will be posted to PDG and PSG.   There was a brief discussion on the differences between the DIS Plain & Simple (P&S) document and IEEE 1278.3.   Graham reviewed rationale for P&S as a SISO (not IEEE) document as background of PDG thinking in developing the standard.  Mark McCall noted that P&S has been assigned a SISO-REF number.  It contains no requirements or shall statements.  On the other hand, IEEE 1278.3 describes recommended practices on how to use tools and protocols to run an exercise/federation.  Mary Christopher asked for discussion of drafting groups.  Graham noted that each document will need new drafting groups.  There is a current drafting group (consisting of Graham) that could take over these documents, but Graham is not inclined to do that.IEEE 1278.1 Remaining Changes SummaryBob Murray briefly noted the PCRs identified prior to the PDG meeting as being considered for the final draft of the standard: PCR 159: High Fidelity Have QuickPCR 182: Clarify emissions PDU RulesPCR 178: Max PDU size revisited (pending results of  PCR 182)PCR 162 Warfare UpgradePCR 98 Supplemental Emissions DataPCR 183/184: Extensibility to DE Fire and Damage State PDUsIEEE 1278.1 Draft 13 Status and SISO-REF-010 statusGraham Shanks discussed the status of the draft standard.   Draft 13 has not been completed.  Rob Byers suggested that the next draft of the standard be deferred until the remaining PCRs are completed.    Graham also discussed the status of the Enumerations document.  He said a change block would be posted by the end of April.  Alan asked question about changes in the entity type enumerations for life forms.  A JFCOM representative would discuss the status of life forms in a subsequent briefing.Graham has done further work on the XML version of the enumerations document.  It is a machine readable file that can be converted to various formats.  The first version will include all entity types and emitter names as well as some other enumerations.DIS XML and EBV StatusDon McGregor of the Naval Postgraduate School (NPS) discussed XML DIS.  He said that it was roughly the same status as last year.  It will use the XML enumerations, converting them to Java enumerations, although some manual intervention may be necessary.   He is not sure about C++ implementation of enumerations.The goal is to implement all PDUs under version 7 (IEEE 1278.1—200x).   He asked if the draft standard can be used for software development.  Graham Shanks said it would be okay if it is restricted to DIS PDG membership.  It is encouraged as part of testing.  Mark McCall agreed noting that the commenting in software incorporates large portions of standard text.  Changes are restricted to PDG members. Terry McDermott asked for clarification as to what an XML PDU is or does.  Don said it doesn’t include heartbeat, dead reckoning, conversions of coordinates, etc.  So far, he has ten PDUs in XML, including Entity State, Warfare PDUs and Exercise Management PDUs.Break 1000-1030JNTC FOM Briefing and Discuss CoordinationThis briefing was scheduled for immediately after break but the schedule was miscommunicated to the briefers who unfortunately left early.Mandatory  Briefing on Use of PatentsDIS Standard Guidelines ProjectBob Murray made a presentation on DIS protocol compatibility.  He addressed the difference between forward and backward compatibility.  In short, backward compatibility allows a new simulation to receive an older version of a PDU and understand and use it.   Forward compatibility allows a legacy simulation to receive and interpret PDUs from a newer version of the protocol.  Bob reviewed five levels of backward compatibility currently being considered in an electronic straw poll.  He will extend voting for a week recognizing that it was difficult for members to vote during the SIW.During discussion Grayden Figart noted that all standard/sims need regular maintenance to keep them current.   Alan Berry noted that the level of backward/forward compatibility one favored depended on a particular change being made and whether it satisfied an individual program’s needs.   Bob outlined five levels of forward compatibility.  No final definitions have been agreed to and no electronic straw vote has been initiated. Bob Murray relinquished chair to Mark McCall while he discussed PDU extensibility.  (Bob is technical lead, and cannot chair during technical discussion).  Extensibility refers to adding additional information to established PDUs, for example, by expanding the definition of articulated/articulated parts record to the new “variable parameter record”. All new PDUs were designed with built in extensibility.   Bob presented his ideas on the design of variable records.Mary Christopher asked where the rules governing byte-alignment could be found.  Bob said he believes they are in the standard.  In summary, Bob noted that progress in developing guidelines was slow and the group had to decide how to proceed. VV&A Joint Session on 1278.4 The PDG adjourned at 1115 to hear briefing on the 1278.4 status at the VV&A meeting to be followed by lunch.Lunch 1200—1330Following lunch, Rob Byers called the roll to determine who was in attendance for the afternoon session.   See the attendance roster above for information.SAC BriefingMark McCall briefed SAC to DIS PDG.  Mark is the chair of the SAC.  Katherine  Morse is co-chair and liaison to the IEEE.Mark addressed some of the comments made by Frank Hill on the PDG reflector.  He said SAC recognizes that not many have read policies in the BPDSP.    Discussed SISO procedures and how the SAC provides oversight.  Mark is TAD for DIS PDG.  He noted that there are ten elected SAC members on two year staggered terms. . The nominating period starts on 16 April for open slots on the SAC, EXCOM and CC.  One quarter of the positions are term-limited every year. He discussed policies and procedures.  He emphasized discipline.  SAC attempts to be responsive.  He also emphasized fairness and the right of appeal.   He also noted the need for openness and consensus. Rob Byers asked about purging PDG rolls of non-participants.  Mark said there no provisions for doing so.  Also there is no provision for credits (e.g. must have attended previous two meetings in order to vote).   As a point of interest he noted that while there were roughly 1000 paid SISO members, approximately 5000 people are registered to web site.  Mark remarked on Technical Acceptance Principles.  The SAC and the EXCOM attempt to be timely but are not always successful and are constrained by product development difficulties.For balloted standard he noted the principles of Generality, Stability, and Supportability.  The SAC lacks the expertise to judge standards on their technical merit.Mark discussed the concept of SISO sponsored IEEE products. SISO has an agreement with IEEE that a PDG is chartered under both SISO (product nomination)  and IEEE (PAR). SISO procedures are followed (but cannot violate IEEE rules) up to IEEE balloting at which time IEEE rules apply.  SISO procedures are governed by BPDSP (SISO-ADM-003—2006). Mark reviewed how the BPDSP applies to the DIS PDG.  A PDG consists of chair, vice chair, secretary, TAD, Drafting group, members.  DIS PDG members must be added to list by chair.  He reviewed the duties of each position and noted that the drafting group editors are responsible for IEEE comment resolution under balloting process. In general, meetings must be accessible to all with informal Robert’s Rules of Order 30 days notice is required for face-to-face meetings.  Teleconferences required five day notice. In a discussion of dominance and affiliation, Rob Byers asked what constituted dominance.  Mark said any allegation would be sufficient to start investigation.  He opined that Frank’s resignation post may cause investigation in that it alleges dominance.Mark said he didn’t know how to prevent this from becoming an issue.  It depends on the integrity of members and openness.  Kevin Springer asked about affiliation.  Mark went through categories and answered specific questions.  Rob pointed out that there were no consequences for an individual who was not forthcoming about his/her affiliation.   Mark said that any suspicion of dominance must be reported to SAC/IEEE.Mark reviewed voting rules and appeals. He noted that SISO had adopted the simulationist code of ethics.In conclusion he noted the hard work ahead and recommended the PDG try to avoid squabbling.  IEEE  1278.1 Plan for completionGraham Shanks lead a discussion for completion of the Draft standard.  He noted at the Fall 2006 SIW, a plan had been adopted and acknowledged that the schedule had not been met. He made the following recommendationsTarget for completion of PCRs: 11 May (six weeks) (Including three weeks for electronic vote).  Guillotine PCRs that are not close to resolution (although some flexibility would be allowed for those near completion).Draft 14 produced with resolved PCRs.Conduct review of draft 14 using SISO comment tracking system. This will be a formal review.  Draft 15 produced and passed to IEEE.  IEEE ballot group formed.  Must be IEEE-SA member to be in ballot group.Ballot resolution.   Approved package passed to RevCom for approval.  IEEE does final editing.  This should take less than six months.   Graham answered questions about the RevCom and what they do.  They are interested in due process, procedure, etc.Ballot group balancing.  As IEEE member can register interest in being ballot group.  (about 70 have already).  Bob Murray will provide a list of PDG members who are eligible (unless they decline) Mark McCall noted that a third group can come from other SISO members who identify themselves as interested in being in ballot group.  Anyone interested will be accepted.  The ballot group must be balanced between government, commercial and academic.    A minimum of 10% of ballot group must come from each group.  One group may comprise a maximum of 50% of the ballot group.Break 1500—1530IEEE  1278.1 Plan for completion (continued)There was a discussion of those PCRs that had been identified as candidates for inclusion in the draft standard before it advances to balloting. Alan Berry briefed PCR 182: Clarify emission PDU changed update/heartbeat rules.   The 1995 standard is unclear on whether all emitters and beams in a system must be in a single PDU or whether the update of a single parameter required all beams to be updated. PCR 150 clarified this and Draft 12 of the standard includes language whereas all emitters & beams must be in single PDU.   It requires a full update for both change data and heartbeat.Subsequent analysis showed this approach and problems and PCR 182 addresses these with four options:	a. null option, all in one PDU as in draft 12	b. permit emitter systems in separate EE pdus.		c. option b plus: permit sending only changed beams in change data updates	d. option c plus: permit changing only track/jam entries in change data updates.A straw poll indicated that option c is the preferred approach.Alan presented a plan for completion of this PCR so that it could be balloted into the draft standard by 26 April.Alan also briefed PCR 098:  BFTT supplemental emissions PDUThis PCR came about because the beam parameter index does not support supplemental beam data unless associated with a radar mode.  There are no means to extend the EE PDU in 1995 standard.  Alan presented two alternatives:a. Append ee PDU with variable emissions parameter recordb. Use Attribute PDU to extend the ee pdu.A straw poll showed a preference for using the Attribute PDU over inserting record between the existing beam and track/jam structures.  However, it did not consider the possibility of placing VEP records at end of PDU.  Alan said a VEP record would be compatible with proposed PDU appendix record (PCR 180).  Alan presented a schedule for resolution of this PCR by 10 May.Mike McCaslin expressed concern with forward compatibility and whether it will hinder balloting success.  Grayden Figart wondered whether standard can be changed at all.  Graham reviewed thinking that some parts of standard are broken and must be revised substantially.  Breaking old simulations is undesirable but sometimes necessary. Bob Murray briefed PCR 178—max PDU size revisited.  PCR 154 set the max size at 8k bytes.  There was concern that the EE PDU might exceed that and PCR 178 proposed change to 32K.  However, PCR 182 may make this issue moot.  Bob recommended closing this PCR if PCR 182 can be used to reduce the length of the EE PDU.Bob briefed PCR 183—Entity Damage Status PDU change.  This change is to add extendable record format to this PDU.   Originally this PDU applied only to directed energy weapons but now is generalized for use by any weapon damage.  However, the form is not changed and this PCR is proposed to accomplish this.Bob briefed PCR 184—DE Fire PDU changes.  This change is also to add extendable format to this PDU.   PCR 183/184 have not yet been postedJoe Sorroche brought up PCR 174 which addressed changes to the DE PDUs based on testing experience. Bob Murray noted that PCR 159 for High Fidelity Have Quick is currently in discussion preceding vote.Graham Shanks briefly discussed the progress of PCR 162—warfare upgrade.  It extends fire/detonate PDUs to expendables and non-munition explosions.Alan Berry stated that he wants to add PCR 180—PDU appendix to the list of PCRs to be considered for inclusion in the draft standard.  PCR 180 provides an alternative to the Attribute PDU for PDU extensibility that originated during discussion of the Attribute PDU.   The PCR was tabled at the time.  Alan noted that the Attribute PDU has no issuance instructions.   Terry McDermott observed that several of the remaining PDUs hinge on extensibility issues and might be combined into single discussion. Alan presented a plan for resolution of PCR 180 prior to 3 May.Graham Shanks observed that PCR 180 is less mature and more far-reaching, as an alternative to the Attribute PDU.  But potential benefits warrants going forward in time for this version of standard.  Grayden Figart opined that the standard  should be limited to either the Attribute PDU or use of the PDU appendix, but should not have both.   Alan said that the standard should either specify issuance rules for each PDU for extensibility or eliminate the Attribute PDU text.Graham Shanks presented a motion that for the following PDUs be considered for inclusion in the P1278.1 (the draft standard) PCR 098, PCR 159, PCR 162, PCR 178, PCR 181, PCR 182, PCR 183, and PCR184.The motion stated that PCRs must be completed within six weeks following the SIW (around 11 May) with a parenthetical allowance for those PCRs “extremely close to ready” at that timeAlan Berry suggested a friendly amendment to remove parentheses (extremely close to ready) to make a hard deadline. Graham made a motion for PCRs to be completed and schedule, Rob seconded the motion. In discussion, Terry McDermott proposed a friendly amendment to add PCR 180.  Alan noted pros and cons of 180. Rob Byers said that he believed the schedule was more important than a list of specific PDUs to be resolved.  Graham affirmed that the intent of his motion was to bring a close to the drafting process.  There was a formal motion by Terry to add PCR 180 to the list of PCRs to be included in draft.  The motion withdrawn for discussion of general wording of motion.  The following friendly amendments were suggested by Rob Byers “That only the following PCRs be considered for inclusion in P1278.1 draft to go forward to IEEE Balloting…” to preclude new PCRs from being introduced for this version of the standard.  Terry McDermott suggested that instead of a soft 6 week schedule, a hard eight week schedule: “ if any of the above PCRs are not approved for inclusion by 8 weeks post SIW they be deferred to version 8.”  Delete last bullet.Graham restated the formal motion which was seconded by Rob.Terry moved that PCR 180 be added to the list of PCRs to be resolved.  Rob Byers seconded the motion.  There was no discussion.  The vote was 20 in favor, 2 abstain.  The amendment to the motion was approved.Joe Sorroche moved that PCR 174 be added to the list. Alan Berry seconded the motion.  Joe explained changes are necessary to correct errors in the current draft.  The motion passed unanimously.The amended motion was briefly discussed and unanimously accepted.Graham presented a second motion with a schedule for completion.    It was recognized that all dates were extended by approximately two weeks because of the new eight week deadline.  The schedule (with friendly amendments) was:Draft 13 produced  by 4 JuneDraft reviews start 11 JuneUsing SISO comment tracking systemOpen for until second week in JulyComment resolution starts on or about 23 JulyDraft 14 produced and passed to IEEE not later than fall 2007 SIW IEEE ballot starts.Graham made a formal motion (including amendments). Rob Byers seconded.  The motion passed unaniomously.IEEE Ballot Comment ResolutionGraham discussed ballot choices.   A ballot group member may make one of the following recommendations:ApproveMay accompany with commentsAction on such comments left to discretion of the sponsorDo not approve:Must accompany with one or more specific objectisons with proposed resolution.May have additional commentsIf despite this no comment is received sponsor is not required to conduct recirculation ballot.Abstain:  Graham’s advice to ballot group members:  if you have something you want addressed, you should reject on first time around.  75% of ballots must be returned.  The balloting period may be extended a maximum of 60 days to reach 75%.  Of submitted ballot 30% or more abstentions make the ballot invalid. 75% or more of those voting affirmative or negative with comments must approve for the ballot to succeed.The sponsor shall make a reasonable attempt to resolve all comments, objections and negative votes that are accompanied by comments. Comments (editorial or technical) can be accepted, revised, or rejected (must give reason).  Comment resolution group considered all necessary comments and determine how to address them.  Changes may be made to draft to resolve negative votes or other reasons.  All substantive changes to document will be identified and re-circulated to the ballot group.If on first round 75% approval is achieved, the editor may reject comments.  However, Graham said he will make a fair assessment and may make changes anyway.If the ballot is recirculated the ballot group may change their vote based on recirculation.  Written confirmation required to change from negative to affirmative. During recirculation, only comments on the changes are allowed. Further recirculation efforts including recirculation ballots continue until 75% approval is achieved. Copies of all unresolved negative votes, reasons and sponsor’s rebuttal are passed to the IEEE RevCom.Graham made a motion that the comment resolution group consist of (including friendly amendments):Graham Shanks,Bob MurrayRob ByersMary ChristopherAlan Berry Joe SorrocheSteve Jones (TBC)Randy Saunders (TBC)Terry McDermott (TBC)Pat Merlet (TBC)Rob Byers seconded the motion.  The motion passed unanimously. AdjournmentThe meeting was adjourned at 5:38 p.m.