Simulation Reference Markup Language (SRML)Product Development Group MeetingFall Simulation Interoperability Workshop26 March 2007[Attendee List provided following the meeting minutes]Minutes:Meeting was called to order by Bob Lutz at 1337.Introduction – Bob LutzSRML is …An application of XML for describing simulation models – enables simulations to be served, received, and processed in a standard fashion using Internet technologies; combines XML and scripts to encode both the structure and behavior of all items comprising a simulationPotential SISO standard: Language specification (XML); Engine specification (object model/API); User GuideIntroduction of officersBob Lutz – ChairJane Bachman – Vice Chair and SAC TADCurt Blais – Recording SecretarySteve Reichenthal – Drafting Group Chair – call for additional volunteers for drafting groupParticipating in the PDGMust be SISO membersGo to SISO web site, select the PDG and subscribe to the reflectorProposed schedule – approved at Fall 2006 SIW, but unresolved Intellectual Property (IP) issues prevented continuation of activities since the last PDG meetingCurrent IP status – Steve ReichenthalSAC, from Mark McCall:SAC has reviewed the issues relating to the SRML IP issue and provided the following guidance to the SRML PDG. This guidance is based on balancing the following factors:The Boeing Corporation currently has both copyright and patent (US Patent No. 7,058,558) rights to portions of the technology related to SRML. Boeing Response: Boeing grants any party its IP royalty free.  Copyrights granted to SISO in letter to Chris Rouget for the SAC.  PDG discussion: Would be useful if patent could be released as well. SRML documentation was published on WWW Consortium and may be subject to W3C rights or licensing requirements (although SAC understands the copyright releases IAW SISO-ADM-005 are being reviewed).  Boeing Response: Per W3C, no derivatives produced which would carry a W3C copyright. They remain author so they have all the rights necessary.SISO has not received adequate releases to either the copyright or patent information. Boeing Response: SISO received releases at the Fall 2007 PDG for both IP and copyright through Chris Rouget.  Need to identify how they were inadequate for SISO purposes.All work performed by the PDG until the IP issues are fully resolved is essentially free work which contributes to the IP claimed by the Boeing Corporation. Boeing Reponse: Has released IP as free for any person. Participants in PDG workgroups already understand that SISO is a volunteer organization.The SAC recommended the SRML PDG cease all work on the SRMLL documents until the IP issues are resolved. SISO-REF-003-2006 (BSDSP) and SISO-REF-005-2004 (Style Guide) provide the current guidance on IP uses within SISO products. The SAC believes it is the responsibility of Mr. Reichenthal and The Boeing Corporation to develop and provide the appropriate resolutions to the IP issues for SAC, EXCOM, and SISO Inc. review. Once these are received and evaluated, the SAC and EXCOM will provide further guidance on SRML.Re Boeing holding copyright and patent rightsNeed letters on the copyright allowing use of the information from the original SRML specification and statement IAW paragraph 4.2.14 identifying patent rules: “The SISO policy on patents prohibits the use of restricted intellectual property in any product. Explicit worldwide patent release is required from technical contributors as part of submissions to SISO. EXCOM approval, through the SAC, is required for any exception to this policy. If approval of restricted content is granted by EXCOM, patented technology shall be identified in the introduction of the document…” Group has some concern that the Boeing statement creates a “restriction” under this policy. Paragraph 5.2.6 (Policy for the Style and Format of SISO Documents) identifies notices that need to go on the front of the document: “For procedures on using patents in SISO standards or guidance documents see the SISO BPDP. An appropriate notice statement shall appear in any product that contains known patented technology.”  Letter from Boeing regarding the copyright is held in SAC records.Boeing SRML Submission to SISO provides statements regarding Intellectual Property Rights (same documentation as used by W3C. Had not been signed by Boeing authorities.  Steve has authority from Boeing to modify the statement as needed and sign the submission statement.  Then has to be evaluated by the SAC and members of the PDG.  This is supposed to be the mechanism by which Boeing is releasing its IP in the specification and derivative products. Some portions of the statement:“Implementation of a SISO standard based on the SRML specification may thus require implementers to obtain a license in Boeing intellectual property.” Seems to indicate organizations would (possibly) have to request permission (license) from Boeing before using the standard.“Boeing agrees that, upon adoption of this submission as a SISO Standard, it will grant to any party a Royalty-Free license under Boeing’s applicable intellectual property rights essential to implement and use the technology proposed in the submission.”“One precondition of any such license granted to the licensee shall be the licensee’s agreement to grant to Boeing and other companies reciprocal royalty-free licenses to any intellectual property rights owned or controlled by the licensee necessary to implement the standard.” – Steven is willing remove this statement.  It would be reasonable for companies to be able to build and sell products (e.g., execution engines) based on the SRML standard.Regarding Copyright, “Boeing hereby grants to the SISO a perpetual, nonexclusive, royalty-free, world-wide right…”Walked through Draft Letter of Assurance. Will be provided on Boeing letterhead, signed by Steven.  Will include copyright release as attachment.Agreed that best go-forward approach is for SAC/EXCOM to assess the paperwork first and then send out a notice to the PDG for final look.Strawman specification and engine specification – Steve will continue to work with it.  Currently, Paul and Jeff are on the drafting group.  Others can contact Steve to volunteer.Boeing engine and examples can be downloaded.Yahoo Widgets – some similarity to SRML (objects with behavior).  SRML distinctive by having a standard simulation engine and being presentation-independent (behavior only) and language-independent.  Can work with HLA and other frameworks.  SRML is about interchange, not interplay (primarily). Objects can interact via messages inside the environment. Standard for representing aerodynamic models – Bruce Jackson, NASA Langley (DAVML – dynamic aerodynamic vehicle markup language).Discussed concept of a SISO demonstration environment for showing capabilities of multiple standards working together.  Refer to paper 07S-SIW-039.  ACTION ITEMS(Steve): Provide signed version of IP statement to SAC for review.(Mark/SAC): Ensure review of statement by SAC and EXCOM and provide findings to the SRML PDG for review/comment.Meeting adjourned at 1658.SISO Standard Membership RosterDate: _____3/27/2007_____Type of Meeting: _X_ Face-to-Face ___ TelecomPresentNameE-MailAddress/PhonePrimaryEmployerParentCorp./PrimeContractorSponsoring AgencyProgram/ProductxKenn Atkinson HYPERLINK "mailto:kenneth.atkinson@osd.mil" kenneth.atkinson@osd.mil703-998-0660DoDN/AOSDN/AxJane Bachman HYPERLINK "mailto:jane.bachman@navy.mil" jane.bachman@navy.mil540-653-7055NSWCDD-TEAMSGov’tNavyMCxCurtis Blais HYPERLINK "mailto:clblais@nps.edu" clblais@nps.eduMOVES InstituteNPS700 Dyer Rd Rm265Monterey, CA 93943831-656-3215Naval Postgraduate School MOVES InstituteDoNN/AN/AxPaul Gustavson HYPERLINK "mailto:pgustavson@simventions.com" pgustavson@simventions.com540-372-7727SimVentionsN/AMOSCOCMSExBob Lutz HYPERLINK "mailto:robert.lutz@jhuapl.edu" robert.lutz@jhuapl.edu11100 Johns Hopkins RoadLaurel, MD 20723JHU/APLN/AN/AN/AxMark McCall HYPERLINK "mailto:james.mccall@mesa.afml.af.mil" james.mccall@mesa.afml.af.mil348 E. Benrich Dr.Gilbert AZ 85296602-751-2741General Dynamics Info TechGeneral DynamicsAir Force Research LabWarfighter Training Research SupportxDon McGregor HYPERLINK "mailto:mcgredo@nps.edu" mcgredo@nps.eduMOVES InstituteNPS700 Dyer Rd Rm265Monterey, CA 93943Naval Postgraduate School MOVES InstituteDoNN/AN/AxLarry Root HYPERLINK "mailto:lroot@simventions.com" lroot@simventions.comSimVentionsN/AN/AN/AxSteven Sheasby HYPERLINK "mailto:ssheasby@raytheon.com" ssheasby@raytheon.com972-344-6126RaytheonN/AN/AN/AxJeff Steinman HYPERLINK "mailto:steinman@warpiv.com" steinman@warpiv.comWarpIV TechnologiesN/AN/AN/AxBrian Wharry HYPERLINK "mailto:brian.wharry@ngc.com" brian.wharry@ngc.com540-469-2209Northrop GrummanN/ANavyAegisxBrent York HYPERLINK "mailto:byork@indra-systems.com" byork@indra-systems.com407-691-5161IndraN/AN/AN/A