Common Image Generator Interface Standing Study Group (CIGI SSG) Meeting MinutesTuesday, 27 March 20071:35 p.m. to 5:00 p.m.Norfolk Waterside Marriott235 East Main StreetNorfolk, VA, USA   23510Planned Agenda: Welcome and IntroductionsStatus review of previous meeting’s action itemsReview of recent maturity activitySymbology interfaceOld BusinessBreak (if appropriate)New businessSet up next meetingAdjournMeeting Purpose:The purpose of this meeting was to conduct business of the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO), Common Image Generator Interface (CIGI), Standing Study Group (SSG).Attendance:NameOrganizatione-mail AddressTelephoneDurham, LanceBoeing HYPERLINK "mailto:lance.w.durham@boeing.com" lance.w.durham@boeing.com314-777-4793Hoang Doan (HD)NAVAIR (NASMP) HYPERLINK "mailto:Hoang.doan@navy.mil" Hoang.doan@navy.mil 407-380-4428Murray, BobBoeing HYPERLINK "mailto:Bob.murray@boeing.com" Bob.murray@boeing.com 314-777-4728Peterson, MarkBinghamton Simulation Company (BSC) HYPERLINK "mailto:mpeterson@bsc.com" mpeterson@bsc.com 607-759-4457Phelps, BillBoeing HYPERLINK "mailto:willard.b.phelps@boeing.com" willard.b.phelps@boeing.com314-777-4799Sardella, JoeL-3 Comm HYPERLINK "mailto:jmsardella@link.com" jmsardella@link.com 607-721-5164Schwalm, Steven R.L-3 Comm (SE Core) HYPERLINK "mailto:srschwalm@link.com" srschwalm@link.com 407-382-2197Wharry, BrianNorthrop Grumman HYPERLINK "mailto:brian.wharry@rgc.com" brian.wharry@rgc.com 540-469-2209Summary of Decisions Made:It was agreed that the fact that CIGI entities only handle one animation per entity was adequate for current users.The next meeting of the CIGI SSG will be at the Fall 2007 SIW.Open Items:No open items were identified.Action Item Assignments:Action Item: Bill Phelps will ask Mark McCall if making a public Wiki will hold up changes, additions, or extensions from being standardized by IEEE.Action Item: Bill Phelps will ask Kerry Thompson of Rockwell Collins for permission to post the sensor dialogue between Boeing and Rockwell Collins on the CIGI SSG discussion board.Action Item: Lance Durham will add some text to the next version of the ICD to convey that the notion of re-defining a view to change the view type is appropriate for the View Definition data packet, i.e. sending View Definition data packets during a real-time simulation is allowed.Action Item: Bill Phelps will send a request to the people that have volunteered to be part of the voting body for information to assure that everyone has fair representation and that the voting body is not biased toward any particular company or program.Action Item: Steven Schwalm will write a PCR introducing different entity lists per viewport, i.e. the host would manage the list per channel. This would be useful when driving an OTW and sensor IG from the same host.  The sensor channel can see entities that the OTW can not.  The OTW should not be forced to process entities it can not see.Action Item: Mark Peterson will write a PCR to propose having Latitude and Longitude fields added to the HAT/HOT Extended Response packet.Action Item: Bill Phelps to contact Bruce Riner of NAVAIR to discuss further actions on needs for a CIGI test tool.Details of the Meeting Proceedings:The meeting was called to order at 1:35 p.m. and the planned agenda for the meeting was reviewed. Each person was given the opportunity to introduce themselves. The status of each action item from the previous meeting was reviewed.During this discussion the investigation by Andrew Sampson of setting up a publicly editable repository (possibly a wiki) on SourceForge to capture common extensions to CIGI was discussed. The concern was pointed out that if the free version of DabbleDB was used, any content added to the database (e.g. as by a CIGI user who wants to publish their extension) must be published under the Creative Commons license. The people in attendance did not believe this would be a problem since any organization that wants to publish a CIGI extension wants it to be public anyway.A question did arise however as to whether this might complicate extensions being standardized by IEEE when CIGI becomes a standard.Action Item: Bill Phelps will ask Mark McCall if making a public Wiki will hold up changes, additions, or extensions from being standardized by IEEE.While discussing the current status of the sensor discussions with Rockwell Collins it was asked if that conversation could take place on the public SISO-CIGI-SSG web board forum so everyone on the CIGI SSG had insight into the conversations being held.Action Item: Bill Phelps will ask Kerry Thompson of Rockwell Collins for permission to post the dialogue on the discussion board.Boeing CIGI team to produce a PCR that blends the best symbology ideas from offered approaches. The team will share all inputs that are provided with interested parties to produce the best result. This PCR will then be forwarded for review to the CIGI SSG voting membership. Status: Follows…Work to date on the symbology interface was described. It was explained that the Boeing CIGI Team had received symbology interfaces from the following three sources and summarized the attributes of each:FlightSafety InternationalRobust and flexibleDoes not fit typical CIGI paradigm of definition and controlGeneral Dynamics Land SystemsVery similar to FlightSafety approachHas contributed code to CIGI effortLockheed MartinImplemented OpenGL primitives at the interface levelFlexible, includes all capabilities of OpenGL symbology generationToo low a level to fit the CIGI philosophyBoeing is working to unify all of these approaches into one candidate that represents the best aspects of each. The current approach borrows heavily from the FlightSafety and General Dynamics approaches. Further work involves:Definition and Control functionality segregated into separate sets of packets.Definition packets allow for the formation of symbols from primitives:TextPoint/Line Primitives (e.g., points, line, polygons)Arcs/CirclesIt was pointed out that we need to add support for Ellipse primitives – inner and outer radii could double as major and minor radii.2D vs. 3D coordinates – 3D is a much larger problem so we will focus on 2D symbology generation for now.Control packets allow symbols to be translated and rotated in screen space, will also include color and other attributes that might change frequentlyExample of rotation – speedometer needleThe current philosophy is to follow the entity paradigm so that Symbols could be arranged in a hierarchy just like the entity hierarchy – conceptually the biggest difference is that you can define symbols on the fly, but you can’t define entity models because of their complexity. OLD BUSINESS ITEMS FROM IITSEC 2005 meetingAt the previous CIGI SSG meeting a question was posed:“Should the CIGI SSG be involved in arbitration between the customer and vendor in regards to CIGI compliance involving waivers to implementation such as User Defined packets, extensions and completeness of implementation?”The Boeing CIGI SSG Team offered the following opinion:“It is not the intent of the CIGI SSG to be a “police force” to dictate CIGI compliance, but rather to define what CIGI compliance is so that implementers understand when it has been achieved. Having stated this, the CIGI SSG should be willing to objectively look at any particular difference of opinion between a customer and a vendor and suggest a solution that will align with the intent of CIGI as closely as possible.”This opinion was supported by the attendees.STATUS REVIEW OF ACTION ITEMS FROM IITSEC 2005 MEETINGLance Durham to add an erratum that clarifies the arbitrary nature of the submodel coordinate system. A diagram showing the submodel coordinate system will be added to show that it can be parallel to the entity coordinate system.  Status: Complete. Errata were released containing a second diagram and revised text to show a parallel submodel coordinate system example.At the last meeting it was decided that the time field in the Celestial Sphere packet be changed to be based on UTC instead of local time. It was further decided that the change will not be retroactive, but future version of CIGI will use UTC.  Status: Pending release of the ICD for CIGI 3.3.Bill Phelps to update SISO CIGI SSG documentation to show the acceptance of this UTC reference for the time field specified in the Celestial sphere packet. Status:  Complete. SISO CIGI Standing Study Group Problem/Change Request (PCR) Status Report document updated January 4, 2007 with all current PCR status.Andrew Sampson to investigate setting up a publicly editable repository (possibly a wiki) on sourceforge to capture common extensions to CIGI. Status: In-work. Have looked at several tools including TWiki and DabbleDB. (See details of the meeting proceedings for more detail)Lance Durham and Bill Phelps to schedule an update to the HE to version 3.2. Status: Complete. Released HE 3.2.0 on SourceForge.The HE 3.2.0 source code was released for Visual Studio 6 and Visual Studio 2003. This will be the last release in which Visual Studio 6 will be supported.HE 2.1.10 was also released. Because there is currently very little ongoing development for HE 2.x, the source code will remain in a Visual Studio 6 project.Bill Phelps will contact Kerry Thompson or Jim Bleak, both of Rockwell Collins, and Greg Basler of Boeing for input on sensor enhancements and/or refinements in the following areas:additions to the Sensor Control packetsupport for Spatial and Temporal sensor filtershistogram collection areaa packet to send to the host IG-derived Gain/Level and Noise valuesStatus:  In-work. There has been an on-going dialogue between Boeing and Rockwell Collins (See details of the meeting proceedings for more detail)Bill Phelps will send out a query to determine whether the View Type parameter can be used as an ID field to change sensor configuration on the fly.Bill sent out a query to voting members in early March, discussion at this meeting revealed that the overall feeling is that the View Type parameter is appropriate where it is and that the notion of re-defining a view to change the view type is reasonable. Status: Complete. The View Type parameter will remain in the View Definition packet.Action Item: Lance Durham will add some text to the next version of the ICD to convey this notion.NEW BUSINESS ITEMSThe CIGI SSG SAC representative, Mark McCall contacted the CIGI SSG Chair, Bill Phelps with a request to list the following information on the CIGI SSG voting membership.NameEmailAddressPhone numberPrimary employerParent companySponsoring agencyProgram / ProductThis information is being collected to assure that everyone has fair representation and that the voting body is not biased toward any particular company or program.Action Item: Bill Phelps will send a request to the people that have volunteered to be part of the voting body.Another topic of conversation that was brought up was the possibility of introducing different entity lists per viewport, with the host managing the list for each channel. This would be useful when driving an OTW and sensor IG from the same host.  The sensor channel could see entities that the OTW could not.  The OTW should not be forced to process entities it can not see.Action Item: Steven Schwalm will write a PCR.  The question of multiple animations per entity was raised. An example of an entity that might benefit from allowing multiple animations per entity would be the portrayal of human forms. It was pointed out that many IG vendors are doing human forms with the current interface and that human forms do not follow the traditional Play/Rewind/Pause/Reverse behavior shared by other animations. For this reason the opinion of the attendees was that CIGI should not try to force it to and that the current single animation state is good enough for now.Mark Peterson of BSG brought up a problem they have been having where the HAT/HOT doesn’t return the Latitude/Longitude of the response point. The current packet is adequate most of the time but isn’t good enough for things that move very fast over rough terrain (e.g., tracers). The question was posed as to whether Latitude and Longitude fields can be added to the HAT/HOT Extended Response packet.Action Item: Mark Peterson will write a PCR to propose this to the group.The Boeing CIGI Team described what had been going on in regards to a radar interface for CIGI. It was stated that a radar interface was different enough from other sensors that the intent would be to take the information learned from this effort and implement a radar interface within CIGI. Some of the interface features were briefly discussed including a conversation on adding Azimuth and Elevation ranges to the LOS Vector Request packet. A radar IG, for instance, could return a LOS response for all entities within this volume.  This functionality would probably need to be implemented with a separate packet to offer a third way to request LOS.  This will need to be revisited if/when we look at radar as a possible area for growth.It was brought up that there is a CIGI user that is running out of User-Defined Data Packet IDs. The question was posed as to whether there was legitimate need for this or whether the IG vendor was using the User-Defined data packets mechanism within CIGI to “tunnel” through the interface with their proprietary interface data packets. This led into a discussion of testing for CIGI compliance. It was suggested by Hoang Doan of NAVAIR that the Navy would be very interested in such a capability and that Bruce Riner, our CIGI Vice Chair from the Navy would be a good point of contact to further discuss this.Action Item: Bill Phelps to contact Bruce to discuss further actions on needs for a CIGI test tool or suite.At this time the next CIGI meeting will be at the fall SISO SIW.The meeting was adjourned at 5:05 p.m.PAGE  2PAGE  6			 PAGE 1	Willard B. Phelps		314-777-4799 