The Role of Architecture in Developing the United Kingdom’s Network Enabled Training Capability (Land)Mr John KentQinetiQRoom G030, Building A50Cody Technology ParkIvely Road,Farnborough,GU14 0LXUNITED KINGDOM+44(0) 1252 392952jrkent@qinetiq.comDr Richard RandelQinetiQDarenth House, 84 Main RoadSundridge, Nr. SevenoaksKent, TN14 6ERUnited Kingdom+44(0) 1959 547439 HYPERLINK "mailto:rrandel@qinetiq.com" rrandel@qinetiq.comMajor Kevin E. GalvinSO2 Live and VirtualDirectorate Equipment Capability (Ground Manoeuvre)Ministry Of Defence,Level 2, Zone 1,Main Building,London, SW1A 2HBUnited Kingdom+44 (0) 2072180604kevin.galvin@btinternet.comKeywords:Architecture, Coherence, Command and Control, DODAF, Interoperability, Integration, ISTAR, MODAF, Network, Simulation (Live, Virtual and Constructive), Collective TrainingABSTRACT: This paper is based on a research concept developed to support work on a proposed future collective training concept in the land domain, Network Enabled Training Capability (Land) (NETC(L)) for the United Kingdom (UK). NETC(L) envisages a capability that will enable UK land forces to train as they operate using live, virtual and constructive simulation, in combination where necessary, and interoperable with command and control systems, ISTAR systems, and other operational equipment.Previous research has identified a set of actions that constitute the building blocks of a strategy for achieving integration between training systems and operational systems. One of these actions identified a fundamental need to investigate the use of an architectural framework and supporting ontology for the design and articulation of NETC(L). The Ministry of Defence (MOD) Architectural Framework (AF) (MODAF) methodology is an enabler for managing the complexity associated with the design of military capability that consists of complex systems of systems.  It identifies the aspects of the capability that must be considered by the different participants in the design process, and ensures that the resultant architecture addresses organisational, technical, and acquisition issues.This paper describes why a MODAF based methodology and supporting ontology is required to facilitate the of NETC(L), illustrating the approach using examples taken from the emerging NETC(L) architecture.Introduction1.1 BackgroundMany complex factors will impact the conduct of future military operations, including the emergence of new equipments and doctrine, changes to military structures and processes, and new types of threat. In order to maintain the ability to ‘train as you operate’ in the face of these changes (as previously described in Reference [1]), the United Kingdom (UK) Ministry of Defence (MoD) is currently developing a concept for future Army collective training known as the Network Enabled Training Capability (Land) – NETC(L)). NETC(L) will deliver improved representation of the future battlespace, support training across the full spectrum of operations, and provide much more flexible training delivery.1.2 Purpose and structure of the paperThis paper is based on research conducted by QinetiQ on behalf of the UK MoD.  It describes the future collective training concept supported by NETC(L), and the way in which NETC(L) will be delivered by a process of migration from the current capability. It then goes on to outline some of significant organisational, technical, and acquisition challenges that will be faced by the NETC(L) migration programme.The paper then describes the importance of architecture on overcoming these challenges, and the need to develop an architecture for NETC(L) in a principled way coherent with other initiatives within the MOD. This motivates a discussion of the MOD Architectural Framework (MODAF). The paper then provides a brief and informal worked example that consists of a set of different MODAF ‘views’ of the NETC(L) goal architecture, explaining the benefits of each view. The paper concludes by summarising the benefits of the architecture-based approach to a variety of stakeholders within the equipment acquisition community. Future Collective Training2.1 The NETC(L) ConceptThe UK Army’s collective training capability is currently supported by a variety of Live, Virtual and Constructive systems. Although these provide a comprehensive, stable and robust training environment, they do not provide the training richness and flexibility that will be required in the future.Compared with the current baseline, NETC(L) will provide:Support for training across the full spectrum of operations in the contemporary operating environment;Coherent, composable training capabilities that allow the assembly of different systems configurations to meet different training events;Representation and stimulation of operational systems (including those that are themselves complex systems of systems) to allow participants to ‘train as they operate’;Routine linkage between training systems, including those that support Air, Maritime, Joint and Multinational (MN) training;More flexible delivery of training, including training away from dedicated collective training establishments (CTEs), for example in barracks, in deployed environments, and in transit;Training at dispersed locations via a variety of means, including, where necessary, being embedded in operational systems;An overarching and coherent training and exercise management capability that supports the planning, design, set-up, and execution of the complex training events that will be required in the future; The overall NETC(L) concept is illustrated in Figure 2.1. EMBED PBrush  Figure  STYLEREF 1 \s 2 SEQ Figure \* ARABIC \s 1 1. The NETC(L) concept.NETC(L) will still require traditional approaches such as live, virtual and constructive simulation. However, these  will be combined in novel ways to support diverse and evolving training needs.2.3 Delivery of NETC(L)NETC(L) will be delivered incrementally by a process of migration from the current capability, partly by making changes to existing and planned systems, and, in some cases, by developing new capability. The evolutionary process – the NETC(L) migration programme – is described in terms of training ‘capability increments’, each of which extends the range of training tasks that can be conducted. These capability increments include: Training for network-enabled operations (NEO), which are characterised by the routine use of C4I and ISTAR systems within an overall effects-based approach. This requires representation (real, emulated, or simulated) of the operational systems in the collective training environment, and supports training in a range of C4I related tasks such as battlespace deconfliction, information management and information exploitation, etc. In the UK, such tasks are performed within the overall context known as ‘network enabled capability’ (NEC, [2]);Training with others, (TwO) including UK single service (e.g. air and maritime), joint, inter-agency and multinational participants. NETC(L) will allow land forces to train in a rich joint context, but will also provide a representation of the land environment to support UK joint training;Training across the full spectrum of operations (FSO), including operations in complex and populated terrain (e.g. urban ops), and in lower-intensity peacekeeping and peace support tasks. NETC(L) will support ‘3-block’ combinations of training tasks, as well as ‘3-environment’ scenarios, for example where a formation’s area of interest includes urban, mountainous and open terrain. These combinations will be based on the integration of current and planned Live, Virtual and Constructive training systems;Training for evolving military forces structures and roles, such as the UK’s proposed medium weight force;The actions required to deliver the capability increments will involve changes to existing systems as well as creation of new systems. The various actions associated with distinct capability increment may be conducted in parallel 2.4 Challenges for the delivery of NETC(L)The NETC(L) migration process will be intrinsically integration-centric, in that it involves bringing together (and in some cases modifying) many different current and planned systems, rather than developing a new standalone capability from scratch. Accordingly, the migration process faces significant acquisition, technical and organisational challenges: Without a shared understanding of the common aiming point, there is no guarantee that the systems involved will be updated in a coherent manner. For example, short term ‘fixes’ that deliver early capability could in fact create technical barriers to future migration. Accordingly, the migration programme requires a clearly defined target or goal capability.There is no central authority that controls the Equipment programmes (EPs), Integrated Product Teams (IPTs) and stakeholders involved. As a result, multiple solutions to common requirements (such as exercise management processes) could be developed, which increases the risk of duplication and incompatibility across NETC(L). Lack of a central authority also complicates the development of common components and underpinning capability (such as standardised interoperability mechanisms).The systems to be integrated exhibit significant diversity in terms of their functions, technologies, and architectures. There is no single technical solution to the integration challenges posed by NETC(L) and, in the worst case, each system will present its own unique array of challenges.Existing UK land collective training organisations  exhibit a high-level of technical and process variation, for example with respect to their exercise management processes. Integration of the systems owned by these organisations will inevitably expose these process variations (consider for example trying to coherently initialise and control numerous distributed systems). Unless the processes are aligned in some way, exercise set-up times may be increased, the training environment may be inflexible to changes in the training need, and the overall system of systems may be harder to operate robustly because of the difficulties of diagnosing problems, developing workarounds, etc.3 The NETC(L) goal architecture3.1 BackgroundPrior work [1] recommended that to overcome these challenges, NETC(L) development should be conducted with the context of a strategy based on an integration coherence framework (ICF). The framework chosen was based on the one originally developed by the US C4ISR Simulation Technical Reference Model (TRM) Study Group [3]. The study group has usefully visualised their model in the form of the so-called ‘House’ diagram, which is shown in slightly modified form in Figure 3.1. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 3.1. The adapted C4ISR-Sim TRM Study Group ‘House’ diagram.Full details of the various ‘building blocks’ are provided in References [1] and [3]. However, in summary, many of them rely on the definition of an architecture that describes NETC(L), where ‘architecture’ is defined in accordance as follows [4]:The fundamental organization of a system, embodied in its components, their relationships to each other and the environment, and the principles governing its design and evolutionIf specified appropriately, such an architectural definition will clearly form the basis of the shared understanding of NETC(L), which as described in the previous section, is critical to ensuring that migration is achieved in a coherent manner. However, it is clear that the architecture must capture the information required by a wide variety of stakeholders, and must be much more than a technical ‘wiring diagram’ of the anticipated system. Furthermore, the architecture must be developed in a standardised way to facilitate communication with other MOD programmes, in particular the programmes developing C4I and ISTAR systems that must be integrated into collective training.Fortunately, the need for standardised architectural definitions is recognised within the ICF, which suggests the use of architectural frameworks to support the design and articulation of the NETC(L) goal architecture.3.2 Architectural frameworksIn both the US and UK, architectural frameworks have been developed to provide standardised ways of articulating complex architectures, and dealing with the complexity they inevitably exhibit. In particular, the MOD has sponsored the development of the MOD Architectural Framework (MODAF, [5]). MODAF identifies the aspects of a given capability that must be considered by the different stakeholders in its development process, including warfighters, military acquisition staff, engineers, etc.  These aspects are captured in a variety of different ‘views’: diagrams, tables and other notations that reflect the needs of different stakeholders from a variety of architectural perspectives. The views fall into several distinct groups:Strategic views (StV): These provide a high-level overview of the proposed military capability;Operational views (OV): These illustrate the doctrine, operational concepts and processes associated of the capability, typically in the form of operational vignettes;System views (SV): These present a comprehensive definition of system functionality and interconnectivity required, and support systems analysis and engineering and through-life management;Technical views (TV): These document the policy, standards and protocols, guidance and constraints required to specify and meet quality expectations;Acquisition views (AcV): These document acquisition programme dependencies and timelines and provide status information to programme management;All views (AV): These provide high-level summary information (such as an integrated dictionary) that enables the management of the Architecture itself.Taken together, the various views present:Broad summary information about the overall enterprise that supports communication of core concepts to various stakeholders;Narrowly focussed information for specialised purposes (e.g. interface definitions that support development of interoperability approaches);Subsequent sections of this paper provide examples of some of these views, using examples taken from the emerging NETC(L) goal architecture.3.3 Origins and status of MODAFMODAF is itself derived from the US Department of Defence Architectural Framework (DODAF, [6]), and shares many of the same types of view. The primary difference between the two is the addition within MODAF of Acquisition Views that present information required by the UK MOD’s equipment acquisition processes.New acquisition programmes across the MOD are being encouraged to use MODAF to define their integration and coherence requirements. To facilitate cross-programme fertilisation, the MOD has also established an MOD Architectural Repository (MODAR), as a place where MODAF-based architectural descriptions of specific equipments can be stored and then accessed by the wider community.  MODAR is in effect a library of system designs, and will increasingly provide a first port of call for stakeholders who require design information about specific systems.Using MODAF to specify NETC(L)4.1 OverviewThis section provides a very brief and informal ‘worked example’ that illustrates how MODAF can be used to support the development of the NETC(L) goal architecture.It is important to realise that the descriptions provided in this paper cannot do full justice to either MODAF (there are approximately 40 views within the framework) or to NETC(L). Instead, the intent is illustrate some of the key features of both, in particular highlighting features of MODAF that illustrate its value to the NETC(L) migration process. For clarity, some aspects of NETC(L) are omitted, such as the parts of the architecture associated with training and exercise management.4.2 Characterising the elements of an architectureIn order to facilitate coherence between different designs, it is important to ensure that different designers describe the various elements of an architecture in a standard way. To this end, MODAF provides the MODAF Meta Model (M3), which in effect describes the structure of a generic architecture, and which serves as the basis for describing an actual architecture in a standardised way. Figure 4.1 shows, in extremely simplified form, some of the key elements of an architecture defined using the terminology provided by the M3. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 4.1. Key elements within architecturePut simply, an organisation conducts activities. An organisation consists of multiple nodes that represent its various constituent parts (for example, the cells within an HQ can be viewed as nodes). The organization typically uses one or more systems. These provide system functions that support the activities conducted by the organisation, and in doing so act on data elements. The systems themselves consist of lower-level systems, which can in turn be broken down to lower levels, etc. The Figure also highlights two different types of MODAF views. As described in section 3.2, Operational views (OVs) show the capability from the perspective of the organisations and their activities. In contrast, system views (SVs) concentrate on the supporting systems and their functions. Additional views (not shown in the Figure) highlight underlying technologies, acquisition stages, etc.Although MODAF does not mandate a particular design process, this way of viewing an architecture immediately suggests a way for decomposing a design into successive levels of detail. In particular, understanding organisational user activities is key to identifying the systems and functions required to support the activities. In this sense, MODAF puts the organisations and users first, and design systems against their needs.4.3 Expressing the High-Level Operational ConceptThe highest level of a MODAF-based architecture presents the high level operational concept of the capability. This is reflected in an Operational View 1, which presents a high-level graphical representation of the required capability, its environment and relationships with external capabilities. Figure 4.2 uses a MODAF OV-1 to show the NETC(L) high level operational concept. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 4.2. Illustrative OV-1: High-Level Operational Concept for NETC(L)This view illustrates the main training nodes (network enabled training establishments and overarching management facilities), key concepts (e.g. reachback, distributed training, support for mission preparation, etc) and relationships with external training systems and operational systems (e.g. those supporting UK Joint and multinational training.).  A key function of the OV-1 is as a facilitator of communication between Customer and Stakeholder communities. For example, by highlighting the types of non-dedicated sites where access to collective training could be provided, the OV-1 enables ‘at-a-glance’ assessment of the way in which access to training is improved by NETC(L). 4.4 Identifying operational activitiesAnother type of architectural view required to support the development of the goal architecture is OV-5: Operational Activity Model. OV-5 views describe the activities required to conduct collective training and the high-level interactions (known as ‘need lines’) between the activities.  This view helps the end-user community to develop consistent and shared views of the activities associated with training. Figure 4.3 shows, in high-level terms, some of the activities conducted by players and exercise control staff during the execution phase of an exercise. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 4.3. Illustrative OV-5: Operational Activity ModelThe activities shown reflect those that occur within the ‘exercise command hierarchy’, where Higher Control (HICON) staff representing a superior HQ issues orders and tasking to a subordinate force (the players in this case), which responds with various reports, returns, and requests. Although three command levels are shown, this does not imply that all NETC(L) exercises are ‘three levels deep’. In some exercises, there will be no lower command (LOCON) function (e.g. Live players interact directly with the physical function), while in others the players themselves could reside at multiple command levels.The left hand side of the Figure indicates the need for exercise control (EXCON) staff to ‘steer’ the exercise to ensure that it continues to meet the training objectives. This will often involve changing the orders and tasking that flow down from the HICON function. In some cases, however, exercise direction will involve interactions with staff (not shown) that are controlling the underlying battlespace representation, or the flow of information to the training audience. Views such as these facilitate the alignment of organisational process required for integration within NETC(L). In particular, environments that use Live, Virtual or Constructive simulation can be compared against a single process view to examine the similarities or differences between them. These views also allow assessment of the impact of different modes of training delivery. For example, when considering distributed training, each interaction shown on the diagram could be inspected to determine if it is viable when the participants are located in different training sites.4.5 Determining information flowsAn understanding of the interactions between different exercise activities must be complemented by an understanding of the relationships between the organisational nodes that conduct the activities. Such interactions are captured in OV-2 views: Operational Node Connectivity Diagrams. Figure 4.4 shows an example of an OV-2 for NETC(L) that represents the information flows between different categories of staff.  EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8   Figure 4.4 .Illustrative OV-2: Operational Node Connectivity DiagramOV-5 and OV-2 views are closely related, but together facilitate the identification of high-level interoperability requirements. This ensures that stakeholders are aware of the need for interfaces, standards and protocols between the various training systems and operational systems involved within the NETC(L) environment.4.6 Specifying system interfacesGiven the activities that are conducted by training participants (documented within OV-2 and OV-5 views as described above), it is possible to identify the systems that provide the functions that support these activities.  The SV-1: Systems Interface Description identifies systems and their interconnections.  By way of example, Figure 4.5 shows an example SV-1 that captures in high-level terms systems and interactions involved in exercise execution. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 4.5. Illustrative SV-1: Systems Interface DescriptionViews such as these are the basis for developing more formal technical specifications of the interfaces and data exchange requirements. These are also captured in MODAF views that are not included in the current paper.4.7 Use of a standardised vocabularySystems developers require standard ways of describing systems.  Without use of such standards, developers (being imaginative people) will invariably develop and draw their system designs in different ways, leading to designs that cannot easily be compared, and significantly complicating subsequent integration and interoperability activities.  This is potentially a problem for MODAF, in that different MODAF developers could in principle design architectural views that were incompatible within and between equipment programmes.To overcome this problem, it is necessary toEnsure that developers use a standardised notation;Ensure that developers use a standardised language for describing their systems.In addressing these issues, the consortium that developed MODAF consortium followed a path that led ultimately to the adoption of an ontology-based approach. There is some debate about the precise definition of the term ‘Ontology’.  One useful definition [7] is“An ontology is a controlled vocabulary that describes objects and the relations between them in a formal way, and has a grammar for using the vocabulary terms to express something meaningful within a specified domain of interest.  The vocabulary is used to make queries and assertions.”Within MODAF, ontologies provide the basis for creating coherent and technically precise specifications of systems and data, and thus provide the formal underpinning for the overall NETC(L) goal architecture.Figure 4.6 shows a very simplified interpretation of the MODAF consortium’s current view of the MODAF ontology [5], using a few illustrative concepts (tanks, organisations, etc) to highlight the overall structure.Figure 4.6. Simplified view of a MODAF ontologyCurrently, three broad layers are envisaged. The upper ontology represents a ‘core glossary’ that is applicable to a variety of different domains.  In contrast, the lower ontology (the middle layer) is much more domain-specific, and introduces considerable military detail.  The lowest-level allows for project-specific extensions to the higher-level definitions. The real MODAF ontology is currently under development, and is considerably more complex than the simple example shown here.Projects that sign-up to the MODAF ontology will inherit a standard cross-project description of the military domain (the upper and lower ontology layers) within which their system must operate, but can if necessary locally extend this framework to cover the features specific to themselves (such as the internal details of a system).4.8 Summary – the value of the architectureIn summary, use of MODAF to specify the NETC(L) goal architecture ensures that the architectural description satisfies the needs of a wide variety of stakeholders. This provides many benefits to the NETC(L) migration programme:Baseline comparison / capability audit. Because it provides a clear description of the goal capability, the architecture can be analysed to determine the variation from the current baseline;Development of coherent migration actions. Awareness of the overall architecture provides context for and helps to ensure coherence of migration actions. For example, it is possible to map the various systems that are created, modified, or extended by migration actions against elements within the architecture. This allows a check that the actions form part of an overall coherent whole and, conversely, that the actions taken together are sufficient to deliver the overall capability (i.e. that some part of the architecture has not been overlooked);Understanding interoperability. Because the architecture makes it clear where interactions between organisations, processes and systems are required, it facilitates derivation of interoperability requirements, selection of associated standards, etc;Risk assessment and mitigation planning. Where specific solution ideas are identified during systems design, they can be assessed as to whether they relate to critical elements of the architecture. If a risk does apply to some critical element, then this may be a candidate for early protyping and other risk mitigation activities;Communication between stakeholders. The architecture addresses organisational and user issues in addition to lower-level technical detail. This allows non-technical stakeholders (e.g. warfighters) to validate aspects of the architecture, for example to determine whether the training process it supports is sufficiently comprehensive and ‘joined up’;Development of coherent defence-wide training systems. By providing a clear definition of NETC(L), the goal architecture facilitates technical convergence with the training systems of other services, nations and agencies and with the operational systems that will be used during training.Finally, MODAF is specifically intended to facilitate coherence between different programmes, especially when interoperability between systems is required. By providing a standard set of views, it allows different systems to be designed in consistent ways. Although adoption of MODAF does not by itself guarantee coherence between systems (it is necessary but not sufficient!), it is a critical enabler of coherence. For example, US JFCOM have used DODAF [8] to specify the Joint Training and Exercise Integrated Architecture (JTEIA). The similarities between DODAF and MODAF mean that the proposed UK approach to future collective training can be compared with US approaches, which will support the development of approaches to coalition training.ConclusionsThe fundamental conclusion from this work is that the anticipated migration toward NETC(L) requires a clearly stated and shared understanding of the goal capability. This understanding should be expressed as an architecture that contains information pertinent to a wide range of stakeholders, not just the system engineers who are the traditional ‘owners’ of architectural descriptions.The MODAF architectural framework (MODAF) identifies the aspects of NETC(L) that must be considered by the different participants in the migration process process, and ensures that the resultant goal architecture addresses organisational, technical, and acquisition issues. As such, MODAF is a key enabler for managing the complexity associated with the design of military capability that consists of complex systems of systems.  Without the development of an architecture that captures this form of information, NETC(L) migration faces severe organisational, technical, and acquisition challenges. Use of the MODAF-based approach is therefore strongly recommended to support the NETC(L) migration programme.AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to thank Allan Cox, Corinne Jeffery and Brenda Stroud for support in the development of this paper.References[1]	Kent J, Randel R, “C4I and ISTAR Interoperability issues within the UK’s proposed Network Enabled Training Capability” , Spring SIW 2006, 06S-SIW-053.[2]	“Network Enabled Capability”, DCBM/J6, Ministry of Defence, JSP 777 Edn 1.[3]	Griffin A, Lacetera J, Tolk A, “C4ISR/Sim Technical Reference Model Study Group Final Report”, Sep 2002.[4]	 IEEE standard 1472[5]	http://www.modaf.com/[6]	“DoD Architecture Framework”, Version 1.0, August 2003,  HYPERLINK "http://www.software.org/pub/architecture/dodaf.asp" http://www.software.org/pub/architecture/dodaf.asp[7]	Tolk, A, Diallo S, Turnitsa C, Blais C, Ontology Based Interoperability, Spring 2006 SIW tutorial.[8]	USJFCOM Joint Training and Exercise Integrated Architecture Description, Version 3.0, Mitre Corporation, July 2004.Author BiographiesJohn Kent is a senior training researcher within QinetiQ. He has approximately 20 years experience working within the UK defence industry. He originally trained as a software engineer focussing on the pragmatic application of novel computational concepts. More recently, he has specialised in interoperability between C4I and ISTAR systems in the collective training environment, and has also contributed to the developments of strategies for C4I and ISTAR collective training. He is currently leading the development of the NETC(L) goal architecture.Dr. Richard Randel M.Phys is a research scientist in QinetiQ and has 10 years experience developing computational models and simulations.  He has explored a wide range of research interests within the defence sector that range from training and experimentation with C4I and ISTAR capabilities, to the aerodynamics of kinetic anti-tank weapons.  During this time he has developed numerous system architectures and computational models in support of his research.  Richard is currently supporting the architectural development of Network Enabled Training for the Land environment.  He earned his doctoral degree from the University of Wales, Cardiff in Physics in 2003.  During his time in academia he has collaborated on numerous of papers for internal scientific journals.Major Kevin Galvin BSocSc (Hons), MSc is a serving Infantry officer with over 33 years of service in the British Army. In the last 10 years, he has been actively involved in the UK Digitization programme as an Operational Architect looking at Command and Control processes and information flows. He is currently the desk officer within the UK MOD responsible for Live and Virtual training, and for ongoing research in support of NETC(L). He received his MSc degree in Defence Modelling and Simulation from Cranfield University at the UK Defence Academy. His BSocSc (Hons) in Economic and Social History was from Birmingham University. He has collaborated on a number of papers at both the Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium (CCRTS) and at SISO SIW.  The terms ‘upper’ and ‘lower’ ontology are taken from the wider ontology literature. Internationally recognised upper ontologies are now beginning to appear.Figure font