OASES: A System for Constructing Multi-Regime Synthetic Natural EnvironmentsRobert A. Reynolds, Todd A. Hutchinson, Peter S. Dailey, Daniel P. McGaffiganLitton-TASCReading, MA HYPERLINK mailto:rareynolds@tasc.com rareynolds@tasc.com HYPERLINK mailto:tahutchinson@tasc.com tahutchinson@tasc.com HYPERLINK mailto:psdailey@tasc.com psdailey@tasc.com HYPERLINK mailto:dpmcgaffigan@tasc.com dpmcgaffigan@tasc.comKeywords:Synthetic Environment, Synthetic Natural Environment, SNE, environment, space, atmosphere, ocean, model,  visualization, simulation, Federate, server, JETS, Integrator, Distributor, Environmental Data Server, EDS, editor, TAOS, OASES, MetMaker, OcMakerABSTRACT:  The Ocean, Atmosphere and Space Environmental Simulator (OASES), a Synthetic Natural Environment (SNE) generation and distribution system developed by Litton-TASC, merges the capabilities of the Government’s Total Atmosphere, Ocean, Space (TAOS) environmental server (development sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Project Agency and the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office) with TASC's MetMaker system.  The OASES system provides a complete toolkit for SNE construction and management.  This system offers the modeling and simulation community, for the first time, a collection of interoperable software tools for constructing high-fidelity, multi-regime SNEs for distributed simulation.  This paper provides an overview of the capabilities of OASES, with emphasis on how the services offered by the system support the full life-cycle of an SNE, from construction of a 4D multi-regime environmental database to services for providing run-time access to this 4D state by simulations with real-time and faster-than-real-time performance requirements.  This paper also describes how OASES can be used as a back-end to the Environmental Scenario Generator (ESG), making the ESG system’s data mining capabilities available to distributed simulations.IntroductionThe Ocean, Atmosphere and Space Environmental Simulator (OASES) is a system under development at TASC which integrates the Government-Off-The-Shelf (GOTS) Total Atmosphere, Ocean and Space (TAOS) system [1,2,3], developed for the DARPA STOW program with sponsorship from DARPA and DMSO, with TASC’s MetMaker system for creating  customized atmospheric scenarios based on the Mesoscale Model 5 (MM5) numerical weather prediction code [4].  The OASES system will provide the simulation developer with a complete toolkit for constructing and managing a Synthetic Natural Environment (SNE).  This paper overviews the OASES system architecture and concept of operations, with emphasis on how this architecture and CONOPS supports both pre-exercise environmental database generation and run-time access to this database by a general simulation application (legacy/DIS) or HLA Federate (HLA-compliant simulation).  This paper also describes how the OASES system can provide a “back-end” to the Environmental Scenario Generator (ESG), providing run-time access to ESG scenarios by DIS or HLA simulations.  The paper concludes with a section describing TASC’s plans to offer OASES as a product free to government users.Figure 1 is a schematic illustrating the primary subsystems that compose OASES.  The figure indicates the boundaries of the OASES system relative to its data sources (MEL, AFWA, ESG) and sinks (legacy/DIS simulators and HLA Federates), and also indicates the “dividing line” between pre-exercise and run-time functions.  The figure also indicates the data flows between subsystems; note however that these data flows are generally not concurrent.  The OcMaker and JETS Editor subsystems are shown in dashed lines because these systems represent very recent developments and are not planned to be included in the initial OASES release.  The OASES main interface reflects the schematic in Figure 1 and is shown in Figure 2.  Despite similarities between this interface and the TAOS V1.0 main interface, the OASES system differs from TAOS in that it is modeless.  Where TAOS is a monolithic system which runs in one of three modes (Capture, Live or Replay), OASES is a collection of complementary subsystems which are configured and run independently.  The OASES main interface in Figure 2 illustrates these component subsystems and the primary data-flows between them, suggesting that multiple subsystems can be executed concurrently, however functionally the OASES main interface operates as a “tool-bar” for launching OASES subsystems such as the Integrator, Visualizer and Environmental Data Server, and it is the user’s responsibility to orchestrate the executions of the subsystems. Figure  STYLEREF 1 \s 1: OASES System Level SchematicFigure 2: OASES Main InterfaceIn the sections which follow, the primary OASES subsystems will be described in detail, working from left (sources) to right (sinks) within the system schematic of Figure 1.   Note that each subsystem has its own main interface which shares the look-and-feel of the OASES main interface; the decomposability of the OASES system into individual stand-alone products (subsystems), each with its own interface and User’s Guide, is one of its key features and is described further in Section 8.MetMaker: Constructing Tailored Atmospheric ScenariosThe Synthetic Environment (SE) Modeling and Simulation (M&S) community currently faces two broad challenges: 1) acquiring authoritative environmental models adaptable to the requirements of M&S, and 2) developing methods for using these models to create synthetic environments that are both realistic and which contain the specific environmental phenomena required to meet a set of military training objectives.  TASCs MetMaker system is designed to meet both challenges. While numerical weather prediction once required supercomputers, recent advances in desktop computing hardware have given the M&S community a new option – creation, on-demand, of atmospheric scenarios on mid-range workstations. In particular, the wall clock time needed to generate a time history of gridded atmospheric data is now comparable to the duration of the computed dataset, making on-demand model runs practical. Of course, that a desktop computer can now run a numerical weather prediction code doesn’t make the creation of a synthetic atmosphere a turnkey operation – the models are complex and are normally the province of expert numerical meteorologists. To benefit M&S, these models must be made usable by non-experts. Numerical weather prediction codes typically require elaborate input data preparation that is often specified in text files that reflect the operating environments of the mainframe and supercomputers they once ran on.  Examples of key considerations for configuring such models to run in an automated mode are: •	Specification of the geographical domain: land boundaries, surface terrain elevation, land-use categories •	Specification of temporal and spatial resolution•	Initialization of the model to avoid instablities and model divergence	•	Consistent and appropriate control parameter settings: map projection, parameterizations, time step and grid-spacingSignificant knowledge of atmospheric science and the numerical model itself must be embedded in any system which attempts to automate generation of an SNE. Of course, the fact that NWP models are run several times daily in support of operational users (e.g., at FNMOC, AFWA) indicates that the processes for running and validating such models have already been extensively studied and automated.  A primary goal of the MetMaker system is to capture the expertise associated with running a specific NWP code – the MM5 model – within an automated framework accessible by non-experts.MetMaker also attempts to address the problem of creating atmospheric scenarios  that contain specific weather as required by a training exercise; for example, “low clouds on exercise day one transitioning to heavy rain by day three”.  One of the more effective techniques for meeting such requirements is the use of four-dimensional data assimilation (FDDA).  FDDA allows pseudo-observational data to be input to a numerical weather model while it is executing.  As data are incorporated into the model, the model is “nudged” towards the desired conditions while maintaining physical consistency.  FDDA provides the basis for steering SNEs towards user requirements while ensuring that the atmosphere remains in a physically consistent state.  The MetMaker component of the OASES system allows the user to run a numerical weather prediction model (MM5) on-demand on a local workstation.  Further, MetMaker provides the ability for users to generate high fidelity atmospheric data and for that data to be customized to meet user requirements.  MetMaker consists of the MM5 numerical weather prediction model, a graphical user interface (GUI) for configuring and running the MM5, and a visualization system used for viewing model output.  The main interface for MetMaker is shown in Figure 3; this interface is launched from the OASES main interface when the user selects the “MetMaker” menu option from the Atmosphere model category.The MetMaker main interface is used to execute the modules which compose the MM5 model.  Clicking the run button on this interface begins the model run.  The estimated run time for a particular configuration is displayed and a status bar, indicating the time remaining in the model run, is updated as the model executes.  The user has the option of omitting modules that he does not wish to run.  In addition, model configurations can be saved and loaded.It is important to note that while the GUIs support configuration of all MM5 parameters, all parameters except the region of interest have defaults.  Thus, the user can execute an MM5 configuration simply by selecting a region of interest and clicking “Run all Model Stages” on the main MetMaker interface.The MetMaker system accepts basic user input to configure and run MM5. Using the GUI to configure the region of interest, (Fig. 4), the user selects a geographical domain by clicking on a global map; the map zooms in to a subdomain with a default extent, centered on the clicked location. The zoomed region that is displayed corresponds to the “mother” or coarsest domain for the model run.  The user may then move the domain to a different geographic location and/or expand or contract the domain using the tools to the left of the map.  Once the user is satisfied with the location and extent of the mother domain, the user may configure subdomains or “nests”, which allow the model to be run at higher resolution within selected areas.  Nests may be created by “rubber banding” with the mouse (Fig. 4).  After creating a nest, the user may move, enlarge or contract the nest in the same manner as for the mother domain.  As subdomains are being configured, their geographic locations and extents are constantly updated and displayed in the middle of the panel.  In addition, the user may set other parameters relevant to the terrain module.  However, the logical choices for those parameters are dynamically defaulted as each nest is created.  The interactive selection of domains significantly reduces configuration time.GUIs are available for all modules of the MM5.  Through all module GUIs, there are numerous parameters that can be set. All of the parameters have reasonable defaults, many of which will not need to be modified by the user for most model runs.  There are some parameters that are set behind the scenes based on discrete modeling theory.  A simple example is the Courant condition that permits an intelligent choice of a time step based on the domain’s spatial resolution. The user selects initialization data in the analysis module.  The MM5 may be initialized with archived gridded datasets, many of which are available from MEL (i.e., NOGAPS).  In the future, we expect that the Environmental Scenario Generator could be used as a tool for supplying initialization data that closely meet user needs.The model steering GUI (Fig. 5) allows users to steer the MM5 towards specified atmospheric conditions.  The user simply needs to specify a geographical region (in the form of a rectangle or ellipse), atmospheric level, and time range for which his input conditions should be incorporated within the SNE.  Behind the scenes, the graphical user interface instructs the MM5 to use FDDA techniques to steer model output towards the specified conditions.   Model steering provides the user with a powerful SNE customization tool.The View Model Output (VMO) module has been developed as a visualization tool for MM5 output (Fig. 6).  VMO is designed for quick, interactive production of model output charts. VMO has the ability to plot up to 4 panels at once through simple configuration within the GUI.  It can plot horizontal and vertical slices through the model output as well as one-dimensional plots such as vertical temperature profiles in skew-T, log-P diagrams. VMO can display fields as they are output by the model.  Thus, the user need not wait until the model run has completed to view output data.  We believe this will be very useful in allowing users to monitor their SNE as it is being generated, and as requirements are being met through steering functions. Numerical weather modeling provides the ability for a completely new and unique capability for constructing weather databases.  Realistic weather databases using the MM5 mesoscale model can be generated on-demand at much higher resolution than those available from archived data sources.  Further, using four-dimensional data assimilation techniques, the model output can be steered to meet the end user’s needs.  MetMaker provides users with the ability to create, view, and customize the atmospheric portion of the SNE at very high fidelity.  The scientific validity and realism of synthetic natural environments will be much improved with the integration of numerical weather modeling with other components of the OASES system.3  OcMaker: Constructing Correlated Oceanographic ScenariosThe OcMaker subsystem currently supports two ocean models: the Modular Ocean Model (MOM [5]) and the Princeton Ocean Model (POM [6]).  Each of them is written in Fortran code and requires the user to specify topography, initial conditions (temperature, salinity, etc.), boundary conditions as well as many setup parameters. OcMaker is being developed to incorporate a graphical user interface similar to MetMaker.  The GUI will allow the user to easily specify a region of interest and to define experiment length and desired outputs.  The ultimate goal is to couple a complete OcMaker subsystem with that of MetMaker.  Based on the interest of the user, OcMaker could be run in a stand-alone mode to produce a number of ocean outputs (temperature, currents, density, etc.) or it could operate in a coupled mode with the atmospheric model in the OASES system.It is well known that the ocean is driven by atmospheric conditions (wind, heatflux, etc.)  near the ocean surface.  In turn, the atmosphere is strongly influenced by the ocean provided surface boundary conditions (dominated by SST).  This is the motivation for the development of an integrated and coupled OcMaker subsystem.  A general case is a two-way coupling in which each model integrates over time using the surface boundary conditions provided by the other model.  A configuration of one-way coupling is also possible where the output of one model sets the surface boundary conditions for the other.  The atmospheric boundary conditions that affect the ocean include the eastward and northward wind stresses, the heat flux, the salinity flux and finally the solar short wave flux.NOAA’s Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) model, MOM 2, is essentially a difference equation version of a group of primitive ocean circulation equations.  The group consists of the hydrostatic, Boussinesq Navier-Stokes equations and a non-linear state equation relating temperature and salinity to the fluid velocity.  The experiment scope used by this model may be global.  A very important feature is that MOM was created to be coupled with a wide range of atmospheric models from a simple fixed idealized wind data set to a full atmospheric general circulation model (GCM). POM is a primitive equation ocean model that includes a turbulence sub-model.  The work done at TASC has focused on running POM on a small region in order to explore its capability.  Specifically, it has been used to model the ocean surrounding a segment of the Hawaiian Islands.  The bathymetry/topography data was obtained from the National Geophysical Data Center (NGDC) ETOPO5 data set [7].  Output data includes temperature, current velocity, density, salinity as well as virtually any quantity used by the model.  Visualization routines have been written using Matlab 5.2 in order to facilitate the use of POM.  Some examples of this output are shown in the following figures.  Figure 7 shows the sea surface current vectors over the Hawaiian topography data previously mentioned.  Figure 8 shows sea surface temperature over the same region (°C).  This work will grow into a powerful capability as the ocean models are tested and integrated under the OcMaker interface.  The ultimate objective is an integrated, easy-to-use ocean subsystem that can model the ocean globally or regionally with temporal and spatial resolution driven by user requirements. Figure 7:  Current Vector PlotFigure 8:  Sea Surface TemperatureOASES Integrator: Constructing a Merged Ocean-Atmosphere-Space Environmental DatabaseThe OASES Integrator, built on the legacy of the TAOS Integrator, is the subsystem which constructs multi-regime environmental databases from the outputs of a set of supported environmental models.  Supported environmental models are classified into one of four environmental regimes by OASES:Ocean Volume – the subset of the full SNE bounded by the (static) ocean floor and the (dynamic) ocean surface.  Supported models include the Optimal Thermal Interpolation System (OTIS) and the Thermal Ocean Prediction System (TOPS), both run operationally at FNMOC.  Modeling of the ocean volume environment is currently focused on temperature and salinity distributions and the resultant sound-speed profiles which affect acoustic signal propagation.Ocean Surface – the dynamic boundary between the ocean volume and atmospheric regimes.  Supported models include the Wave Action Model (WAM), a global wave model driven by NOGAPS surface wind predictions and run operationally at FNMOC, and a simple public domain Tide model.  While modeling of the ocean surface environment is focused primarily on deep-water and surf-zone wave modeling, ocean surface temperature, salinity, turbidity and current are also relevant to Navy and Marine Corps simulators.Atmosphere – the subset of the full SNE bounded below by the ground or ocean surface and above by the floor of the space regime; the atmosphere-space boundary is not precisely-located by OASES at the current time.  Supported models include the Navy Operational Global Atmospheric Prediction System (NOGAPS), run operationally at FNMOC, the Mesoscale Model 5 (MM5) model run operationally at the Air Force Weather Agency (AFWA), and TASC’s MetMaker system based on MM5.  Atmospheric modeling to support military simulators currently includes ambient temperature, pressure, humidity, visibility and wind as well as the phenomena of clouds, fog, rain, snow, and surface radar ducting.Space – the subset of the full SNE bounded below by the ceiling of the atmospheric regime and extending at least as far as a typical GPS satellite orbit (25,000 km altitude).  Supported models currently include the Parameterized Ionospheric Model (PIM [8] ) and the Wide-Band Model (WBMOD [9] ) of ionospheric scintillation.  Space modeling is currently focused on ionospheric effects on accuracy and availability of the Global Positioning System (GPS).The main interface of the OASES Integrator is shown in Figure 9; it is a subset of the OASES main interface of Figure 2 and illustrates the decomposability of OASES into stand-alone subsystems.Figure 9: OASES Integrator Main InterfaceOASES supported models can be further classified as Internal or External.  External models are models which are run external to OASES and historically have been those that are in current operational use by the military.   External model outputs, typically gridded and presented to OASES as large collections of GRIB-encoded files, are inputs to the OASES Integrator. Support for internal models was added to the TAOS Integrator under the sponsorship of the PSM+ program [10].  Internal models are run by  the OASES Integrator on the local workstation as part of the environmental database generation process.   Currently the space-regime models, PIM and WBMOD, are the only internal models supported, although the Army Research Laboratory in Washington, DC is currently developing internal model support for their WAVES atmospheric model.Although MetMaker, and eventually OcMaker, are capable of being run on the local workstation, they will be supported initially as external models.  This is to support initial development of MetMaker and OcMaker as stand-alone systems applicable to both the military simulation domain as well as the commercial climate modeling and prediction market; as an internal model MetMaker could only be used within the OASES context.  The impact on the OASES concept of operations (CONOPS) of supporting MetMaker as an external model is that the user first generates an atmospheric scenario using MetMaker and then runs the OASES Integrator to capture the MetMaker output.  If MetMaker were to be supported as an internal model then a single run of the Integrator would result in both generation of an atmospheric scenario and integration of this scenario with the outputs of models associated with the other three environmental regimes.OASES Databases: Visualization and ManagementThe OASES Database subsystem will include an enhanced version of the 4-D environmental data visualizer, itself based on the public-domain vis5d product [11], that is currently a central component of TAOS.  The enhancements currently under development are to support visualization of very large environmental databases, specifically the Global98 METOC database developed for the STOW-98 project [11].  The enhanced visualizer will allow the user to visualize spatial and temporal subsets of a single scenario, and will support both rectangular and spherical display projections; the latter is useful for visualizing global datasets.  Visualization of  gridded and non-gridded data types across all environmental regimes will be supported; Figure 10 includes typical visualizations for the ocean volume, ocean surface, atmospheric and space regimes.The database subsystem will also include a “Database Manager” providing a set of utility functions for managing OASES databases.   Utilities provided by the Database Manager will include functions to:Spatially subset a Scenario to a desired playboxTemporally subset a Scenario to a desired intervalCopy Fields from one Scenario to anotherCopy Scenarios from one database to anotherRemove a Scenario from a databaseRemove a Field from a ScenarioRename a ScenarioDelete Fields from ScenariosExport a database to another formatImport a database from another formatThe last two functions will significantly increase the value of OASES to the M&S community by allowing OASES to work with databases built by other systems, and to allow OASES databases to be used by other systems.  The initial OASES release will support exports to the Joint National Test Facility’s Space Missile Defense Tool (SMDT) format.  Support for the SEDRIS Standard Transmission Format (STF) is also planned.Figure 10: Four-Regime Visualization.  Upper left: Water Mixing Ratio over Southern California, Upper right: Water Temperature in the Carribean Sea and Gulf of Mexico, Middle: Global Sea State and Surface Current, Bottom: Ionospheric Electron Density at 350kmOASES Client Services: Environmental Data and Query ServersOASES, like TAOS, will include services to provide run-time access to an environmental database by simulators operating in a distributed environment  There are two distinct OASES subsystems providing client services: the Environmental Data Server or EDS (formerly the TAOS Distributor) and the Query Server.The EDS will be an HLA-compliant simulation application, or Federate, which simulates the natural environment by periodically updating a set of objects which encapsulate the environmental state data required by an extensible set of client models, notably those developed for JointSAF by the STOW-97 program. The EDS subsystem includes run-time editors for the JointSAF Gridded Weather, Uniform Weather, and Observed Ocean models.The Query Server was developed for TAOS under the PSM+ program and is described in Reference [10].  In addition to supporting general client queries of the SNE at points and along lines-of-sight, the Query Server provides an extensible framework for adding effects models to the OASES system.  The initial OASES release will include an integrated version of the WBMOD signal propagation model, which computes radio signal degradation parameters in the presence of ionospheric scintillation.OASES as a Back-End to the Environmental Scenario GeneratorThe OASES system will complement the Environmental Scenario Generator, currently under development by NRL with sponsorship from DMSO, in a number of ways.  Primarily, the OASES client-service subsystems described in Section 6 – the EDS and Query Server – will make the scenario generation services provided by ESG useful to distributed simulations with real-time or faster-than-real-time performance requirements.  There are several ways ESG and OASES might be interfaced to achieve this goal, as described below.As indicated in Figure 1, the ESG can be decomposed into a Data Mine and a mesoscale forecast generator based on the Coupled Oceanographic and Atmospheric Mesoscale Prediction System (COAMPS).  The Data Mine will include a web-based search engine allowing the user to specify the criteria for an atmospheric scenario that would make this scenario useful in a military training exercise.  ESG will search its NCEP archive of global analysis products to identify a set of “matches” to the user’s specifications.  A matched analysis dataset can then be downloaded from ESG and provided to MetMaker as an initial condition for an MM5 run, creating a mesoscale forecast based on the matched analysis.  Further tailoring of the scenario could be accomplished using MetMaker’s four-dimensional-data-assimilation (FDDA) capabilities or the JETS Editor that is indicated in Figure 1.As a second alternative, if a low-resolution environmental database is required or desired, the ESG Data Mine function can provide OASES with a set of global NOGAPS-based analysis products which approximately meet the users scenario requirements in a specified playbox.  As the OASES Integrator supports the NOGAPS model, and in particular can use this model to construct scenarios containing tactically-significant, derived state variables such as visibility, storm indices, and cloud base/top [11], linking the OASES Integrator to the ESG Data Mine opens the door to the possibility of constructing low-resolution atmospheric scenarios based directly on time-series of NOGAPS analysis fields where the initial condition matches the scenario requirements.  The ground-truth component of the Global98 database [8] was constructed in just this way, i.e., from a time-series of NOGAPS analysis datasets, except that the initial condition was not based on matching scenario requirements over a playbox, but rather chosen to be representative of spring conditions for some year, which happened to be 1998.A third potential linkage between ESG and OASES would simply leverage the full ESG capability to create a tailored atmospheric scenario using COAMPS.  As OASES will support the COAMPS model directly, the user can use the ESG Data Mine and forecast generator together to create a relatively high-resolution forecast over the playbox of interest, meeting the scenario requirements.  This complete forecast can be presented as an input to the OASES Integrator and converted directly to OASES database format, or potentially integrated with OcMaker output or the output of one or more space-regime models.  The resulting OASES-format database can then be used with the EDS or Query Server to support run-time access to the (potentially multi-regime) tailored scenario.The OASES ProductAs noted in the Introduction, OASES is actually composed of several independent programs (subsystems) which collectively provide a complete toolkit for creating and managing an SNE.  As any single M&S program is likely to be interested in only a specific subset of the OASES system, the packaging, release, documentation, and patching of OASES will be done at the subsystem level.  A full OASES release will also be available which includes all subsystems as well as the OASES main interface shown in Figure 2.TASC plans to manage the OASES software configuration.  Specific extensions to OASES sponsored by programs contracting with TASC will be folded into the baseline maintained by TASC.  The vision for OASES includes establishment of a web site for centralizing product information, product distribution, documentation, FAQs, and patches.The initial OASES release is planned for spring of 2000.  This release will be for Silicon Graphics platforms, O2-class or better, running IRIX6.5.  This release will be freely available to government customers.References[1] D. A. Whitney: “TAOS: Dynamic METOC Environmental Simulation Services”, TASC Technical Report TR-07601-10, Final Technical Report to the STOW-97 program, 30 January 1998[2]    R. A. Reynolds, et. al., “The Total Atmospheric and Oceanographic System (TAOS), Object-Oriented Simulation of the Natural Environment for Modeling and Simulation Applications”, Proceedings of the Object Oriented Simulation Conference (OOS-98), January 1998, San Diego, CA[3]	TAOS Version 1.0 is available to Government programs via the Topographic Engineering Center (TEC) in Alexandria, VA, c/o Jack Huntley. A User’s Guide and Developer’s Guide are also available from TEC.[4] 	Hutchinson, T. A., et al., “Using Numerical Weather Modeling to Customize Synthetic Natural Environments”, Proceedings of the Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW), March, 1999.[5] 	The Modular Ocean Model (MOM) is available from NOAA’s Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL).  The model code and documentation is available at  HYPERLINK http://www.gfdl.gov/~kd/MOMwebpages/MOMWWW.html http://www.gfdl.gov/~kd/MOMwebpages/MOMWWW.html.[6]  The Princeton Ocean Model (POM) was originally developed by Blumberg and Mellor in the late 1970s.  The model code and documentation may be obtained from  HYPERLINK http://www.aos.princeton.edu/WWWPUBLIC/htdocs.pom http://www.aos.princeton.edu/WWWPUBLIC/htdocs.pom.[7]  The ETOPO5 (Earth Topography - 5 Minute) digital average land and sea floor elevations were compiled by the National Geophysical Data Center. Information and data may be obtained from   HYPERLINK http://edcwww.cr.usgs.gov/glis/hyper/guide/etopo5 http://edcwww.cr.usgs.gov/glis/hyper/guide/etopo5. [8] 	The Parameterized Ionospheric Model (PIM) is freely distributed via Computational Physics, Inc. or via the Internet.  At time of writing, the model software and documentation may be downloaded from an AFRL anonymous FTP site at andersun.plh.af.mil (146.153.4.202)[9]  The Wide-Band Model (WBMOD) of ionospheric scintillation was developed by Jim Secan, currently at Northwest Research Institute. The model source code and documentation may be purchased via Northwest Research for a fee of $200.[10]	Reynolds, R. A., et al., “TAOS in Space”, Proceedings of the Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW), March, 1999.[11]	Birkel, P.A., et al.., “Breaching the M&S METOC Operational Barrier: The Worldwide Low Resolution on METOC Database”, Proceedings of the Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW), March, 1999.Author BiographiesROBERT A. REYNOLDS is a Principal Member of the Technical Staff at TASC and has been the system architect and lead developer for the TAOS system through the STOW-97, -98 and PSM+ programs.  His primary interests are in object-oriented modeling and simulation in a distributed environment.TODD A. HUTCHINSON is an atmospheric scientist with a M. S. in Meteorology from the University of Oklahoma.  Todd has worked on various numerical prediction efforts and several modeling and simulation activities.PETER S. DAILEY is an atmospheric scientist and the technical lead for atmospheric data integration on the TAOS project. Dr. Dailey received a B.A. and B.A.S. from the University of Pennsylvania, and a M.S. and Ph. D. from the University of California at Los Angeles.DANIEL P. McGAFFIGAN is a Member of the Technical Staff at TASC and received a M.S. in Electrical Engineering from Tufts University.  His technical interests include signal processing, communications systems and maritime navigation. Fig 3:  MetMaker Main Interface Figure 6: View Model Ouput GUIFigure 5:  Model Steering GUIFigure 4:  Graphical user interface for selecting the region of interest. Top: global view.  Bottom:  Regional view showing several nests.