Think differently for Good CrisesAuthor: Anders Mattson, Crisis Management Support SystemLykke Silfwerbrand, PhD Student Lund University, SwedenAnders MattsonCrisis Management Support ABLomvägen 629192 57 SollentunaSwedenPhone: +46 705 900 806E-Mail: am@c4i.seAnders Mattson is a Crisis Management Development and Training Professional. He is a long-term member of SISO including two terms on SISO EXCOM. He has been locally responsible for arranging Euro-SIW 2003 and 2006.Lykke Silfwerbrand is since 2007 PhD student in Leadership at Research Policy Institute, Lund University.Key words: Leadership, Crisis Management, Emergency Management, Societal Security, Virtual Command Post, Virtual Arena, Training, Brain, Interoperability, Awareness, C-BML, CML, CMSS FOMAbstractEarly on in the development of simulation tools for the training of Crisis Management Organizations and Teams, military models and simulators where edited, modified, converted and used. Tanks became fire trucks, an APC was converted to a police car.The training organizations benefited a lot from the military experiences and from efforts and money spent by different DoD/MoD's.But three different parameters distorted the perfect picture.In military scenarios there are no high fidelity models and simulations of the general public. This is of outmost importance in a Societal Crisis Game.A military commander leads in a well-organized and structured manner. The Societal Crisis Manager will find himself running a “hard-to-comprehend” Ad Hoc organization.During military command management is of outmost importance, leadership is seldom taken into account. During Societal Crises leadership makes the big difference.To utilize good simulators for Crisis Management you need to take all these three parameters in account. The models for "the general public", "human leadership" and "Ad Hoc Management" have to be developed. The development has to follow available standards such as the HLA-family. But you also need to develop new standards such as the CML (a developed C-BML) and a CMSS-FOM.This paper will present some good, and some bad, experiences from the development of Crisis Management Scenarios.... and good military simulations of transportation and movement are still valid, even during civilian actions.IntroductionThis paper is a part of an effort to change the view on development of Crisis Management Systems and Crisis Management Training Systems. The development must change towards the use of internationally accepted and available standards in order to build sustainable tools and systems. The development must also accept the methodology used in the development for training of professionals in crisis management. First you train and then you act in real life. Command and control system for crisis management must therefore be developed the same way. First as a tool for training and then, using the same system, as a tool for real life crisis management.Cultural misunderstandingsMilitary Commanders and Homeland Defense Managers seldom agree on a common way to act and communicate in a Crisis Situation. They almost never play in the same “sandbox”.They don’t do this because they don’t like each other; they disagree because they don’t understand each other. The cultures in military operation and during Societal Crisis (at least in non-war situations) are fundamentally different.For this reason training and command systems cannot easily be modified for use within the two different cultures.In order to understand the non-warlike situation it is most important to understand at least the following three parameters when transferring a military system to a Crisis Management System.1) People without uniform don’t behave like troops. This doesn’t mean they are enemies. It means they are not conform and they are probably not trained for handling a crisis situation. The task of the leadership is to make those people safe and happy.2) There is no “order of battle” in a societal crisis. Almost every action is a reaction based on the awareness of individuals without proper communications and information tools. Even groups of rescue people tend to act rather on local awareness than on vague orders and sparse information from their command chain.3) When it comes to societal crises, people – involved or not - panic, get scared, and they usually don’t have a chief nearby. Manuals and proceedings are seldom available, and most people are not trained for what’s happening. People will therefore act on strong personal leadership. They follow the one they think is the best leader for their own survival.Models of the general publicIn order to build models of the general public in a crisis management tool it’s crucial to understand some relevant and basic facts;The society is a system of people (individuals and groups), common beliefs (ethics, moral, culture), structure (law and order, organization, responsibilities) and resources (the environment, governmental or private belongings).The result of a crisis management effort is measured upon how well human life and the environment are preserved, costs minimized and whether societal functions, structure and beliefs are maintained.Models of the general public must consists of all these elements; people, belongings, environment, structure, common beliefs and (as explained later in the paper) leadership.In order to act in a crisis situation there are three processes that must run in parallel during the whole situation. These are rescue, support of continuity and recover. To minimize the effects of a crisis it is crucial to work with rescue operations, business continuity and recovery operations at the same time.Models of people must, based on this discussion, be based on individuals acting according to their own awareness includingIs this dangerous for me?Is this dangerous for someone I care for (family)?Is this dangerous for my team, or someone in my team?Are my belongings in jeopardy?Is my society in danger?Is there any great impact on the natural environment?Is someone I trust leading me?Is this only happening to someone else?Observe that different people prioritize differently between these parameters.These models must allow activities in all the three phases; rescue operations, business continuity and recovery operations, at the same time.One example; A group of people are trapped in traffic jam, at the same time they act as observers of an accident in front of them, the next minute they might become victims in the same accident, hit from behind, and in that case will be need of rescue. Meanwhile the traffic flow continues. The group will be subject to a recovery operation when they get their cars fixed.Note; the general public partly consists of a large number of people that act weird, maybe in panic, if exposed to a crisis. These people will not follow the usual pattern and might “freak out”, and they also need to be taken care of and rescued. Models of Ad-Hoc organizationsMilitary Commanders and their staff are normally working together sitting at prepared workstations in a homogeneous software package with well-known metaphors such as map symbols.When it comes to societal crisis there is no such thing as well organized efficiency, everything is ad hoc. Commanders on all levels will have to start with solving the crisis (rescue, continuity, and recovery) wherever they are when they are alerted, whether it is at home, in their car, at a restaurant or elsewhere.There is no “order of battle” in a societal crisis like the kind military trained personnel are familiar with. In a crisis individuals react on the basis of their awareness. They will not have access to proper information tools and communication means. They also lack both information and leadership. Even groups of professional rescue people tend to act on their local awareness instead of awaiting vague orders and sparse information from their command chain.In order to help people to co-operate they need to share the same awareness. Awareness will be developed upon a sum of what you see, what you hear, what you feel, what you understand and what you guess. In initial phases of a crisis a lot of the information is distorted, sometimes even false. This goes for the chief in command as well as for people exposed to the crisis.The best information is normally available on the lowest level where eyewitness information from the accident is collected. We call this the “input level”.Information from rescue professionals, the media and governmental functions and eye witnesses come together on the first command level and a common awareness is created for the first time. We call that the “intelligence level”.The models of the command structure must therefore be described as a network with clusters (organizational domains) and with a lot of information flowing in between individuals; sometimes this information will hit an organizational domain. Individuals in the general public can’t effectively feed good information directly into police or fire brigades command systems.It’s neither possible for individuals to get access to police information “on line” without someone publishing the information publicly. In order to retrieve that information an individual must have the means and knowledge to look for it.Models of information flow and awareness in an Ad-Hoc situation with an Ad-Hoc organization are important to develop.Models of leadership ( vs. management)The present trend is to focus on the education of managers. Preparing plans for evacuations, transportation, handling of toxic agents, and so on. These “emergency plans” are good precautions and they help with risk reduction. All these efforts result in that lot of possible crisis stay at the level of smaller accidents, or even below that. A crisis occurs when one or more of the plans isn’t working as well as planned.Well-organized organizations depend heavily on well-structured management. In military structures there are rules to follow your commander, otherwise there will be severe punishment ruled by a military court. There are numbers of manuals and procedures for commanders to follow in a military operation. But, when it comes to a societal crisis, people panic, get scared and they don’t have a chief nearby to rely on. Manuals and proceedings are seldom available, and most people are not trained for what’s happening to them. They will therefore act on strong personal leadership. In a crisis people will quickly find the person with the strongest leadership.This also applies to rescue workers and military personnel when they understand that their chief no longer is in control of the situation. Models of human behavior must therefore include both the decision of well trained commanders following plans, manuals and orders and at the same time take account for the behavior of strong, but sometimes incorrect and misinformed, leaders.Model of developmentAlmost all expertise on Crisis Management agrees on two “facts”. First of all, Crisis Mangers and Crisis management teams work better if they are well trained. Secondly, it’s not possible for the human brain to differ between what it learned from a real life accident and what it learned from a well organized training session.The Crisis Management Team/Officer training will therefore make it possible to train situations that rarely ever occur in real life. It’s also possible to train scenarios in multiple, parallel, sessions in order to compare experiences and ensure best possible actions.Experiences like this are widely available from airplane simulator training. Both individual and team actions trained in a simulator are validated to work well in real time incidents and accidents.Therefore, the conceptual infological model for Crisis Management should be in use for both real and simulated events. Normally, real time events include a lot of low intensity accidents while the big ones, luckily for us, rarely, if ever, occurs for the Crisis manager. At the same time a mix of low and high level accidents might be a part of a daily, or weekly, training sessions.A lot of efforts should be put into using training sessions as system development sessions. The experiences from training should be used in real life, not only the other way around. (This is a recurrent problem; the command and control systems are not tested for large scale accidents, until they actually occur.)The methodology “training before live action” is used for all hazardous, and other, professionals. No soldier is sent into battle without prior training.If the methodology “training before live action” is also implemented on systems development, presumably SISO efforts such as C-BML and the HLA architecture will be important parts of systems development for Crisis Management C2 systems.If the C-BML effort is expanded to cover crisis management needs, with the proposed name Crisis Management Language (CML), in co-operation with ISO/TC 223 Societal Security, a lot of good resources might be available.If these training systems are developed using the HLA-architecture and a CMSS-FOM (Crisis management and Societal Security FOM) it will be easier to get the “feeding” systems one and the same interface rather than building two interfaces, one for simulations and one for real life.Infological solutionThese different approaches to model the general public, to model command structures and to model leadership, need a new concept for the information flow. It is important to model the information flow where both public, non-public, false, distorted and true information must be allowed to flow in-between individuals, groups and organizations.The general public acts according to their awareness. They normally just follow their daily routine unless they understand something odd is happening. The daily routine is something that the Continuity Manger needs to know and be aware of.That understanding of something “odd” can be based upon something one has seen, heard, read or felt. The information can be direct, the person sees it, or indirect, the person hears about it. The understanding, awareness, might be correct or false but will in any case trigger some actions. Humans are influenced by each other. If one starts running in one direction, and the situation is “tense”, a lot of people will follow in that same direction. The will to follow, to be led by someone trusted, is very strong in a crisis situation. Even if managers, such as rescue personnel, police officers and politicians might do a good job as long as the individuals don’t panic they will soon find themselves not managing when strong natural leaders take over. A) Rescue teams and their commanders (command centers) need to know the situation as it is, including upcoming risks. They have the need for “professional” rugged C2-systems. But the systems must also model the interaction in-between observers, fire fighters and victims. This interaction offers more information inside the rescue domain and make the information readily available more reliable.B) Continuity managers need to know the need for logistic resources over time, transportation, power, water and so on. Continuity managers need information of what’s working according to normal as well as disturbances over time, as direct results of the accident as well as indirect results such as evacuations, power cut offs and so on.C) Recovery managers need to understand, and influence on, the strategic recovery decision made early by politicians.SummaryMilitary Commanders and Homeland Defense Managers seldom agree on the way to act and communicate in a Crisis Situation. They almost never play in the same “sandbox”.This division is not a sign of them don’t liking each other; they are disagreeing because they don’t understand each other. The cultures in a military operation and a Societal Crisis (at least non-war situations) are fundamentally different.Therefore training and command systems cannot easily be modified between the different cultures.In order to understand the non-warlike situation it is important have to take at least the following three parameters in account when transferring a military system to a Crisis Management System.1) People without uniform don’t behave like troops. 2) There is no “order of battle” in a societal crisis. 3) When it comes to societal crises, people – involved or not - panic, get scared, and they usually don’t have a chief nearby.People without uniform don’t behave like troops. This doesn’t mean they are enemies. The leaderships task is to make those people (and their belongings) safe and happy. Models of individuals and groups need to have good fidelity.There is no “order of battle” in a societal crisis. Almost everything is a reaction on the awareness of individuals without proper communications and information tools. Even groups of rescue people tend to act more on local awareness than on vague orders and sparse information from their command chain. Models of information flow and awareness in an Ad-Hoc situation with an Ad-Hoc organization has to be an important task to develop.In military structures there are rules for following command, otherwise there is severe punishment ordered by a military court. There are numbers of manuals and procedures for a commander to follow in a military operation. When it comes to a societal crisis, people panic, get scared and they seldom have a chief nearby to follow. Manuals and proceedings are scarcely available, and most people are not trained for acting in a crisis situation. People will act on strong personal leadership. They will follow the one they think of as the best leader for their own survival. This also applies to rescue workers and military personnel when they understand their chief no longer is in control of the situation. Models of human behavior must include both the decision of well-trained commanders and the behavior of strong, but not always correct, leaders. If the training systems are developed using the HLA-architecture and a CMSS-FOM (Crisis management and Societal Security FOM) it will improve the “feeding” systems and the same system would be used for training and simulations as well as for real life crises.ReferncesTolk A, Turnitsa C, Diallo S, Fall SIW 07, “Object models, messages, languages – the warfighter deserves better”Blais C, Turnitsa C, Gustavsson P, Fall SIW 06, “A strategy for ontology research for the coalition battle management language (C-BML) product development group”Mattson, A.The Virtual Command PostSeveringhouse R, Tegner J, Mattson A, EuroSIW06, “Interoperability in crisis management: organizational, political, technological and cultural.” Mattson, A. “The Tele Rescue Demonstrator”Mattson, A. Silfwerbrand L, F SIW 07, “The virtual Arena for Crisis Management.”ISO/TC 223 Societal SecurityNFPA 1600