Dealing with Structural Uncertainty in Tactical WargamingDr. Marko A. HofmannDr. Bodo JungeInstitute for Technology of Intelligent Systems (ITIS)University of the Federal Armed Forces MunichHeisenbergweg 39Germany - 85577 Neubiberg0049 89 6004 3242 HYPERLINK "mailto:marko.hofmann@ unibw.de" marko.hofmann@ unibw.deKeywords:Uncertainty, wargaming, bounded rationality, simulation supported decision making, assumption based planning, scenario planning, exploratory simulationABSTRACT: There are two kinds of uncertainty in science: structural and parametric uncertainty. Parametric uncertainty means that we know the relevant factors and their interrelations for a given phenomenon, but miss the exact (initial) values of these factors. Structural uncertainty means that we are unsure if we know all the relevant factors and their interdependencies. Using this conceptual distinction it is clear that every simulation model for tactical wargaming is necessarily affected by massive structural uncertainty, since the “fog of war” has not lifted much since the days of Clausewitz.  The term “fog” seeks to capture the uncertainty regarding own capabilities, adversary capabilities and intents, as well as many other factors. However, if war is seen that way, it is necessarily insufficient to base decisions on frameworks that only deal with parametric uncertainty. The classical approach to make decisions, rational analysis, has therefore severe limitations for this application. The major consequence of structural uncertainty for simulation supported decision making is that stochastic parameter variation and subsequent statistical analysis are inadequate as the sole basis for critical decisions.  The paper discusses this calamity and, as a solution, suggests tactical wargaming, a method based on assumption based planning, scenario planning, expert intuition and exploratory simulation. This approach significantly differs from standard wargaming, which, in the author’s view, is too focused on parametric uncertainty.1. IntroductionThe “fog of war” is a term used to describe the uncertainty and ambiguity of military operations. War is seen as inherently volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous. For this condition, contemporary US military usage offers the acronym VUCA, to which anyone would prefer the succinct elegance of “fog”. Like many other fundamental military concepts, “fog of war” is normally attributed to Clausewitz [1], who receives credit for the alliterative “fog and friction” characterization of war.Although ubiquitous on strategic and operational level, too, the practical importance of military uncertainty is most vividly demonstrated on the tactical level. It includes military commanders’ imperfect intelligence regarding their enemy’s numbers, disposition, capabilities, and, especially, intent, regarding features of the terrain and environment, and even including inaccurate knowledge of the state of their own forces. Fog of war is not only caused by the limits of reconnaissance, by the enemy’s feints and disinformation, by delays in receiving intelligence and difficulties passing orders, and by the difficult task of forming a cogent and consistent picture from a large amount of diverse and doubtful data, it is also caused by a general impossibility to predict the reasoning of single human minds and the behavior of agitated groups. During actual combat the uncertainty of war and the chaos of the battlefield even increase, since chance and imponderabilities like fear, hate and despair become of increasing importance. Taking this considerations serious it is obvious that dealing appropriately with uncertainty is a vital function of all military decision making. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the two classification systems mostly used to describe uncertainties and the connections between them.  Section 3 discusses the importance of structural uncertainty in military decision making and the denial of it in the traditional rational-choice model. Section 4 provides the reader with a brief overview on wargaming in general. Section 5 discusses the method of analytical wargaming and its shortcoming with respect to structural uncertainty, section 6 presents methods of bounded rationality. Section 7 integrates the ideas from section 6 into a new wargaming method called tactical wargaming. Section 8 concludes the paper by reiterating its contributions and suggests some conclusions and future research directions. 2. Classifications of UncertaintyThe first and classical categorization of risk and uncertainty stems from F. H. Knight. He used the term “risk” in two senses, which - notwithstanding the different wording - highlight the nature of uncertainty. From his economic point of view, risk (in the broader sense) has two dimensions: risk in the narrower sense and real uncertainty [2]. Risk (in the narrower sense) is associated with known (dangerous) events and the possibilities of their occurrence.  These possibilities are regarded to be assessable, using “hard facts” (e.g. frequencies). Hence, risk is uncertainty about the actual occurrence of single events from which we know the probabilities (uncertainty of type 1).  According to Knight, real uncertainty is an attribute of known (dangerous) events for which the probabilities of occurrence are indeterminable on objective grounds (uncertainty of type 2).  But there is even a third type of uncertainty associated to completely unexpected events, which reveal their detriment only after they have happened (uncertainty of type 3). All three types of uncertainty are ubiquitous in military conflicts and many other social systems, too. The more modern classification of parametric and structural uncertainty (which can not be attributed to a single origin) has a slightly different meaning, but addresses a similar distinction. Parametric uncertainty means that we know the relevant factors for a given phenomenon, but miss the exact (initial) values of these factors. In other words, we have good empirical evidence that the causal reasoning of the model we use is a adequate representation of the relations in the real world. What is sometimes hard to find are the "right" parameters for the model. Parametric uncertainty is roughly equivalent to uncertainty type 2 in the modified Knight’s classification, but it also includes type 1, if we see probabilities as special expressions of parameter uncertainty.  Structural uncertainty means that we are not sure if we know all the relevant factors and that we most probably do not know their interdependencies. Or, in other words, there are serious reasons to believe that the model we use to represent the phenomenon is at least incomplete. Hence, structural uncertainty ideally reflects the concept of type 3 uncertainty in the former classification, only substituting unknown factors for unknown events.The modern classification is directly focused on the models we make of complex systems, whereas the older classification can be seen as an attempt to describe the attributes of real systems.  Since the major concern of this paper are models used to support decision makers it is based on the second classification. 3. The importance of structural uncertainty in military decision making and its denial in models of rational choiceThe importance of uncertain events or factors has already been mentioned in the introduction. We may now ask, whether this uncertainty is parametric or structural. Since we have explicitly mentioned a number of factors generally considered to contribute to massive uncertainty (enemy’s numbers, disposition, capabilities and intent, terrain, weather, human factors etc.),  one might assume, that all this is only parametric uncertainty. However, it is far beyond the current state of knowledge how these factors really interrelate, including their causal and temporal dependencies. In addition, it is questionable, if a human made list of such factors can ever be complete. Up to know, it has been impossible to make reliable, repeatable predictions for any complex social system. Due to self-adaptive learning mechanisms in social systems it is currently even unrealistic to believe that such predictions are achievable goals. The “causal structure of social reality”, that is, the network of human interactions and beliefs is constantly changing. Any long-term conflict shows this variability: Every success of one side changes the behavior of the opponent. Furthermore, a certain amount of unpredictability is downright vital to military survival. Hence, structural uncertainty is most probably an inherent problem of the domain. Taking structural uncertainty seriously it is almost paradoxical that the standard model of decision making, the rational analytical decision making framework (RADMF), completely ignores it. Rational decision-making is a well-defined methodology [3], based on the analytic comparison of different options within a so-called decision framework, which consists – in military context – of  environmental system states including enemy options, probabilities (p) of these environments, and quantitatively evaluated consequences of own options against enemy options based on a global objective function (see Table 3.1). The best decision is calculated by maximization of the expected utility value.Table 3.1:  The general structure of rational analytical decision making frameworksEnvironment 1Environment 2Environ. 3p1p2p3Option AConsequence A-1Consequence A-2Conseq. A-3Option BConsequence B-1Consequence B-2Conseq. B-3Option CConsequence C-1Consequence C-2Conseq. C-3The RADMF can be a useful template for decision making in well-understood systems, however, it is obvious, that such a framework does not, at least not deliberately, take into account structural uncertainty, but only parametric uncertainty (in the form of probabilities). One might therefore assume that this framework is not usable, or at least not exclusively usable, for military decision making: We hardly ever know completely our own options, can sometimes only guess about the enemy, have to make assumptions about future environments and their probabilities and have to interpret calculations or simulations of the outcomes with the uttermost care. Nevertheless, the RADMF is used both in the US and the German Army as the framework for collecting the insights gathered during tactical wargaming, intended for decision support (see Figure 5.4, taken from [4]). 4. Serious games: wargaming for decision support“Wargaming is a flexible instrument designed to develop, compare, and improve courses of action (COA)”. This is a definition given by the German General Staff College.The origin of institutionalized Wargaming dates back to emerging Prussia and its General Staff in 19th century and can be described as means to interactively play the development of a military (and later on non-military as well) operations. Both, Clausewitz and Moltke the elder saw the potential of Wargaming in a staff being better prepared for an operation within a common context. They also advised it for the usage of its members’ creativity and intensified planning by critically questioning and scrutinizing planned COA. The Wargaming process is not bound to a certain level of command, but its implementation strongly depends on this, since each level of command has typical constraints concerning available time, resources and experts of different operation-specific fields. Typically tactical, operational and strategic levels are differentiated. In this article, the tactical level is in focus.5. Wargaming as an analytic evaluation tool for COA comparison5.1 Principles of analytical wargamingWargaming can be used for the analysis of own and enemy options. It is then the cornerstone of the evaluation of COA.  Figure 5.1 shows it as being part of a cyclic, iterative process which is the backbone of the Wargaming Guide developed at the German General Staff College [4]. Figure 5.1:  Evaluation of COA within an analytical frameworkIn general, wargaming for COA analysis is based on a sequential process of some largely independent cycles (repetitions) of “moves” from at least two different teams within a gaming environment (sand table, map or computer based system). Within this paradigm it follows an Action – Reaction – Counteraction pattern (see Figure 5.2), using an impartial  umpire to judge the outcome. The outcome can also be calculated using fixed rules (like in chess) or simulations (see section 6).The central rational of this kind of wargaming (analytic wargaming) is the analysis of a succession of events that constitute a COA.  Since all COA are given before the wargaming starts, the range of possible events is limited to what the team members regard as possible within that COA.  From a generalized point of view, this kind of wargaming tries to reduce the uncertainty of known events and is therefore dealing with a special kind of parametric uncertainty (see Figure 5.3 and the following explanations). Structural uncertainty is not addressed directly, only implicitly via hidden thoughts of the team members.Figure 5.2: Wargaming sequenceThe final results of analytic wargaming are condensed in tabular comparisons. For this, several qualitative or quantitative methods are used. Qualitative methods can be as simple as advantage/disadvantage (A/D) tables, or sophisticated like the four dimensional SWOT (Strength, Weakness, Opportunities, Threats) matrix. More formal methods with finer granularity are the usage of color- or grade-based (ordinal order), or numerical (cardinal order) matrices as shown in Figure 5.2 and 5.3, taken from the German General Staff Guide to Wargaming. Here, the COA are compared by arranging specific selection criteria given by the commander according to their significance and  assigning each COA a degree of compliance regarding the fulfillment of each criterion. While the ordinal approach (Figure 5.2) allows discrete ratings, which are not comparable in a way that a “++” is as double as beneficial as a “+” or four times better than a “o”, it still is well suited for getting an overview on COA which technically is similar to the advantage/ disadvantage matrix. Due to their ordinal or even only nominal ratings, however, such matrices (A/D, SWOT and ordinal) are always equivocal. Mathematically clear and, in general, unambiguous results can be achieved, using numerical matrices. The weighted decision matrix (Figure 5.4) is such a table for quantitative comparison. Here, the COA are compared by assigning a numerical value to their prospect of success. The commander’s selection criteria are weighted according to their significance ranging from, for example,  1 (low) to 5 (high). Then the degree of compliance for each criterion of each COA is assessed ranging from, for example,  1 (low) to 5 (high). For each of the Commander’s Selection Criteria a numerical value is calculated by multiplying the significance level with the degree of compliance. To determine the COA’s prospect of success, these values need to be added. The most promising COA will have the highest value. Figure 5.3:  Quantified Evaluation (ordinal) of COA according to a German General Staff Guide to Wargaming (Example) Figure 5.4:  Quantified Weighted Evaluation (cardinal) of COA according to a German General Staff Guide to Wargaming (Example)Weighted decision matrices are obviously a specific extension of the RADMF using multidimensional criteria (vectors) to calculate a single consequence attribute (compare with Figure 3.1).   Notwithstanding their mathematical elegance, they seem somewhat strange, because they stand in full opposition to the fog of war. If no further sensitivity analysis is done on the numbers such matrices are completely devoid of uncertainty. There are further serious critics on such matrices, but the scope of this paper is broader than weighted decision matrices and their use for military applications. Regardless of the special form of the matrices (A/D, SWOT, ordinal or cardinal) they all share a common feature: The criteria (e.g. advantages (A/D), strength ((SWOT), tempo (as a special instance of ord./card. matrices))  can be seen as the decision relevant parameters of the COA. Hence, the major result of analytic wargaming, that is, the final basis for the commanders briefing, is a reduction of parametric uncertainty. But, what is left out in this approach, is an explicit provision for structural uncertainty. This critic is not meant to denigrate the benefits of analytic wargaming: Done by a group of experts it can actually, as a process, raise the level of awareness for structural uncertainty. However, it does not provide the “wargamer” with methodological help to take account of structural uncertainty. This weak point becomes even clearer when simulation systems are used to support the calculation of the consequences of COA. 5.2. Simulation in analytic wargamingModern wargaming is generally done on an electronic map using iconic representations of military units. The resolution ranges from weapon systems and soldiers  on tactical level up to whole armies on strategic level. It can be done completely without any simulated entities like a sand table based wargaming. The major benefit of this simple kind of computer based wargaming is better traceability via automatic documentation and powerful scalable visualization. With the use of some elementary simulation functionalities it is further  possible to facilitate the handling of the wargaming (automated standard movements on roads, for example) and to introduce dynamic visualization based on short simulated repetitions of move sequences (replay function). The major step ahead for wargaming, however, is seen in the use of a simulation system to evaluate the outcome of different COA. In such an approach there is no coercive need for a human umpire. For simulation the wargaming factions implement their plan (COA) by fine-tuning the deployment of their units and giving initial orders. After the simulation has started all elementary combat processes, including off-road combat mode movement, reconnaissance and mutual attrition, are automatically simulated. In an interactive simulation it is possible and necessary to command the units by interrupting the simulation run, whereas in a closed simulation no human intervention is possible after the start. Both simulations necessitate some kind of command and control modules with different extent.The major advantage of interactive simulations is more flexibility in the command of the COA realization. However, this flexibility has two drawbacks for wargaming: First the evaluation of COA is dependent of human knowledge about the intricacies of the special simulation model and dependent of the human skills in the operation of the simulation. Second, interactive simulations are much more slower than closed simulations (the difference can amount to several orders of magnitude).  As a consequence of this limitation and of learning effects, it is seldom possible to make more than a few repetitions with the same (own and enemy) COA combination. Thus, there is little variation included into the evaluation. The uncertainty of real combat is therefore underestimated.With closed simulation it is possible to make hundreds of simulation runs using different random numbers for all kind of processes. Although this variation is somewhat compensated by its military “blindness” with respect to an interactive human commander, it can nevertheless capture a huge range of parametric uncertainty. The standard routine to take this uncertainty into consideration is the computation of measures of central tendency and dispersion (mean and variance, for example) [6]. For simplicity, let us assume that every simulation run ends with a exactly measurable result somewhere between a clear success (100) and a complete failure (0). A frequently used setting in standard military wargaming consists of three own COA which are compared with two enemy COA (usually the most likely and the most dangerous COA). A possible simplified result of a closed-simulation based statistical evaluation within this setting could look like  Table 6.1.In order to get a definite result from this numbers it is necessary to weight between the two cases and the statistical measures.  If we, for example, equally weight most likely and most dangerous enemy COA and ignore variance, COA 1 must be favoured because it has the highest average mean (55). A risk aversive decider would discount means by a certain proportion of the variance and would put a higher weight on the second case (the most dangerous enemy COA). This could lead to the preference of COA 3.It is obvious that uncertainty in this approach is attributed as a statistical parameter to the given COA. This assessment remains valid regardless how many parameter are taken into consideration. Structural uncertainty, the real fog of war, is, at least methodologically, ignored.Table 6.1: Simulation based statistical evaluation of COA (Example)Most likely Enemy COANumber of runsmeanvarianceCOA 1COA 2COA 3100100100605550302010Most dangerous Enemy COANumber of runsmeanvarianceCOA 1COA 2COA 3200200200504050301010In strong connection with this problem is the ubiquitous demand for validated combat simulation models. What does “validated model” mean, if we have to face massive structure uncertainty in reality? It is hard to believe  that any combat simulation model will ever capture the whole variety of possible incidents, not to mention the probabilities of these incidents. It is seldom possible to demonstrate more than the technical accuracy of the modelling of the elementary processes (micro-level behaviour) and the plausibility of the operational picture (macro-level behaviour). This plausibility is by no means, a reliable fundament for predictions, not even statistical prediction. Tables 6.1 would significantly differ for different simulation systems, unless calibrated on purpose. It is therefore already questionable, whether combat simulation models can take satisfactory account of parametric uncertainty. The inclusion of structural uncertainty into a validated model is impossible, if both concepts are take literally: If the model is a valid representation of reality it is proven that nothing structural is missing. And if the model is guessing about potential (future) structures it can not be validated in the classical sense, using empirical data from the past.The whole dilemma would be tolerable if structural uncertainty was totally out of reach of all methodological endeavours. If only intuition or chance could penetrate structural uncertainty, or, to use Clausewitz’ expression, if only the coup d’oeil (French for “glance”) [7] could cut through the fog of war, we simply would have to live with the dilemma, hoping for a genius or sheer luck. But structural uncertainty is dealt with in various methods: Scenario and assumption based planning, and explorative simulation, for example. What is the difference in these approaches to the RADMF, in general, and to standard analytical wargaming, in particular?6. Bounded rationality6.1 Principles of bounded rationalityThere is so much uncertainty inherent in almost every phenomena affecting decisions in social systems (in the broad sense of the word “social”, comprising all system with human communication and interaction, e.g. economic, military, political, social in the narrow sense) that trying to follow the rational decision-making process is often irrational and self-deceiving. The Nobel laureate Herbert Simon used the term “bounded rationality” to indicate this limits of rationality [8]. Modern psychology has confirmed his findings and underpinned the indispensable value of heuristic, intuitive and self-reflective decision making. Thus, the essential criterion of a successful decision making framework for social systems should often not be formal rationality in the sense of the common RADMF. The difference between the RADMF and all approaches based on the notion of bounded rationality can be highlighted with five major principles from Simon:Exploration of possible options replaces any attempt to complete evaluation of given sets of options.With respect to the results of the decision making process, precision is much less important than robustness because of data uncertainty.There are no absolute decisions, all of them are context-dependent and “moderate” (suitable versus unsuitable in contrast to right versus wrong).Objective optimization is replaced by subjective “satisficing”.If possible each “big” decision is sequenced and thereby ultimately postponed into a set of small decisions in order to avoid irreversible failures (an attitude which is also called incrementalism).These principles show that methods of bounded rationality take uncertainty (in the form of structural uncertainty (see principles 1 and 5) as a fact [9].6.2. Examples for decision making based on the principles of bounded rationality 6.2.1 Assumption based planningAssumption based planning [10 ]is a method that helps to deal with uncertainty. It is used to identify the most important (most critical) assumptions in a plan or idea, test these assumptions and think of hedging actions. A plan is regarded to be a tentative solution to the inexact problems posed by an uncertain future. Even if the future could be known with certainty (which is unlikely), there are likely to be uncertainties about whether a given plan is the proper solution or approach to that future. Any plan contains assumptions  about what the future holds (the problems in the future) and about whether the plan will perform as hoped (the solution to those problems).Assumption based planning is used best when a plan has already been constructed; the techniques are used to improve the robustness and adaptability of the plan by reducing the number of surprises that occur by decreasing the risks posed by assumptions made during the planning process.Assumption-based planning (ABP) has five basic steps: List all assumptions in the plan. Identify load-bearing vulnerable assumptions. Create signposts. Take shaping actions. Take hedging actions.According to the developers of ABP a planning assumption is a judgment or evaluation about some characteristic of the future that underlies the plans of an organization. All planning requires some judgments about, or  evaluations of, the future. The more uncertain the future, the more likely is it that the planner will have to make judgments or "guesstimates" to help narrow the range and number of uncertainties about the future into a manageable few before progress can be made. [10] also provides a list of techniques to find assumptions in a plan. The next step in ABP is to identify those assumptions upon which the success of the plan must rest - the so-called "load-bearing" assumptions - and the assumptions that are most vulnerable to being overturned by future events – assumptions which are likely to crumble. Assumptions that are both load-bearing and vulnerable are the most likely to produce dangerous surprises as the plan unfolds. To deal with potential surprises, ABP uses signposts, shaping actions, and hedging actions. Signposts are warning signs that can be used to monitor those assumptions that are most likely to produce surprises. Signposts are events or thresholds that, if detected, signify that a vulnerable assumption is broken or dangerously weak and that management or planning action is called for. Shaping actions are intended to help shore up uncertain assumptions, they are attempts to control the future as much as possible, Planners generally know how they would like an assumption to play out, hence shaping actions are designed to help the assumption play out to the planners' liking. Hedging actions, in contrast, better prepare for the possibility that an assumption will fail, despite efforts to shore it up. Hedging actions typically come from thinking through a plausible scenario in which an assumption collapses and asking what might be done now to prepare for that scenario.6.2.2 Scenario planningA scenario [11] describes a possible future environment, but is not a prediction. It combines known facts about the future with plausible trends which are key driving forces. A scenario explores the extremes which challenge the existing mental conception of the future. It should be engaging, interesting, challenging and credible, as well as logically consistent with the known facts. A set of scenarios describes a range of possible futures, and should be mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive. Ideally, the set should have no more than four scenarios or it becomes difficult to manage. Scenarios can be presented in many different forms, such as in a script, a timeline, within a discussion or as a computer simulation. Scenario planning can include anticipatory thinking elements that are difficult to formalize, such as subjective interpretations of facts, shifts in values, new regulations, inventions and even intuitions and visions. However, the descriptive scenarios need to be supported by numerical analysis, which should: test the credibility of each scenario, explore the magnitude of changes in the environment, evaluate the impact of those changes.The scenarios are then used to challenge existing conceptions of the future and stimulate new ideas. They form the basis of a (in general) strategic debate which is drastically different to the traditional strategic planning cycle. In the best case, scenario planning creates a flexible plan which is composed of a variety of options, which might be seen as contingency plans. This enables the decision maker to adapt his plans to the evolving environment. According to the leading developers of scenario planning (Van der Heijden et. al. 2002) it is a process that surfaces and challenges assumptions and mindsets in a constructive and creative way;recognizes uncertainty and makes it explicit;provides a way of making sense of an overabundance of information; facilitates the development of new insights that would not reside it from conventional planning methods;ensures that all of this is achieved as an organization in which individuals align on coherent action;integrates thinking, planning and key future investments to exploit the scarcity landscape.In short, scenario planning allows organizations to rehearse the future, to walk the battlefield before the battle.  The result it is not, however, a more accurate prediction of the future, but the ability to better distinguish the significant aspects of the future.  This, in turn, allows better decisions to be made.Assumption based and scenario planning share the same ideas (see section 6.3), but differ in scope. Whereas scenario planning tries to capture structural uncertainty directly by conjecturing about it, assumption based planning is more focused on the structural uncertainty hitherto neglected in the own planning. From a theoretical point of view scenario planning is a breadth first search for structural uncertainty and assumption based planning a depth first search. Quite naturally, both approaches can be combined, either within scenario planning (with a stronger focus on the special assumptions made within the scenarios) or within assumption based planning (by systematically challenging the long-term and basic assumptions of the current plan). In the new wargaming approach presented in section 8 we have chosen the second combination.6.3 Summary of the difference between methods of bounded rationality and the RADMFComparing the RADMF and the methods of bounded rationality some major differences come to mind.  The latter  lead to results which are ex-ante and ex-post only approximations,take a critical stance towards the predictability of the future,allow discussions about the reasoning itself, not only about the input data,do not claim objectivity, take unexpected events to be unavoidable,easily accept adaptations of own decisions since nothing “has to be defended”,do not only accept rationality but also intuition.The main difference, however, is that the alternatives are inherently highly adaptive and self-critical towards the current knowledge, with other words, they take a significant amount of uncertainty as irreducible.7. The methodological approach of tactical wargaming7.1  Origins of tactical wargaming Tactical wargaming has been developed at the University of the German Armed Forces in Munich [12]. It is the result of a study conducted for the German Army Office, which has intensively supported and tested the methodology. The term “tactical wargaming” has two different meanings. First, it indicates the military level of decision making it was intended for. Military custom separates tactical from operational and strategic level. Tactical decisions dominate military thinking up to the level of battalion and even brigade. The method of tactical wargaming has been originally developed for this echelons. The expression also served as a quick distinctions from the guide of the German General Staff, which is a “Guide to operational wargaming”. From a methodological perspective tactical wargaming  is an alternative to analytical wargaming, as it has been presented in section 5. It is “tactical” because it is a constant questioning of the enemy’s intentions and possibilities, and therefore resembles the thinking of a good chess player. (würde ich weglassen, könnte auch bleiben, bin aber eher für weglassen).7.2 Expert intuition, mental simulation and the central rational underlying wargamingBefore we discuss tactical wargaming in detail, an important question has to be answered: Where does the idea (the option, the COA) to be evaluated come from? This question is unanswered in analytic wargaming and also within the RADMF. Both assume that the options are obvious or emerge directly from analysis. This notion is seriously flawed. The most important source of ideas for COA and options in general is expert intuition. In his timeless classic “On War” Clausewitz explains: “Now, if one is to get safely through this perpetual conflict with the unexpected, two qualities are indispensable . . . The first is figuratively expressed by the French phrase coup d’oeil. The other is resolution” [1]. For Clausewitz, coup d’oeil is “the rapid discovery of a truth which to the ordinary mind is either not visible at all or only becomes so after long examination and reflection.”The coup d’oeil is only possible on the foundation of self-reflected experience and good knowledge of the past. The military commander thereby creates in his mind patterns of various resolution, which he uses to assess situations and develop own courses of action. However, even with excellent intuition, uncertainty still rules the battlefield. Accepting and managing uncertainty is often the difference between success and failure. Successful commanders learn to recognize when uncertainty necessitates a change in the plan, and how to structure the battlefield and anticipate enemy events based on limited information in order to reduce uncertainty.In general, much of the reasoning of experts in uncertain situations is done by mental simulation. Mental simulation is the development of a story or scenario around the recognized pattern that describes actions and events that will occur from an initial state to some point in the future. Mental simulation gives meaning to these cues or patterns and fills in the gaps of the analogy. Not only does it help identify weaknesses in the plan, but it also generates expectations about success and helps the decision maker identify opportunities. Such a mental simulation can be supported excellently by wargaming. Its advantage is  easily explained by a comparison with chess. It is much easier to think through possible moves  if you are allowed to move the pieces. That is the very simple rationale behind wargaming. 7.3 Tactical wargaming – The methodThe process (see Figure 7.1) starts with a visualization of the current situation (step #1) which is considered to be of high importance in order to create a common understanding throughout the whole staff. Since this step is one of the core activities within a brigade staff and usually supported by IT a very well way, there is not much to add to it. Step #2 then separates the current situation from future endeavors in a way, that it requires own systems to be able to manipulate the situation’s representation without further consequences for the staff’s work. It adds a mission layer on top of the situation layer and therefore ensures everybody to talk about the same items. Steps #1 and #2 also serve as stimulations for coup d’ oeils. The third step is first in the creativity-cycle ranging from step #3 to step #8, which are all in the tug of war between missing information and contradictious information overflow as well as chances and risks for the operation’s success. Here, an idea (coup d’oeil,) bridges the difference between current situation and defined mission and their objectives. Please note, this action has no defined starting point, technically this initial idea could be of any nature and is more of a starting point for discussions but a well elaborated COA. Figure 7.1:  Tactical Wargaming according to the Guide to Tactical Wargaming issued by the German Army OfficeStep #4 then specifies the idea at hand by disassembling it into its core elements which of lowest reasonable (depending on the context) granularity. After this the idea’s elements are subject to analysis for relevant assumptions (step #5). The point here is to find a good balance between a search in depth (e.g. recursive questioning of assumptions) and search in width (finding out the largest number of independent assumptions). Usually due to time-boundaries it seems better to start searching for a large number of independent assumptions and taking these into step #6.  The goal of step #6 is then to class assumptions according to their criticality and their plausibility (see section 7.4). All used values are not quantified and usually not justified by hard facts or even numerical data. But this method quickly filters out those assumptions which are highly implausible and at the same time due to their criticality a threat to the operation itself. Step #7 then is to find out what happened, if an assumption would not hold and here limited to the “dangerous” assumptions defined in step #6. Taking these results into account step #8 addresses contingency plans according to the alternatives defined in step #7. If the contingency plans are free of inconsistencies to an required extend, then they are made explicit (if time suffices) or announced if only oral communication is possible  and is followed by the presentation of these plans (as well as eventually the order production). If this is not the case, for example a contingency plan reveals a critical threat that has been neglected up to this point then the commander or the chief of staff can choose to run through the cycle again with certain and limited modifications or to restart the planning process completely from scratch. This exit option for a complete restart is not limited to be taken after step #8 but throughout the whole process, since critical insights will be gained anytime during planning and refinement phase. During the whole process  gaming (moving unit icons over the terrain representation) is used to visualize all steps but also additional ideas and objections. With respect to structural uncertainty step #5 is of paramount importance. Therefore some additional techniques are used to elicit such assumptions (see [10]) So far, we have made the best experiences with the so-called post mortem technique (sometimes also called the crystal-ball technique). By metaphorically “gazing into a crystal ball,” the planner assumes that the critical event or action failed to achieve the results needed for the success of the plan. The challenge then becomes explaining why the event or action failed. This “trick” may seem extremely simple, nevertheless it is assumedly the most effective way to challenge own (pre-)conceptions, and thereby an explicit approach to the consideration of structural uncertainty.Tactical wargaming is, in contrast to analytical wargaming, a sequential analysis of the currently favored COA (idea, plan) and not a comparison of different COA. If successful it yields a tree of contingency plans that reflects the examination of structural and parametric uncertainty, which is considered to be manageable. Otherwise, it urges to modify the whole plan, to find a new idea, to try a completely other COA and to start the cycle again.A major additional advantage of tactical wargaming is its flexibility. The level of depth and width can be freely chosen according to the time available. It can even stop almost immediately whenever needed, because no decision matrix has to be filled. 7. 4 Example for tactical assumptionsIn order to illustrate the reasoning of tactical wargaming this section  discusses an example. It is assumed that the mission of a task force is to safeguard the village A from the attacks of guerilla war fighters. The higher commander’s intent is to deny the enemy a deep penetration into the military protection zone. The currently favored plan is to safeguard village A directly from positions within the village. The following planning assumptions have been identified during the tactical wargaming which was triggered by a first assault on a farmhouse outside the village:enemy’s primary objectives are logistic facilities (A),own combat service support is provided by units of allied  (B),engineers will be able to bridge river Z within the next 24 hours (C)air support from armed helicopters available within 2 hours (D)in worst case, own forces will be numerically only slightly inferior to guerilla fighters (E)the political situation in the host nation will be stabile for the next 48 hours (F),the connecting road between villages A and B will be trafficable during the next 24 hours   (G),enemy support form villagers is negligible  (H).These assumptions are played through by active wargaming and evaluated within a two-dimension diagram displaying the plausibility and criticality of the assumptions (see Figure 7.2). The most dangerous assumptions are obviously those which are less probable and highly critical. Figure 7.2 shows a possible attribution of priorities to the assumptions.The next step after prioritization is the development of contingency plans using shaping and hedging actions that are again acted out on the war game platform. 7.5. Explorative Simulation in tactical wargamingThe methodology of tactical wargaming can profit from  simulation in at least three forms. The first use is a straightforward application of the ideas presented in section 7.3. It is done by interactively playing out the assumptions challenged. The simulation system provides the whole evaluation environment and the players are restricted by the simulation interface and internal rules. It is possible to play against a human opponent (which enhances creativity) or computer generated forces (which increases reproducibility). A variant of this kind of application is the use of a closed simulation to automatically check the criticality of the questioned assumptions. Note that in all these cases  the simulation system itself is only a tool for investigating already detected risks. It is therefore, in effect, a tool for reducing the parametric uncertainty attributed to these risks.Figure 7.2: Plausibility-Criticality-DiagramSecond, an interactive simulation system can be used as gaming platform on which all kind of movements and events can be carried out. Here, a simulation system should actually be used as a basis for creative thinking and questioning. Experiments with the German combat simulation system SIRA have shown this approach is feasible but slow and sometimes awkward without special wargaming features, like “magic moves” which allow the completely free allocation of units or the introduction of completely new forces. On the other hand, some of the regular features of this simulation system have shown additional value for military decision making, in general. The almost instantly computation of areas of sight within a multi-attributed 50 meter grid terrain model allows a quick first shot terrain analysis. The algorithms of reconnaissance make weak points visible and movement algorithms allow the computation of space and time demands for complex movements of numerous combat vehicles.  Although this use explicitly deals with structural uncertainty by searching playfully for hidden chances and risks it is limited by the self-criticism of the players. From a scientific perspective, however, the third use of simulations for tactical wargaming is the most interesting, especially with respect to the challenge of structural uncertainty. This use belongs to the wide field of (closed) explorative or “What if”- simulation. Traditionally, “closed explorative simulation” means setting hypothetical initial values, let them run within  a simulation system that is based on some basic deduction rules, and see what comes out. This simplistic view, however, does not capture the nuances of the process and the profound expertise necessary to create and interpret them.  The basic idea of this approach is to use closed simulations to detect (not analyze) critical assumptions (and thereby actively dealing with structural uncertainty). The major advantage of closed simulations in comparison to interactive ones is, as already mentioned, the much greater speed of the former. It is therefore possible to run hundreds or even thousand of simulation runs within the time available for the decision making. The crucial question is, how structural variability can be introduced into the systems? By the use of random generators for the elementary process (attrition, movement, reconnaissance etc.) it is only possible to generate parametric variance. What is needed are random effects on the level of events and within the command and control modules. Random events can be easily generated if the demand for valid representations is completely given up. Then, a  random event can be, for example, a regular event (detection, shot, etc.) without cause or a randomly chosen event from a historical data base. Introducing randomness into the command an control modules is somewhat more difficult, but nevertheless possible, if the notion of optimal behavior is neglected. By deliberately generating suboptimal behavior via random functions, the behavior of a command and control module becomes incalculable. Which is exactly what is intended. The key concept of the evaluation of such simulation runs is the exclusive debriefing of their extremes and the abdication of statistical reasoning. Disastrous simulation runs (from the perspective of the own planning) are taken as possible threats (implying critical assumptions), extremely advantageous runs are taken as possible chances. Means and measures of variance are not investigated, because the model is invalid anyway. All extreme simulation runs have to be checked by human experts, which can quickly discard them as completely implausible or further scrutinize them, because they appraise the chain of events as possible regardless its inconsequent creation within the simulation system. Their main function of this approach is to broaden the view of the planner with respect to unexpected future trajectories.  Invalid representations, deliberately modeling suboptimal behavior of automated forces and the renouncement of statistical evaluation for the benefit of mere extremes may seem absurd at first glance, but taken together and seen from the perspective of structural uncertainty they make perfect sense, since such simulation runs can be seen as explorations into the unexpected. However, it is necessarily clear, that even these principles can not capture the whole range of possibilities spanned by real systems. The approach is currently under investigation within the German army and first experiments have shown its feasibility and potential. The main challenges concern the generation of (enough) variability within the command and control modules, and how the whole endeavor is organized in terms of event preselection and experimental design.8. Summary and ConclusionDealing with uncertainty is vital for all planning and decision making in complex social systems. Standard wargaming, however, as many other instantiations of the rational decision making framework, is too focused on parametric uncertainty, losing sight of structural uncertainty, which is of much greater danger in complex situations. This calamity has to be addressed by methodological means. The paper has proposed  “tactical wargaming” as such a method. It can be done without explicit simulation support, but takes great benefit from it, if the simulation is not used for evaluation only but also for the detection of critical assumptions.Even if all ex ante analysis done this way is far from the reality future actually brings, it will, at least, confront the decision maker with the unknown, making him  more prudent and flexible in his thinking. Having experienced structural uncertainty within a wargaming analysis he will be more apt to give up his plans on time in reality. This effect has to be proven by further work. We also advocate for a multi model approach, that is, using more than one simulation system in the way described in section 7.5. The organization of such an approach has yet to be defined.As a general conclusion, tactical wargaming is regarded to be promising approach for the methodological treatment of structural uncertainty which has to be further investigated in the future by experimental work.9. References[1]	Clausewitz, C.v. Vom Kriege. Reinbek: Rowohlt Tb. 1978.[2]	F. H. Knight. Risk, uncertainty and profit. Boston, MA: Hart, Schaffner & Marx; Houghton Mifflin Company, 1921.[3]	Luce, D. and H. Raiffa (1957). Games And Decisions. New York, John Wiley & Sons.[4]	Birnstiel, M., et al. Wargaming - Guide to Preparation and Execution, Bundeswehr Command and Staff College. 2006.[5]	Smith, R. The Utility of Force - The Art of War in the Modern World. Vol. 2. Lonon: Penguin 2003.[6]	S. M. Ross. Simulation. Academic Press. San Diego. 2002[7]	Caraccilo, D.J. and J.L. Pothin. "Coup d’oeil: The Commander’s Intuition in Clausewitzian Terms". Air & Space Power Journal 2. 16 / 2000, 2000. pp.[8] 	Herbert A. Simon. Models of Bounded Rationality, Vol. 1-3. MIT Press. 1982 and 1997.[9]	Gigerenzer, G., & Selten, R. (Eds.). 2001. Bounded rationality: The adaptive toolbox. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.[10]	Dewar, J. A. Assumption-Based Planning: A Tool for Reducing Avoidable surprises. Cambridge UK, Cambridge Press. 2002.[11]	Van der Heijden, K., R. Bradfield, G. Burt, G. Cairns, and G. Wright. The sixth sense: Accelerating organizational learning with scenarios. Chichester: Wiley. 2002.[12]	Heeresamt/ITIS. Leitfaden für taktisches Wargaming. German Army Office. Köln. 2007.Author BiographiesMARKO HOFMANN is Project Manager at the Institute for Technology of Intelligent Systems (ITIS), Neubiberg, Germany. After his studies of computer science at the University of the Federal Armed Forces in Munich he served two years in an army battalion staff. From 1995 to 2000 he was research assistant at the Institute for Applied System Analysis and Operations Research (IASFOR), where he got his Ph. D. in computer science. Since April 2000 he is responsible for basic research in applied computer science at ITIS. He gives lectures at the University of the Federal Armed Forces in Munich and at the University of Applied Sciences in Kufstein.BODO JUNGE is an active officer within the Federal Armed Forces. He studied computer science at the University of the Federal Armed Forces in Munich. He was research assistant at the Institute for Applied System Analysis and Operation Research (IASFOR), where he recently finished his Ph. D. in computer science about automated control in combat simulation systems.