An Overview of NASA Constellation’s Recommended Practices Guide for Verification, Validation and AccreditationLisa CainBobby HartwayDanny ThomasAEgis Technologies Group631 Discovery DriveHuntsville, AL 35806256-922-0802 HYPERLINK "mailto:lcain@aegistg.com" lcain@aegistg.com HYPERLINK "mailto:bhartwar@aegistg.com" bhartwar@aegistg.com HYPERLINK "mailto:d.thomas@aegistg.com" d.thomas@aegistg.comRandal WallaceNASAMarshal Space Flight CenterHuntsville, AL 256-544-2940randal.l.wallace@nasa.govKeywords:“Verification, Validation and Accreditation”, “NASA”, “Recommend Practices Guide”ABSTRACT: Tragic experience with the manned space program has taught NASA the importance of understanding the credibility of simulation results used to support critical decisions.  Accordingly, the Office of the NASA Chief Engineer mandated a Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Standard to provide uniform engineering and technical requirements for M&S processes, procedures, practices, and applications. This standard has been endorsed for all M&S used to support critical decisions in NASA programs and projects,.   In advance of the official release of this standard, the NASA Exploration Systems Mission Directorate (ESMD) proactively empowered the Constellation Program to develop a Recommended Practices Guide (RPG) for M&S Verification, Validation and Accreditation (VV&A) to support the objectives of the standard.  By leveraging from the extensive work of the Defense Simulation Modeling Office (of the U.S. Department of Defense), the RPG provides a standard for conducting M&S VV&A across ESMD.  The RPG contains definitions, guidance for determining roles and responsibilities, top-level process descriptions, and document templates for reports and plans.  NASA has used the RPG for conducting VV&A on seventeen simulations over the past year and a half.  This paper introduces the RPG, describes the NASA-specific VV&A process, discusses critical roles, and describes some lessons-learned for practical application of the guide.  M&S VV&A PROCESS OVERVIEW: -- NASA’s M&S VV&A Process is designed to capture, assess, and document credibility of results from M&S use.  Verification and Validation (V&V) comprise activities to answer the question “How good is the M&S?” Accreditation is a mechanism to answer the question “Is it good enough (credible) for the intended use?”  M&S accreditation is a formal endorsement, including the documentation of and supporting evidence for that endorsement, that the M&S results are sufficiently credible to support the intended program decision.  Figure 1 shows the M&S VV&A Process within an overall scope of M&S integrated management.  The main objectives of the VV&A Process (shown at the top) are to assign responsible parties for the VV&A activities, document M&S credibility, and to accredit key M&S for specific intended use(s).  Inputs to the VV&A Process (shown on the left) are 1) M&S VV&A Prioritization Inputs, which includes information from project and engineering management about the urgency and criticality of the M&S application, used to set schedule and required depth of research, and, 2) VV&A Process Inputs, which provides user requirements metrics (how good does it need to be?) and M&S capabilities information (how good is it?).  VV&A Process Resources (shown at the bottom) includes several supporting documents, such as the VV&A RPG, the VV&A Policies and Strategies, and the NASA Standard for M&S.  The VV&A process also uses the program M&S Database (MSDB) as a resource for information.  The VV&A Process produces output documentation (shown at the right side of the figure) to substantiate an accreditation decision and traceable records supporting credibility claims for M&S results.   Figure 1.  M&S VV&A Concept of OperationsThe center portion of Figure 1 depicts the VV&A process activities and data flow.  A Three-Phase VV&A Process  activity allows incremental investment management that is particularly useful in the context of NASA’s large inventory of legacy M&S – allowing limited VV&A resources to be more effectively applied to the most critical M&S applications.  The baseline for VV&A activities is the M&S Assessment M&S Capability Report in Phase 1 - Initialization.  This report can be viewed as the M&S resume´, giving all pertinent information and enough description of the M&S to indicate sufficiency for an intended purpose.  It also supplies the factual basis for additional planning and analysis.  Included in Phase 1-- Initialization is the selection and weighting of accreditation criteria, an interface diagram of the functional interconnectivity or interoperability of the M&S, and an estimate of the effort required to complete Phase 2 – Planning.  Phase 2 produces an Accreditation Plan and a Verification and Validation (V&V) Plan.  Phase 3 – Execution is the execution of these plans.  An important aspect of this three-phase process, and the main reason for the delineation of phases, is that there can be an accreditation decision at the end of each phase.  This is to allow for situations where, at the end of each phase, it may be decided that further development of a tool is not economically feasible or relevant, but the M&S is still appropriate and credible for its intended use at that time.  In the following paragraphs, we describe the Three Phase Process.  PHASE 1– INITIALIZATION: The purpose of Phase 1 is to status the M&S under consideration.  The essence is to capture intended use (Accreditation Criteria), current operations (flow diagram), pedigree (Capability Report), and credibility (Credibility Assessment).  The completion and assessment of the gathered info will determine whether to proceed to Phase 2 – Planning.  The Phase 1 process is shown in figure 2, and described below.Figure 2: Phase 1 Establishes the Status of the M&SOnce an M&S has been identified for the VV&A Process, a conversation with the M&S point of contact will occur to determine key participants, estimate the initial level of effort expected for each participant, and set up a kick-off meeting.  The MSDB is also accessed to retrieve any existing information on the M&S.  The kick-off meeting will bring all participants together to introduce the effort, define the scope, and begin scheduling tasks.  After this initial meeting to establish team responsibilities, the VV&A Broker guides the V&V Agent in characterizing the M&S, which is documented in the Capability Report.  The VV&A Broker also works with the Accreditation Agent to establish Accreditation Criteria for approval by the Accreditation Authority.  These criteria can be used in the Credibility Assessment, as well.  The Broker may conduct training and outreach as needed.The accreditation decision at the end of Phase 1 is based on the accumulated evidence provided in the Capability Report, Context Flow Diagram, and Credibility Assessment.  The Accreditation Authority will make the decision whether or not to accredit the M&S for the specified intended use defined by the Accreditation Criteria.  Also at the end of Phase 1, a management decision is made whether to proceed to Phase 2 – Planning.  This decision is based on the accumulated evidence provided in the Capability Report, Context Flow Diagram, and Credibility Assessment, as well as the Estimate for Phase 2 Planning Activities.  These products are described in the subsections below.Finally, all relevant information obtained through this process is to be entered into the MSDB.Capability Report - The Capability Report document is one of the key outputs for Phase 1.  It captures many types of information pertaining to the M&S undergoing the VV&A effort including application, description, use history, development and configuration management practices, and V&V history (see Capability Report Template).  Accreditation criteria and a Context flow diagram, which are also key outputs of Phase 1, may be placed within the Capability Report document.Accreditation Criteria - Accreditation Criteria are the specific items, variables, or parameters that the user/analyst deems necessary for their consumption of the M&S results.  The Accreditation Criteria drive the Accreditation Process – they are the criteria against which evidence will be measured to evaluate acceptability for the specified intended use.  These criteria are to be defined by the Accreditation Authority and/or Accreditation Agent, with help from the VV&A Broker.  Credibility Assessment -A credibility assessment is done in Phase 1 once all of the information is gathered and compiled.  The intent is to assess the credibility of the M&S as is, at that point in time.  While the assessment is done after the data is gathered, the criteria should be identified and weighted at the beginning of the effort.  It is recommended that these criteria match the Accreditation Criteria. Please refer to Section 5.0 NASA 7009 M&S Standard – Credibility Assessment for details on doing the Credibility Assessment. When additional V&V work is accomplished, either through the VV&A Process or over time as the M&S matures, the credibility should be reassessed.Context Flow Diagram - Many M&S support linked analyses; therefore, the VV&A effort requires knowledge of the inputs, outputs, sources and destinations of data, models, tools, and pre- and post-processing activities.  The interconnections of these items are to be illustrated in a context flow diagram, another key output for Phase 1.  Estimate for Phase 2 Planning Activities - The Estimate for Phase 2 Planning Activities is the anticipated cost of developing an Accreditation Plan and Verification and Validation Plan (described in Section 4.2 Phase 2 – Planning).  The purpose of this activity is to have enough information to determine whether to proceed into Phase 2 – Planning.  There may be a significant amount of time and resources needed to develop the Accreditation Plan and V&V Plan, therefore, it is recommended that a concerted attempt is made to determine the level of effort expected and make an informed decision before proceeding.  Figure 4.2-1 shows the activities to be completed during Phase 2. Conclusion of Phase 1 – Initialization - The main objective of Phase 1 – Initialization is to identify, characterize, and scope the M&S for a specific intended use.  This information is necessary for building a verification and validation plan, and supports CxP’s ability to prioritize resources and efforts across the program.  The level of effort required to exercise Phase 1 – Initialization depends on the existence and availability of legacy artifacts to produce the key outputs.  These key outputs are reiterated here:Key OutputsCapability Report – prepared by the Developer, in collaboration with the VV&A Broker.  This document compiles all relevant information pertaining to the current state of the M&S, including but not limited to:  program needs/requirements; M&S requirements; history of use; conceptual model; configuration and document management; “artifacts” available as determined by level of risk, inputs, outputs, data pre- and post-processing; and any legacy VV&A or V&V artifacts.Accreditation Criteria – identified by the Accreditation Authority who represents the user of the information produced by the simulation.  This defines, as specifically as possible, what criteria and assessment techniques that will be used to assess that the data is “good enough” for the intended purpose. Credibility Assessment – prepared by the Accreditation Authority or Agent in collaboration with the VV&A Broker.  This document assesses credibility per the direction found in NASA-STD-7009 Standard for Models and Simulations.Context Flow Diagram – prepared by the M&S Developers and Users in collaboration with the VV&A Broker.  Understanding the analysis process and data flows is critical to scoping the VV&A effort and to the larger program needs. Estimate for Phase 2 Planning Activities – prepared by the M&S Developers and Users in collaboration with the VV&A Broker.  This document details the estimated resources necessary to execute Phase 2 Planning activities.Memorandum of Record – The Accreditation Authority signs a memorandum of record indicating the accreditation decision for a specific intended use, including any caveats, limitations, assumptions, and constraints.  It also includes the decision whether to proceed to Phase 2 – Planning.  PHASE 2 – PLANNING:  While Phase 1 – Initialization focuses on characterizing the M&S build to date, Phase 2 – Planning is a dedicated resourcing activity for future V&V activities.   Managers are looking for confidence in the data presented to them for decision making.  However, it requires resources – whether time, people, or money – to execute the activities needed to enhance confidence.  Therefore, managers must trade requirements for increased confidence against the potential costs and schedule impacts to decide whether to allocate the proposed resources and to what extent.  Phase 2 identifies the resources and schedule necessary to the identified accreditation data needs recommended in Phase 1 - Initialization.  As shown in Figure 3, the process begins with a review of the results of Phase 1 and any user or developer updates (2.1).  The Capability Report and the accreditation criteria specify what information needs to be collected to support accreditation.  With these, the Accreditation Agent can then identify the data that supports accreditation. (2.2). The Accreditation Agent prepares a draft of the Accreditation Plan (2.3), including the Problem Statement, Accreditation Scope, M&S Requirements and Accreditation Criteria, Key Participants and Accreditation Issues. The Accreditation Agent gives the Draft Accreditation Plan to the V&V Agent, including the data requirements to support accreditation, who then identifies the V&V activities to be performed to build the evidence supporting the stated Accreditation Criteria (2.5). This RPG recommends that the V&V Agent first determine the activities best suited to support the Accreditation Criteria, without initial consideration to time and cost of the M&S development process. The V&V Agent should consider all previous V&V work detailed in the Capability Report, and any planned testing. Typically, this is data relates to the quality of the development and whether it is suitable for the stated intent. Once the V&V activities are identified, the V&V Agent determines the resources required to produce the needed data (2.6).  Acting as an agent for the supplying organization and the M&S developers, the V&V Agent works with the Accreditation Agent (who is acting as an agent of the consuming organization and the Accreditation Authority) to balance the desired data needs against available resources.  With the set of identified V&V activities and resources required to execute them, the V&V agent can now prioritize to determine which will be incorporated into the work effort.  The resulting decisions produce the Draft V&V Plan. (2.6) The V&V Agent and the Accreditation Agent work together to develop an integrated schedule (2.7) and (2.9).  Naturally, the detailed V&V schedule goes into the final V&V Plan (2.8), while the detailed accreditation analysis schedule goes into the final Accreditation Plan (2.10).  See the appendices for the templates of these plans. The agents facilitate the approval of the plans within their respective organizations.  Managers can now make an informed decision on whether of not to proceed to Phase 3 - Execution.   Figure 3.  Phase 2: Planning for Additional ConfidenceKey Outputs:Accreditation Plan – prepared by the Accreditation Agent in collaboration with the VV&A Broker.  This document specifies the Accreditation Authority’s stated requirements, including means and metrics needed to accredit the M&S for a specific intended use.  It includes cost and schedule information.  V&V Plan – prepared by the V&V Agent in collaboration with the VV&A Broker.  This document should be done following, or in concert with the Accreditation Plan and details the recommended V&V activities thought necessary to provide the evidence needed to support the accreditation requirements.  The process of selecting V&V tasks rationally within a constrained budget involves answering three key questions about the integration of M&S in your program: What do you need M&S to do?  How well do you need the M&S to do it?  How well do the candidate models and simulations do what’s needed?  Faithful execution of the following two activities contribute greatly to the development of a well-focused (hence cost-effective) V&V program:Application Analysis: an in-depth analysis of your problem to define what you want M&S to do.Acceptance Criteria Definition: called Accreditation Criteria in this RPG.  While defined at the beginning of the effort, these should be revisited and revised if necessary to facilitate development of a sound V&V Plan.The V&V Plan also includes cost and schedule information. Refer to the V&V Plan Template.Memorandum of Record – The Accreditation Authority signs a memorandum of record indicating the accreditation decision for a specific intended use, including any caveats, limitations, assumptions, and constraints.  It also includes the decision whether to proceed to Phase 3 – Execution.  PHASE 3 – EXECUTION: Phase 3 Execution implements the recommended V&V Plan to satisfy the criteria in the Accreditation Plan as depicted in Figure 4. It is important to realize that performing the V&V activities does not guarantee increased confidence.  As with any testing mechanism, V&V allows for the awareness of errors, gaps, or deficiencies, and may require improvements to the M&S in order to provide enhanced confidence.Figure 4.  Phase 3 Implements the PlansKey Outputs:V&V Report – prepared by the V&V Agent in collaboration with the VV&A Broker.  This report describes the V&V activities executed and results obtained.Accreditation Report – prepared by the VV&A Broker in collaboration with the Accreditation Authority or Agent and V&V Agent.  This report describes the accreditation criteria and activities exercised to comply. Memorandum of Record – The Accreditation Authority signs a memorandum of record indicating the accreditation decision for a specific intended use, including any caveats, limitations, assumptions, and constraints.  It also includes the decision whether to proceed back to Phase 2 – Planning.  CONCLUSION: The Modeling and Simulation Verification, Validation and Accreditation Recommended Practices Guide (M&S VV&A RPG) provides appropriate guidance for conducting VV&A on Modeling and Simulation (M&S) activities for NASA.  It is consistent with the intent of NASA-STD-7009, Interim Standard for Models and Simulations, approved December 1, 2006. It has been specifically tailored for NASA activities, and therefore does not attempt to cover the depth or breadth found in the VV&A RPG provided by the US Dept of Defense Distributed Modeling and Simulation Office, for example.  However, we strongly recommend familiarity with that body of knowledge, to gain a deeper understanding of the years of experience and practice available within the VV&A community of practice.  The NASA VV&A RPG takes high-level VV&A concepts and puts them into a format useful for implementing the process within NASA.  It further tailors the VV&A process with the introduction of a time-phased VV&A process, specifically designed for the NASA environment.This document is provided within NASA for use in the Constellation Program for space exploration. The unabridged RPG  document contains document templates for the products discussed in this paper.Note that an affirmative accreditation decision exists only as long as the intended use and the M&S remain unchanged.  Most of the M&S used for the Constellation Program will be continually evolving and maturing over time; therefore, VV&A will be an ongoing process throughout the program life-cycle. As a consequence, the accreditation status of any given M&S should be revisited when the intended program use changes, when the M&S changes, or on a regularly scheduled basis (for example, at each major program review or milestone).  Such re-accreditation efforts should focus on what has changed beyond the baselined accreditation, thereby maintaining the continuous record of credibility and confidence needed for decision-making.Author BiographiesLISA CAINE is a Systems Engineer with AEgis Technologies Group in Huntsville, Alabama. She supports the Exploration Mission Space Directorate (ESMD) VV&A Program. Ms. Caine earned a BS degree in Engineering and Information Systems from Michigan State University and a Masters in Project Management from Keller Graduate School of Management in Chicago.  She was also recently awarded the Project Management Professional certification through the Project Management Institute (PMI).BOBBY HARTWAY is a Senior Research Scientist with AEgis Technologies Group in Huntsville, Alabama.  He has developed a new paradigm for simulation characterization and requirements development for space and defense systems. He is using this paradigm to support NASA’s activities for integrated management of modeling and simulation.  Mr. Hartway is a Certified Modeling and Simulation Professional (CMSP).DANNY THOMAS is a Senior Research Scientist with AEgis Technologies Group in Huntsville, Alabama.  He is supporting NASA’s effort to institute consistent management practices for simulation development and use.  He has developed simulations for space and defense. Mr. Thomas is a Certified Modeling and Simulation Professional (CMSP).RANDAL WALLACE is a senior engineer on loan to NASA through cooperative agreements between the Marshall Space Flight Center, the University of Alabama in Huntsville, and the US Army Space and Missile Defense Command.  He has extensive experience in the use and development of large, complex M&S in support of tactical and strategic missile defense programs.Figure 7.0-1: Expanded View of Draft M&S Characterization Taxonomy for NASA Constellation Program