The C2SimProxy Concept:Fostering M&S and CCIS InteroperabilityDr. Hans-Peter MenzlerBundeswehr Technical Center for Weapons and AmmunitionSchiessplatz, 49716 Meppen, Germanyhpmenzler@bwb.orgHans J. MuschikESG Elektroniksystem- und Logistik-GmbHLivry-Gargan-Strasse 6, 82256 Fuerstenfeldbruck, Germanyhmuschik@esg.deDr. Eckehard NeugebauerIABG mbHSchiessplatz, 49716 Meppen, Germanyneugebauer@iabg.deKeywords:HLA, MIP, Interoperability, PSI-SA, C2SimProxy, SuTBw, SINCEAbstract: This publication reflects on the essence of a four years development and demonstration effort in the frame of the recently finished SINCE project, the Simulation & CCIS Connectivity Experiments, which has been carried out by Germany and the United States at the level of a bilateral Memorandum of Understanding. Both nations had undertaken to link distributed environments which were comprised of sets of nation specific operational and simulation systems. On a common ground, the partners leveraged from existent international communication standards such as the Multinational Interoperability Program (MIP), the High Level Architecture (HLA) and Web-Services, in support of a multinational Common Relevant Operational Picture (CROP) and a collaborative mission planning capability. Henceforth, a central question is if disparate information domains (M&S and CCIS) can be coupled constructively while avoiding any intrusion into the single system components, the standards being kept as side conditions. Following these ideas, a prototype for an M&S-CCIS-Gateway was developed by the German SINCE team: the so-called C2SimProxy. This paper describes the technical architecture of the C2SimProxy. The main components are: an intermediate overall reference data model, a generic simulation FOM processor, and a CCIS hub. Results of successful coupling experiments are shown as well.1. IntroductionIn 2002 the Secretary of Defense of the United States and the German Federal Ministry of Defense signed a Memorandum of Understanding concerning the Simulation & C2 Information System Connectivity Experimentation - SINCE. The objective of that joint US/GE program was to define, implement, experiment, and demonstrate a generic solution for interfacing and networking to couple modeling and simulation environments (M&S) with Command, Control, and Information Systems (CCIS).There are manifold areas of application to benefit from such a train-as-you-fight environment, such as Simulation Based Acquisition, Training and Education, and Decision Support. With regard to this broad spectrum of application, the solution for the problem of coupling M&S and CCIS requires a non stove-piped basic architectural approach to promote network-centric semantics rather than dealing with domain specific intersystem- and interface-solutions.An important cornerstone in this architectural work is the C2SimProxy [1],[2]. It has its conceptual origins in the 1999 started development of the simulation infrastructure PSI-SA [3], [4], and [5], which predominantly counts on a system independent approach to distributed M&S environments. Both, PSI-SA and C2SimProxy recently became software infrastructure components in support of the German Armed Forces‘ Simulation and Test Environment (SuTBw). PSI-SA has got MOTS product status in March 2008, C2SimProxy is going to get this status soon.2. Means of InteroperabilityThe aim of the SINCE project was to couple M&S and CCIS from different vendors and nations based on military user requirements, envisaging a multinational collaboration environment in support of military mission planning and execution. Actually, the rationale of the C2SimProxy is to minimize effort in the area of standard compliant interfacing of systems. Henceforth, the C2SimProxy shall comply with existing agreed upon communication standards from the international community, such as the High Level Architecture (HLA) and the Multilateral Interoperability Programme (MIP). However, these today’s exposed standards shall only be examples from a diversity of potential and conceivable standards. As such, the C2SimProxy shall not depend on specific side conditions on communication, but focus on mission space modeling rather than intersystem communication.A primary postulate is the existence of a mission space data model in either domain, i.e. M&S and CCIS. Actually, this prerequisite is met by today’s Federation Object Models (FOMs) for cooperative M&S and diverse core data models (CDM) in the CCIS arena, e.g. the C2IEDM from MIP. Therefore, the C2SimProxy appears to be a broker enabling those models to constructively interfere with each other and in accordance with user specific requirements. In order to get rid of domain specific model ingredients, we postulate the existence of a sustainable mission space model thus reflecting the military user requirements on M&S and CCIS intersystem (cross-domain-) collaboration. This overarching model is the so-called Conceptual Reference Model (CRM) and becomes the core of the C2SimProxy application: Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1 Introducing the CRM in support of M&S and CCIS intersystem collaboration inside the C2SimProxy.From a more theoretical viewpoint, the C2SimProxy transforms the simulated combat situation into its operational representation and vice versa. This state transformation benefits from an intermediate state instance of the CRM, thus reflecting the sole elements of the mission state in accordance with the user’s expectations about operational situation awareness and collaborative functions. 3. Technical ArchitectureThe technical architecture is mainly affected by the idea of transformation of information content. Therefore, the CRM is the leading part, followed by transformations FOM ( CRM and CRM ( CDM.Though from scratch, the CRM is not going to be invented arbitrarily. However, the case CDM=C2IEDM – the SINCE case –gives sufficient orientation about situation description and operational function space, e.g. delivery of orders and receipt of messages. Nevertheless, the C2IEDM comprises much more functionality and descriptive elements than the CRM does, and needs to handle in the frame of collaborative environments. The same holds for the FOM, which is not a fixed model but which basically is composed of structures representing some object space and dynamics for interactive distributed simulation. E.g. the RPR FOM is a first choice candidate. Upon operational requirements analysis, the SINCE endeavor actually came out with a small object oriented CRM ( REF _Ref194733900 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 2) thus reflecting a logical intersection of the C2IEDM and an extended RPR FOM.The CRM is supposed to be an extendible data model in a sense of more operational requirements to come and be satisfied in the future. By now, the C2SimProxy enables the user with the following M&S/CCIS cross-domain transformation capabilities, solely based on the CRM from  REF _Ref194733900 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 2:Pass, maintain and keep track of the Common Relevant Operational Picture (CROP), either for initialization and runtime execution, i.e. CDM ( CRM ( FOM.Forward operational tasks from CCIS to M&S, i.e. CDM ( CRM (FOM.Generate operational messages about situation awareness and forward to CCIS, i.e. FOM ( CRM ( CDM.Generate operational messages about enemy recognition and forward to CCIS, i.e. FOM ( CRM ( CDM.The SINCE experimentation was successfully conducted using the CRM and a small subset of the C2IEDM as indicated by  REF _Ref194733900 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 2. However, this architectural approach requires a certain degree of flexibility with respect to the adaptation of simulation systems. For the sake of completeness concerning capabilities C1 through C4, the distributed simulation model, as represented by the FOM, shall support Aggregation and Disaggregation of military units (ref. C1)Processing and tracking of military orders including decomposition of orders down to lower echelon levels (C2)Object status description and respective object update management according to military rules of engagement (C3)Logical separation of ground-truth and perceived-truth as part of a dedicated object recognition model (C4)Time Controlled and Time-Managed update and event handling (C1)The FOM being supposed to support those capabilities is described in a separate M&S Interface Control Document (ICD) for further user guidance, rationale and interoperability aspects [6]. This so-called SINCE-FOM turns out to be a noteworthy extension to the RPR FOM 2.0.So far, planning, preparation and setup of experimentation using the C2SimProxy concept is mainly driven by the user’s Operational Scenario Description and Cross-domain Information Exchange Requirements.This is to be reconciled with the CRM and its transformations into operational data models CDM and FOM. The concept as a whole ensures participating systems to only depend on the choice of the underlying data models, i.e. the FOM and the CDM for M&S and CCIS, respectively. Further interdependencies among systems (point-to-point like) shall not exist. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2 Extendible basic layer of the Conceptual Reference Model (CRM) inside the C2SimProxy 4. Key DesignAs far as we keep the C2SimProxy independent of specific communication standards, we claim it comes with reconfigurable model transformations. The CRM then serves as an extendible referential Data Interchange Model. At run-time it is a dynamic model instance within the frame of the C2SimProxy application, along with two convertible communication hubs for inbound and outbound data streams (see  REF _Ref194733838 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 3).Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3 Layered Architecture of the C2SimProxy with convertible components: Transformations T and Com-Layers CCOM/SimCOM.PSI-SA comes with a generic simulation hub, independent of the M&S communication standard and the FOM. In case of using HLA, the SimCOM is an interchangeable local RTI component, dynamically linked to PSI-SA.Both, PSI-SA and the CCIS-hub are software layers which allow for transmission of data from either domain – M&S or CCIS – into the central CRM instance, based on transformations. This can formally be written as EMBED Equation.3  where the brackets |i> denote information content with reference to the data model i, i. e. the model instance. Each  EMBED Equation.3   is a bijective transformation for streaming CRM information content into the respective |i>. That also claims the existence of the inverse  EMBED Equation.3   for transformation back into the CRM. In practice,  EMBED Equation.3   is bijective by construction, as long as it constricts the cardinality of the model i appropriately. 5. Implementation AspectsFor realization of the C2SimProxy a set of criteria has been established to align proper design and implementation.An essential factor is object-oriented design of the CRM. A data base is not being used, and internal and external data streaming insures a one-to-one correlation with CRM data elements. Consequently, the CRM instance appears in class structures, e.g. C++, as well as in XML schema. A modular design to support accommodation to further future requirements is promoted. Hence, components of the C2SimProxy became stand-alone modules:CCIS-Hub implements the connection to and from the CCIS. A strict separation between protocol, e.g. ESMTP or MIP DEM, and CDM, e.g. C2IEDM, is maintained.The German PSI-SA implements the connection to and from the simulations. E.g., it can be used to interface to HLA federations.A ProxyManager administrates the CRM instance. It transforms inbound C2 and simulation data into the CRM representation, and vice versa for outbound data. It does not store history but keeps pace with the latest status of either domain. ProxyGUI allows for a minimum user interaction. It gives the user help support and status information as well as error and warning messages.ProxyConfig is not yet realized but shall ease the overall configuration in the future.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 4 Architecture of the C2SimProxy with its main components.For means of flexibility, the C2SimProxy components can be deployed on mobile computers and the domain’s networks can be separated by using proper network cards.External communication in SINCE has been established in practice using Secure WAN (VPN).6. SINCE ExperimentsSINCE [7] conducted five bilateral experiments over four years. It has undergone twice as much national pre-testing events and several reconstruction and reconfiguration phases to successively improve and completeOperational ScenarioDistributed ModelFunctionality and PerformanceCross-Domain Interoperability, i.e. quality of transformationsThe SINCE run-time environment establishes a brigade HQ as being the High Level Control above three subordinate battalions, each of which comprising coalition partner units, to provide the C2 stimulus. Those three friendly battalions were initially created by three CCIS, and individually controlled by three different simulation applications.The scenario was located in the Kosovo region and the simulated brigade ought to re-establish peace. It was tasked to move to a specific area and to establish a base for future operations. A number of five basic vignettes MarchEngagementMinefield OperationsMEDEvacResupplybecame re-usable operational building blocks to conveniently support and reconfigure different courses of action. In the conduct of SINCE experimentation three logical network clusters have been established for international connectivity: CCIS Network (MIP)M&S Network (HLA)Web-Service enabled CollaborationThe CCIS monitors the Coalition CROP. The second network is for delivery of simulated ground truth while the C2SimProxy primarily mediates between these networks. The third network supports tasking of U.S. troops via a specific U.S. collaboration web-based portal [7].A high level integrated depiction of the architecture, the connectivity and the mediation is summarized in  REF _Ref194747436 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 5.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 5: High level view on SINCEThe next paragraphs describe the three phases of the SINCE experiments, i.e. initialization, collaboration and execution as summarized in  REF _Ref194747555 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 6.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 6: Generic sequence diagram of a SINCE experiment (time runs top down)6.1 Scenario InitializationFirst, the MIP DEM contract between USA and DEU has to be concluded. In addition, agreements about type definitions, type-to-type transformations for unit and equipment, as well as several naming conventions for consistent mediation were carried out. Accordingly, a matrix implemented in the C2SimProxy maps military equipment types onto SISO EBV and v.v. (see Appendix). CCIS have been prepared properly to include aggregated holding of equipment as well as consumables, ammunition and fuel for the lowest echelon level. That gives the input data for further disaggregation inside the M&S domain.Next, initialization of the whole information space including the following sub-processes, takes place:Setup the simulation federation execution (e.g. by starting C2SimProxy).MIP DEM transmission of CROP between the national CCIS.CDM(M&S transformationInvoke instantiation of M&S objectsFill information gaps in M&S, e.g. via disaggregation of higher echelon units within the simulation systems.Publish initial simulated information space and start simulation after initialization. M&S(CDM transformationGenerate and transmit situation reports.Generate and transmit RECCE reports.After initialization, the environment is in idle state. At this point, any CCIS data won’t change as long as any M&S object doesn’t.SINCE invokes dynamic change of a situation when releasing military orders originating from the CCIS. The five basic vignettes  REF _Ref195076309 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Vig1- REF _Ref195076322 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Vig5 where used to cause those dynamics.6.2 Collaboration (Unit Tasking)An appropriate model in support of simple tasks (e.g. march, attack, defend, destroy) has been introduced in the FOM. Along with a corresponding FOM interaction class ORDER there’s an attribute taskstatus to identify a military entity of being tasked. A task is launched by CCIS and communicated via MIP DEM. The C2SimProxy receives those orders, extracts the relevant task data and transforms those into FOM interactions.Exclusively, a more complex military OPORD was delivered by the respective web-based U.S. portal. SINCE succeeded to pass the OPORD (1st vignette applied to U.S. troops) from the collaboration area to M&S along with transformation of U.S. formatted data into respective FOM data via the CRM inside the C2SimProxy.6.3 Simulation ExecutionSince the C2SimProxy is a member of the federation, it is able to monitor the whole M&S federation data. Immediately after having received interactions of class ORDER the simulations start executing those.Upon manual intervention, or periodically by configuration, a situation report gets generated and communicated to the CCIS. If properly configured, recognized enemy information will be propagated to the CCIS, periodically or immediately upon initial detection.6.4 Lessons LearnedAcross all phases of experimental work, the CRM turned out to be very sustainable. The basic structure from  REF _Ref194733900 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 2 hasn’t changed since it came out in early 2004. Only the number of attributes has increased marginally. There is little question that the experiments conducted have provided significant insight as to how to improve multi-national collaboration and achieve a sufficient degree of semantic interoperability. The SINCE environment provides a cost-effective means to address the numerous inter-dependent issues and enable coalition partners to better understand each other’s “business rules”, concepts of operations, tactics, techniques and procedures. There is no doubt that the R&D savings were significant if instead each of the nations were to create an experimentation environment such as SINCE on their own. Operationally, the opportunity for experienced military users to collaborate and interoperate in a tightly-coupled manner on a common tactical scenario also proved invaluable. 7. C2SimProxy - Future DesignIn order to finally meet the initial conceptual baseline the following overall key elements are currently under investigation:Initial instantiation of data models including transmission of ORBAT, OPORD, and disaggregation of units.Online distortion of ground truth information at the level of CRM based message creation.Cross-domain time-management for reliable coordination within M&S domain and between M&S and CCIS.Those elements are currently bound to be matured in the frame of the German Armed Forces’ Simulation and Test Environment (SuTBw). Beyond those conceptual aspects, further issues on software and system design are under discussion since Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) increasingly affects investigations on network-centric environments. Meanwhile, PSI-SA goes service-oriented, so-called PSI-Web. It allows for improved handling of CRM(FOM XSLT-formatted transformation input, and with respect to that input PSI-SA enables an application to effectively process different FOMs semi-automatically. Actually, the proposed Next Generation C2SimProxy is intended to make more extensive use of SOA principles, and alike to a Web-in-a-Box solution it will implement a manifold of convertible and reconfigurable services and features, like e.g. PSI-Web. In addition, further C2 interfaces are planned to be added, e.g. ADatP-3, OTH-Gold, Link, C-BML and NFFI.As such, the C2SimProxy shall become a highly flexible, reconfigurable infrastructure to be instantiated in accordance with a diversity of user needs and requirements, e.g. as a sole message-generator in support of CAX response-cell environments. 8. SummaryThe approach to conceptually make the model and its transformation the central architectural issue gives higher synergetic impact to cooperative use-case analysis and design of applications. Communication standards, like e.g. HLA and MIP, become less important side conditions as soon as proper technologies solve the problem to neatly separate the data models from underlying data marshalling techniques. This is no more a pure vision but a viable option to tackle operational needs in a varied spectrum of applications. The SINCE design and experimentation phases have given an impressive first proof of concept over the past four years. The partners have endorsed an architectural approach which predominately enabled a user to run a simulated dynamic scenario initially driven by a combined operational picture. By narrowing the complex situation down to a set of mutually independent tiny vignettes, a close relation between those operational building blocks and their corresponding information exchange requirements appears to be particularly favorable, and gives rise to proper information analysis and transformation with respect to the models in question.The SINCE way of doing business imposes standard compliance on each environmental component including the C2SimProxy application. However, this is only an initial condition for a component to participate. Primarily, a respective application has to adopt the domain model in its own responsibility, thus covering the semantics of the cooperative environment and applying the transformation rules, where appropriate.9. AcknowledgementsThe work described in this paper was strongly influenced by discussions with all members (DEU and USA) of the SINCE team.The implementation of the C2SimProxy was carried out by E. Bock (ESG), Dr. M. Lügering (IABG) and H. Muschik (ESG).10. References[1]	Menzler et al.: Command and Control to Simulation Proxy Solution (C2SIM-Proxy) - Loose Coupling of Disparate Worlds, Euro Simulation Interoperability Workshop, June 2001, London, UK [2]	Menzler and Sieber: Non-Hierarchical Approach to Couple CCIS with M&S, NATO M&S Group Conference, Oct. 2002, Paris, France[3]	Menzler et al.: HLA in a Nutshell, Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop Paper 00S-SIW-026, Mar 2000, Orlando, USA[4]	Menzler: Proposed Standard Interface to Improve Interoperability, Simulation Interoperability Workshop Paper 01S-SIW-042, Mar 2001, Orlando, USA[5]	PSI-SA at http://www.sim-infra.de[6]	SINCE FOM and ICD, SINCE Report 2008[7]	Klose et al.: Train as You Fight – SINCE – the Key Enabler, NATO M&S Group Conference, Oct. 2004, Koblenz, GermanyAuthor BiographiesDr. Hans-Peter Menzler earned his PhD in applied mathematical physics in 1989. He worked for three years as a scientist at the Max-Planck Institute for Plasma Physics. Since 1992, Dr. Menzler focused on object oriented design for distributed planning and simulation in different areas of application. In 1999 he moved to the German MoD’s R&D branch where he developed concept and implementation of PSI-SA and C2SimProxy.Hans J. Muschik studied computer science and mathematics at the Technical University in Munich where he received his diploma in 1978. The same year he joined ESG GmbH where the focus of his work has been the specification and realization of diverse CCIS. Since 1998 he has been project leader for several development and research projects on the coupling of simulation and CCIS.Dr. Eckehard Neugebauer received his Ph.D. in Physics at the University of Munich in 1985 and performed his doctoral research at the MPI for Physics in Munich, Germany, and at CERN in Geneva, Switzerland. He has now over ten years of experience with networking simulation systems, especially using DIS or HLA, and of networking simulation systems with other IT-systems, e.g. C2-systems. In 2002, he joined IABG. Since 2007, he is the head of a department that is mainly concerned with the networking of simulation systems.Appendix: Elements of TransformationThe following table extracts exemplify the mapping between the different domains.FOM ( CRM (extract)For each FOM entity attribute which has a correspondence in the CRM the implemented mapping is defined.FOMCRMAggregateEntity.Marking	{string}PerceivedEntity.Marking	{string}PhysicalEntity.Marking	{string}unit_formal_abbrd_nameAggregateEntity.ForceIdentifierPerceivedEntity.ForceIdentifierPhysicalEntity.ForceIdentifierOther	0 (not used)Friendly	1Opposing	2Neutral	3unit_hstly_code	UNK (not used)	FR	HO	NTCRM -> MIP (extract)For each C2IEDM table which is used either when analyzing or generating a MIP DEM PDU, the implemented mapping is defined.C2IEDM TableC2IEDM AttributeCRMOBJECT-ITEM-STATUS10000080	OPERobj_item_statobj_item_idunit_idobj_item_stat_ix<index>cat_codeOR | MAhstly_codeunit_hstly_codebooby_trap_ind_codeNULLemsn_ctrl_codeNULLrptd_id<rptd_id_reference>UNIT10000128	OPERunitunit_idunit_idformal_abbrd_nameunit_formal_abbrd_nameNote: <index> means that the appropriate index is generated. <rptd_id reference> means that the correct reference identifier is inserted.EBV -> APP-6A (extract)For each experiment a list of the used entities is produced as a basis for the necessary type definitions. Note: In the SINCE experimentation expendables (fuel, ammunition) have also been used but no examples are given.SISO EBV category, subcategory, specificAPP-6A / MIL-STD-2525BSymbol1.1.78.1.2.0.0	platformTank/Main Battle Tank Leopard 2 (MTB)Ground vehicle armored tank heavy1.X.3.2.2.1.1.3SFG*EVATH-*****1.1.78.3.3.0.0	platformArmored Utility VehicleKeiler armored minesweeperGround/engineer vehicleMine clearing vehicle1.X.3.2.2.3.5SFG*EVE---*****1.1.78.x.2.0	aggregateArmorUnit combat armor1.X.3.1.1.2.1SFG*UCAT--*****1.1.78.x.10.0	aggregateCombat unit with armored minesweeperUnit combat engineer combat1.X.3.1.1.6SFG*UCE---*****EBV -> MIP (extract)Based on the previous list the mapping between the simulation entity types and corresponding MIP object types is produced using an Excel sheet, which is exported into a csv file and transformed into a corresponding xml document. It is envisaged to generate the necessary MIP TYPEFILL automatically from this table. This mapping is used by the C2SimProxy, no code changes are required.namemipTypeIdsisoEbvsymbolIdmipTypeCodeLeopard 2 MBT1807700000007011.1.78.1.2.0.0SFG*EVATH-*****MA.EQ.LNDWEP.TANK.BTNKHEKeiler armored minesweeper1807700000007041.1.78.3.3.0.0SFG*EVE---*****MA.EQ.ENGEQ.MINCLRGE BN Armour1807700000009021.1.78.6.2.0SFG*UCAT--*****OR.UNIT.COMBAT.ARMOUR....BNGE SECT ENG1807700000009101.1.78.2.10.0SFG*UCE---*****OR.UNIT.COMSPT.ENG....SECT Formerly the DIS (IEEE 1278) Enumerated and Bit Encoded Values