Training crisis leadership abilitiesLykke L SilfwerbrandPhD Student Lund UniversityLomvägen 629192 57 Sollentuna+46 73 980 73 45lykke.silfwerbrand@fpi.lu.seAnders MattsonCrisis Management Support+46 70 590 08 06am@c4i.seKeywords:Leadership, Training, Talent, Agent, Serious gaming, Ability, Crisis behavior, Leadership, Followship, HLA, IEEE 1516, Interoperability, Fuzzy logic, CMSS FOM, CML, C-BMLABSTRACT: This paper is a part of the doctoral study “Leadership in a crisis”. The study aims at training crisis leadership ability and at measuring changes in the ability. This paper proposes a simulation design for training leadership ability. Basically all people have leadership talent, but they can have a stronger or weaker talent. Based on the talent each person has ability for leadership, and this study is aiming at training that leadership ability. This leadership training simulation takes into account the irrational behavior of people under stress. The idea is to present a believable leadership training situation, in order to virtually train leadership ability. The simulation supports several “modes” of leadership ability such as, person to person, leadership of a group, and leading trough others, and leading groups on multiple levels.For leadership training it is very important that the simulation enables scaling and interoperability as well as reuse. Scaling is necessary because each training session is individually set up based on leadership ability and level of training. Interoperability is indispensable in order to interconnect simulations and support the different modes of training described above. Reuse of simulations and design enables comparing training sessions, which is required for the learning process each leader goes through.The simulation uses the architecture IEEE 1516, HLA, in order to enable the functionalities discussed above. The design for the training uses intelligent agents that can make decisions and act human-like. The communication between the user and the agents is altered with an algorithm weighted with fuzzy logic. The fuzzy logic represents altering of information, which is very common in any leadership situation.This simulation has three main representation designs: the individual, the area of awareness, and the means of communication between the leader and the agents.Representation of individuals in the simulation. Each individual is represented by an intelligent agent that can make decisions and learn from mistakes, deploying learning algorithms and probability for fuzzy logic. The latter represents non-logical behavior and emotional reactions. Representation of the “situational awareness”. The leader is allowed to see and have awareness of certain areas of the situation. The situational awareness depends on the situation, the mode of leadership and on the level of training. Representation of communication. Communication between the agents and the leader has several sources. There is a simulated view of the situation, communication via voice or transcript from the leader to the group and communication back from the group. The communication is weighted with fuzzy logic and probability of disturbance of the information. The element of fuzzy logic represents faults and incompleteness in the communication, which could stem from stress, confusion or simply irrationality.This tool can be a part of the Virtual Arena for crisis leadership training.1. BackgroundThis paper is part of the doctoral study called “Leadership in a crisis”. The study aims at training and measuring leadership ability in order to more effectively manage crisis situations.1.1 Escalating crisesHandling crises is a natural part of everyday life for most people. Crises, small or large, occur all the time, in all countries and cultures. Breaking an arm or having a fatality in the family can be a crisis. In these cases we deal with the emergency and can than regain control of the situation. A storm or earthquake can also lead to a crisis, such as the ones the world has witnessed during the last years, in Burma and Japan. Depending in the response efforts these may or may not result in long term crises.A fire brigade, for example, is well trained to deal with certain crises such as fires. Most fires do not escalate to real crises because the public knows that the fire brigade is well trained and highly skilled at handling the fire, thus the public expects them to deal with the situation. The same is true for other trained professional as doctors, policemen and military personnel. They are trained at responding to crises and the public trust them to take care of such situations. After the professionals take over; the public get on with their lives and make sure that they recover from what ever influence the crisis had had their lives.  SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Recently, there have been major emergencies such as hurricanes, flooding and forest fires that have spread in a number of places. But the crises have not been dealt with on time. They have escalated and put people in danger which neither the professionals nor the respective governments had anticipated and prepared for. Like depicted in the figure, if the emergency is taken care of the crisis will not grow and recovery can take place. But if the emergency response does not succeed; it is not possible to keep up business continuity and the recovery will be delayed, which will result in damages on society. It is very important to be prepared to deal with emergencies when they happen, so that they don’t escalate.2. Leadership and managementCrises always have occurred and will continue to do so, but with the right leadership training they don’t need to escalate. The lack of leadership is evident when an emergency cause’s disruption in day-to-day life and evokes emotions such as fear or pain and we have no control of the recovery. Be it on a small or on a large scale.It is fairly easy to predict where an emergency might take place but close to impossible to anticipate the timing and extent of it, i.e. were a fire will start or the effects a hurricane will have. Because an emergency by nature is this difficult to foresee in detail the only way to handle crises well is to train the leadership abilities of the persons in charge. Leadership means to lead people and a well trained leader will adapt the leadership to the persons engaged as well as to the situation, whereas a manager has a set of regulations to follow that cannot be adapted to every situation. It is not enough to have rules and regulations of how to manage the crisis. With well trained leaders emergency situations will be solved and not escalated into bigger crises, and with the number of crises rising the way it is it is clear that the amount of existing trained leaders is not sufficient.Managers are educated at universities and institutions but leadership is not as much trained for until it is needed, which is why many leadership situations are dealt with ad hoc. When managers try to manage an emergency it most probably results in an escalating crisis which will disrupt the daily business and prevent recovery, a description that reflects the current development of escalating crises in the world.Most people have some talent for leadership but few have trained this ability. Like discussed above leadership and management are different specialties. Leadership is the ability to lead other people; it is cooperation between leader and follower(s) to accomplish something. A follower is the person(s) that follow the leader. A trained leader is also a trained follower, and a talented leader is a good follower and will understand when to lead and when to be led. It is sometimes important to switch leaders, and a trained leader will be prepared for and willing to do that.Leadership is widely discussed in academia but there are few training facilities for leadership. Like any other skill leadership must be trained in order to be mastered and for leaders to work with crises, as discussed here, experience is important. Leadership can be practiced one-to-one, one to a group or through levels of organizations, depending on the ability of the leader and the task. Leadership training must be individual and adapted to the talent and ability of every person in order to be efficient.Before exercising leadership on other people every leader must so to say be the leader of him or her self. Before it is possible to lead other people a leader must believe in her/him and trust her or his ability to lead others. In this case of leadership, concerning crisis situations, the leader must also be familiar with her or his reactions to crises. This implies to be aware of ones emotions and reactions and for a trained leader it also means to anticipate other people’s emotional reactions in relation to the situation and than act proactively.2.1 Crisis behavior and AwarenessWhen we are in a crisis non-logical behavior and emotional reactions become part of our expression, even though we might not be aware of that until the exposure of a traumatizing or overwhelming situation. With training everybody can learn how he/she reacts at a crisis and even change the behavior. The human brain is programmed for reacting based on the life human beings led a thousand years ago, which is sometimes counterproductive in our times. This is something that a leader must learn to expect. People act emotionally and strongly at times of stress or a crisis. The ancient human brain also gives us a natural talent for leading and following, because humans have always lived in groups. This is the ability that we nurture in the training of leadership. At every moment we are aware of our surroundings to some degree. The awareness is what we know, see and feel about the area around us. For a leader the area of awareness can be the closest proximity or the area in which the emergency takes place or some other defined area. The leader must take in and process information about that area and base the leadership on this acquired knowledge together with previous knowledge and understanding of the situation.  3. Training and Simulation tool for leadershipIn order to train leadership it is not enough to rely on the few crises that occur in daily life, the number of crises is not enough for training purposes. Computer supported training is an accepted and widely used method of decision making and would also be suitable for leadership training. None of the existing so called leadership training simulations that we know of are actually training leadership, but teaching management. On the market there exist numerous of management training tools, that are following predefined rules and regulations and that train managers to be prepared for different situations. Thus leadership is not part of the training. In order to train leadership the virtual situation must be reflecting real life actions that prepare the leader for real life situations. The simulation must also have a design where the individuals represented in the scenario can be either operated by a person or by an intelligent agent. Every person will in this way react individually, which humans do. The training GUI should be connected to a gaming engine as well as a manned vehicles and other tools so that the training can be played either with people or with computers or a mix of the two.4. Virtual leadership trainingThis training tool allows virtual leadership training that prepares people for dealing with leadership in real situations through computer simulated situations and mixed situations with manned and unmanned agents. 1.2 Representing personality and behaviorIn the simulation each person is represented by an intelligent agent, and every agent can interact with other agents as well as with the leader, who is in this case another agent with special abilities. The agents have profiles, such as leadership skills, proactivity, courage and curiosity. The agent has an input based on the senses and analyzes the surroundings and actions around based on the senses and because they are intelligent and can learn agents have previous knowledge to fall back on. Based in all these parameters the agents take actions. An individual can be completely or partly run by an agent or partly or completely activated by an operator. In real life it is common that when one person starts walking in one direction, others will follow or another person will walk in another direction as a reaction to the first action. But all actions are in relation to other individuals or actions. The intelligent agents behave in this manner, based on learnt behavior and built in prerequisites. These prerequisites represent the individual’s personality.The intelligent agents can make decisions and learn from mistakes. Each agent deploys weighted learning algorithms with added fuzzy logic which represent the personalities of the people they represent. The latter are non-logical behavior and emotional reactions. It could represent irrational behaviors that arise from nervousness, insecurity or from being frightened. These scenarios are common and natural, and with leadership training – both concerning oneself and others – it becomes easier and more familiar to deal with such reactions2. Leadership trainingEach training session is individually set up based on leadership ability and level of training of the user. 2.2 Question based designThe design is based on asking questions. In order to build a question based system there are two main issues: First, the respondent has to understand the question and second you have to make the information available on the system.  Human “players” in a game during training and development will probably be professionals, with the same cultural and lingual background as the leader/commander. The answer will be weighted with faults that may represent ignorance or nervousness and the leader must take that into account before spreading any information. Therefore the question/answer procedures will not be the same as asking terrified people in a crisis about information.The design for the training uses intelligent agents that can make decisions and act human-like. The communication between the user and the agents is altered with an algorithm weighted with fuzzy logic. The fuzzy logic represents altering of information, which is very common in any leadership situation. In a group individuals will relate to each other and to the leadership and with this design the irrationality in human nature will be taken into account and generate believable situations.Each agent will to see and be aware of certain areas of the situation depending on the scenario. This area can range from a single room where the agents reside and only concern information about the group and that room. It can also be expanded into being a large area representing external information; relevant and irrelevant to the case at hand. The situational awareness also depends on the mode of leadership and on the level of training.The communication is weighted with fuzzy logic and probability of disturbance of the information. This means that the information might be disturbed while transferred to either the agents or the leader. It also represents difference in interpretation. The leader and an agent might interpret some information differently, which can lead to problems if not resolved in time. 3. Architecture design Every agent will either be run by the agent or partly or completely by an operator. The agent has a behavior model, a performance model and a physical model describing the individual it represents. The agent also has a situational awareness which depends on the other models. This awareness describes the understanding of the outer world. An agent representing a trained and skilled leader could have a complex situational awareness, whereas a child has a very limited ditto.  SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Based on a common language, preferably the proposed Crisis Management Language (CML), a development of C-BML, the agents can communicate. In a crisis situation the outcome will be rearranged and twisted because of irrational behavior that all persons in danger or in a state of crisis are. An object model that describes communication between agents based on High Level Architecture is also required for this simulation design. The simulation uses the architecture IEEE 1516, HLA, in order to enable the functionalities such as interoperability and reuse of earlier objects and environment descriptions. For this the development of a Crisis Management Societal Security FOM, CMSS FOM, is much needed for the interaction of the agents and other objects. For leadership training it is expected that the simulation enables scaling and interoperability as well as reuse. Scaling means that each training session can be individually set up. Interoperability implies interconnection with other simulations using the same architecture. Reuse of simulations and design enables comparing training sessions, which is positive for the learning process of the user.The simulation uses the architecture IEEE 1516, HLA, in order to enable the functionalities discussed above. 4. ResultThis proposed solution with intelligent agents representing individuals at crisis scenario will open up for a new training simulation for leaders. This simulation with the development of CML and CMSS FOM offers a complete training environment that is compatible with existing scenarios for other kinds of training.The solution based on HLA using a CMSS FOM and CML will support reuse of objects and simulations as well as interoperability and scaling, which makes the simulation adaptable for multiple leadership simulations.The leadership training simulator provides a training opportunity for leaders so that they can train leadership in a crisis situation within controlled environments and thus be better prepared for real crises. 5. Conclusion This paper proposes a simulation design for training leadership ability. Basically all people have leadership talent, but the talent can be stronger or weaker. There is significant difference between management and leadership and in this study we focused on leadership. We also discussed that in order for a leader to lead other people he or she must first be able to lead him or herself. The leader must also be aware or his or her emotions and reactions and deal with them in order to lead others in difficult times. This leadership training simulation takes into account the irrational behavior of people exposed to a crisis and especially being the leader of a group that is in a state of crisis.The leadership training simulation presents a believable leadership training situation, which involves other people, or agents, or both. The simulation supports multiple modes of leadership ability: such as, person to person, leadership of a group, and leading trough others, or leading groups on multiple levels. This is possible through deploying the architecture IEEE 1516, HLA, CML and CMSS FOM.The simulation is based on intelligent agents that interact and which have human like behavior. They are not completely predictable and have personalities and their own situational awareness. They can learn from experience and communication uses a question based design. This simulation design allows for reuse of agents and simulations and the possibility to gradually increase the leadership training experience.4. References”NFPA 1600”, Standard on Disaster/Emergency Management and Business Continuity ProgramsArguello L, et al. 08E-SIW-048, “Integration of modeling tools fot communication protocols using HLA” Bertrand O, Carle P, Choppy C, 08E-SIW-041, “Reusing distributed simulation through processing tools”Blais C, Turnitsa C, Gustavsson P, 06F-SIW-003, “A strategy for Ontology Research for the Coalition Battle Management Language (C-BML) Product Development Group”Blais C, Turnitsa C, Gustavsson P, Fall SIW 06, “A strategy for ontology research for the coalition battle management language (C-BML) product development group”Crisis Management and Societal Security (CMSS) Forum, SISO,  HYPERLINK "http://www.sisostds.org/index.php?tg=articles&idx=More&topics=139&article=483" http://www.sisostds.org/index.php?tg=articles&idx=More&topics=139&article=483Dahai J, Nickens T, Wang Y, 06F-SIW-066, “Modeling Decision-Making Learning Process under Crisis Situation” Mattson A., IBRO 07, (Invited presentation) “Maintaining Leadershipin a Crisis Situation “Mattson, A. “The Tele Rescue Demonstrator”Mattson, A. Silfwerbrand L, Euro SIW 08, “Think differently for good crises.”Mattson, A. Silfwerbrand L, F SIW 07, “The virtual Arena for Crisis Management.”Mattson, A. The Virtual Command PostSeveringhouse R, Tegnér J, Mattson A, EuroSIW06, “Interoperability in crisis management: organizational, political, technological and cultural.” Silfwerbrand L, IBRO 07, (Invited presentation) “Leadership, a measurable talent”Standards Australia, “HB 221:2004”,Business Continuity ManagementSwedish Institute of Standards, ISO/TC 223 Societal Security, “ HYPERLINK "http://www.sis.se/DesktopDefault.aspx?tabName=@DocType_301&Doc_ID=909330" \t "_parent" ISO/PAS 22399:2007”, Guideline for incident preparedness and operational continuity managementTolk A, Diallo S, Turnitsa C, 06F-SIW-008, “Merging protocols, Grammar, Representation, and Ontological Approaches in support of C-BML”Tolk A, Turnitsa C, Diallo S, Fall SIW 07, “Object models, messages, languages – the warfighter deserves better”	Author BiographiesLYKKE SILFWERBRAND is a Doctoral student in Leadership at the Research Policy Institute at Lund University, Sweden, since 2007. ANDERS MATTSON is the CEO of Crisis Management Support, Sollentuna, Sweden. He is a Crisis Management Development and Training Professional. He has been a long-term member of SISO including two terms on SISO EXCOM. He was locally responsible for arranging EuroSIW 2003 and 2006.Learning - TrainingGood leadersFewMostSomeManagementLeadershipUnpreparedBy the book       Situational Awareness Behaviour ModelPerformance ModelPhysical ModelAgentOperatorGUI       Situational Awareness Behaviour ModelPerformance ModelPhysical ModelAgentOperatorPlayer 2 on a PCPlayer 1 on a PCHLA/CMSS FOM/CMLNetwork of agents