SimSummit Meeting18 September 2008Orlando FL0800-1000Meeting held in conjunction with Fall 08 SIW.(notes compiled by Rick Severinghaus)IntroductionsMr. Bill Waite kicked off the meeting and led the morning’s discussionReminded all to check SimSummit website for activities, updated postings, etc., especially concerning upcoming meetings.Attendance: about 50 people.Executive Committee member remarks   SCS. Diane “DJ” Weed, SCS Exec Dir, expressed continued interest and support of SCS in SimSummit’s activities.   NTSA	No representative present   SISORick Severinghaus, Chair SISO Excom, mentioned ongoing standards work of interest, new initiatives to address open source software and crisis management/societal security via 2 Study Groups, and suggested ‘now’ is the time for renewed effort to foster ‘connections’ among the many organizations having a stake in M&S, workforce development, etc. Suggested this as a way forward to reinforce individual agency/ organization efforts.  Concluded by introducing Ralph Weber as the new chair of SISO Excom, and mentioned the chairs of both Conference Committee and the Standard Activities Committee are changing also.Action ItemsAsk all to submit list of known meetings for posting.Jim Coolahan (JHU/APL) volunteered to enter data (at meeting, a sheet was passed around, about 20 events were listed)Suggestion was made to provide an “input section” to the website, to allow folks to submit items, while retaining ability of SimSummit to screen them before posting for all to see.Asked for member input/interest in attending a dedicated ‘offsite’ shortly after I/ITSEC.Need to update Topic of Interest vs. Membership Listing (regards the Topical Agenda)Issues discussedActivities mentionedSCM SG (Simulation Conceptual Modeling Study Group) meeting report: NATO’s group on SCM workingBOK (Body of Knowledge)  – problematic to sort out relationships amongst disciplines. Bill’s slide used to illustrate.  Basic issue: it is not an organized discipline.BOK can be accessed on Sharepoint Site, a link from SimSummitJim Hollenbach Q: what about AFMS’ $5M project (Ed Degnon) on BOK? That project claims to have collected some 13 BOKs.  A.  That material captured on BOK website. Air Force taxonomic breakdown is different than SimSummit’s.  Issue outstanding: there is not configuration management of BOK’s.Vision expressed:  BOK grow to be an “open source” presence in being, not directed  or controlled by any one organization.Comment regarding University courses now popping up – SimSummit vision for BOK is that attempts to take on / embody a larger perspective than is represented by individual university courses, whose viewpoints/scope of BOK tends to be somewhat limited.“Crash” Konwin (BAH) suggested an off-site on workforce development, mentioned that, of  the courses he has looked at, all have a particular view/focus, and each are narrow in scope wrt addressing BOK.Discussion on CMSP	Revitalization in progress. Chair of effort is Bill Tucker (Boeing) with Bill Waite (AEgis). Achieving broad acceptance is the core element of the effort.  Envisioned: 3 part certification:  Basic, M&S Practitioner; M&S Manager.  A basic assumption in the effort is that it is serving the M&S Profession.  (Much as BOK exists to support the medical doctor profession)Audience folks made comments that the past DoD focus of CMSP needs to change: be broadened outside its US DoD roots. Bill responded by saying that intent is for CMSP testing to be explicitly traceable to the M&S BoK.  This led to a short discussion by Bill Tucker, in which he reviewed the scope and scale of effort needed to build the profession of M&S. Industrial DevelopmentMentioned M&S Expo held earlier this year for benefit of US Congress/staffers, held at the Rayburn Building.M&S Congressional Caucus meeting next January mentioned. Reminded audience that SimSummit topical agenda formed the content basis, and organization, of the 1st 2 meetings.  Then, 3rd meeting effort was to show folks the breadth and scope of M&S across the US. Next (4th) meeting (Jan 09) is going to address the regional M&S activities which now exist, and will try to illuminate  how M&S activity can impact both economic development and social welfare in those regions having robust focus on M&S based industry, academics, and government activity.   The intent is to include emphasis on Congressional designation of M&S as a national critical technology, and the economic benefits that can accrue via M&S activity.Business PracticeMention of LVC architecture study ongoing, and expectation of public release of results in next months.Economics of M&S and ROI Bill showed slide listing some past efforts to address these two issues:	MSG-031 NATO on Cost Effectiveness of M&S	DND SECO’s Cost Benefit Analysis Review ReportMention of SISOs ongoing ‘Economics of M&S’ SSG (Standing Study Group)Assertion made to audience is that all of these activities are supportive of SimSummit agenda and the advancement of M&S. Discussion of possible SimSummit off-site.Bill asked for expressions of interest in a SimSummit dedicated event, 1 or 2 days over a weekend, nominally the week following I/ITSEC.   5 members had responded to a survey he had sent out, with input regards possible topics for the offsite.  These included:Outreach to new organizationsWork on existing agenda (selected topics)Work on fundamentals of M&SWork on gathering more members to SimSummitGeneral comments and discussionJim Hollenbach commented; need to frame issues in context of Workforce Development. Need to align vectors and push cooperation, and especially to ramp up international organizational cooperation and agreement.Mention of STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math) and how does SimSummit promote it.  Steve (‘Flash’) Gordon mentioned interest in pre-college M&S education.Ralph Weber mentioned AMSC’s interest in high school education and promoting STEM via Science Fair events state-wide.Priscilla Elfrey mentioned Florida Education & Technology Conference, to be held June 2009 in FL.  Made the point that there are many educational events (as opposed to M&S events) which address M&S to various extents, and offer possibility of getting SimSummit’s message across to educationally focused audiences. SummaryAll were thanked for attending, and reminded to provide indication of interest for a SimSummit off-siteinput events of interest to the community to SimSummit, or direct to Bill Waite, for posting on SimSummit Website.consider attending next SimSummit meeting, at I/ITSEC.