STAY ALIVE: A Research Prototype for Exploring Safety Awareness TrainingUsing Distributed Gaming TechnologyMichelle L. RuderLuis M. BaresASRC AerospaceMail Stop: IT-C1Kennedy Space Center, FL  32899321-867-6864, 321-867-2844michelle.l.ruder@nasa.gov, luis.m.bares@nasa.govPriscilla R. ElfreyNASA Kennedy Space CenterMail Stop: IT-C1Kennedy Space Center, FL  32899321-867-9153priscilla.r.elfrey@nasa.gov Keywords:Safety, awareness, prototype, gaming technology, point of view, presence, immersion. ABSTRACT: STAY ALIVE is a research prototype for safety awareness training, using game-enabled simulation technology, that makes training enlightening, engaging and fun.  Recalling initial instructions and using situational awareness principles, trainees must escape a fire by choosing the appropriate door.  Escape times are measured while stressors are increased.  This paper describes how STAY ALIVE utilizes first person point of view (PoV), a generic scenario, immersion- and presence-enhancing design, and ease of distribution to provide more people opportunity to realize, review, analyze and practice effective awareness behaviors.  The goals for this prototype include facilitating interest in first-person PoV safety training and eliciting further suggestions on prevention technologies. 1.  The Customer Is FirstSafety awareness and training programs are numerous and widespread, utilizing a variety of materials and methods.  A boom in simulation and gaming technologies applied to training is making a big impact on effectiveness, because it allows greater and more varied sensory stimulation, mental stimulation, interaction, rehearsal, review, and transferability.  Simulation also surprises us, allowing us to see, experience or learn things we might never have otherwise come to know. First person point of view (PoV), however, has been under-utilized in safety training of many types and its criticality seldom properly credited. The U.S. military is perhaps the most consistent user of first person PoV in training, largely due to firearm content.  The myriad games from the entertainment world mimicking such content not only preserve first person PoV, they are categorized as “first person shooter” games.  But in other types of safety training, first person PoV is limited or ignored.  Consider three scenarios:I) Employees of a large building practice fire evacuation drills regularly.  They have experience leaving the building but no experience from flames, heat, smoke, cyanide poisoning, power outages, or blocked exits.  They never hear fire crackling or sirens blaring. They never see a firefighter running by with an axe or a medic carrying a stretcher.  And they are never told how close to the life-or-death time limit they came—or even what that limit is.  Therefore, no one ever pauses to feel doors before opening them, covers their faces, or “stops, drops and rolls.”  II) All airlines provide passengers with written, illustrated, verbalized and demonstrated instructions for an “unlikely event” before every flight.  The smiling attendants present the training between the pillows and the peanuts, wishing everyone a safe and happy flight.  The crewmembers are usually the only ones who have actually put on a mask, clutched a seat cushion, or jumped down the slide yet many passengers do not pay attention to the demonstrations or read the safety cards.III) A highway accident leaves a semi-truck overturned and a mini-van crushed.  Rescue teams are on site, assessing the situation, and traffic is slowed in both directions.  None of the other motorists knows the victims or is needed for the rescue, yet everyone feels compelled to stare.  Doing so causes more accidents, now blocking the road entirely and delaying rescue.In these three stories, safety training was available, even mandated, but was considered irrelevant, insufficiently informative, non-engaging and/or missed a significant portion of the population.  Trainees did not or could not take the training personally, investing little and taking away even less.  When actually faced with an emergency situation, few if any will be able to react in a timely, effective way because they lack appropriate knowledge, habits, skills and experience.This is illustrated in the last scenario, where emergency response teams know what to expect and how to act, but the other motorists do not.  They become bystanders amassing in morbid curiosity or even shock, because they have seen few or no real accident scenes before.  In trying to learn what happened, who was injured, and what the experts will do about it, they become engrossed to the point of neglecting their own driving tasks. Learning this way causes more accidents than it prevents.If training methods for these scenarios were engaging and informative, personally relevant and accessible to all involved, performance in emergency situations would likely be significantly better.2.  Virtual) Reality and RiskThe STAY ALIVE project addresses these concepts with a research prototype.  Taking inspiration from The Lady & The Tiger story’s blind life or death choice, the simulated environment is a simple room with multiple doors.  Only one door is the safe exit, but it is not the door through which the participant enters.  The participant reads instructions on a virtual notice board before entering the room.  These include actions to perform, dangers to avoid, and means to escape safely.  While performing the tasks in the room, a fire begins and quickly escalates.  With realistic graphics, sound effects and the pressure of time, the individual must exit as quickly as possible.  Those who remember and use the introductory information effectively will escape; those who do not will (virtually) die.Based on the most available safety training, the STAY ALIVE development team anticipates few participants will survive the scenario.  They designed the surprise to increase awareness of potential, if unlikely, danger and the importance of personal awareness training.Stan Owens of BST, Inc., a presenter on risk perception, points out that many people are reactive, acting only after an event has occurred, rather than consistently proactive to prevent an occurrence.  “Risk may have once been recognized, [but] repeat performance, without negative consequences, erodes understanding of risk.”  He goes on to say that in fact, risky behaviors with no negative outcomes are under-reported, resulting in data misleading people to think occurrences are minor or rare.  If data are collected and statistics reported correctly, the number of near-misses would be much higher and they, in combination with incident data, would reflect a more clear assessment of the risks.  Some sources, according to Owens, suggest the ratio of risky behaviors to reportable events may be as high as 200,000 to 1!1  This astonishing number indicates we need to pay as much—or more—attention to identifying and preventing risky behavior as the incidents themselves.  The STAY ALIVE prototype can provide such catalytic experiences and consequences in a virtual way, interjecting interest before it is too late.3.  Strategies to Study Training experience shows the best way to reach people is to highlight the mismatch between reality and their perception of it—to surprise them.  So naturally, with simulation, we can create engaging material that also “shocks and awes” people into the reality of risk.  Additionally, it can provide feedback and rehearsal opportunities that reinforce learning. When distributable, this can be done wherever and whenever needed.  The STAY ALIVE prototype is powered by the Torque 1.5 game engine.  Participants access content via internet or computer network, using a traditional desktop computer with keyboard and mouse.  This architecture supports the cost, distribution and accessibility goals of the project. To maximize participants’ presence (feeling of being in the environment),2 the STAY ALIVE prototype utilizes 4 design strategies: 1) first person PoV, 2) mental and physical interaction, 3) moderate mental workload, and 4) stress induction.  These strategies challenge short-term memory, and force reliance on situational awareness skills, long-term memory and appropriate habits.  Stressors such as reducing the allotted time, increasing the volume or type of sound effects, introducing obstacles, or thickening of smoke are simple yet effective variables to manipulate and are directly related to immersion (sensory fidelity).2  STAY ALIVE’s Torque-enabled graphics, lighting and sound effects are as realistic as practicable to facilitate this. Though considerable attention is paid to the immersive aspects, the desktop computer interface is not expected to diminish presence or transference of awareness skills.  While research on computer and game console interfaces for training is rather limited, a 1994 Israeli Air Force study on video games for training revealed pilots’ PC practice improved flight performance and situational awareness during flight. With SA levels above average, they had sufficient ability for expanded planning and other cognitive demands during flight.3  Flight trainers for the personal computer have mushroomed in number and complexity, but in 2002 the FAA actually approved one (Motus311p) for training purposes, acknowledging sufficient support of awareness transferrence.4 This combination of architecture and technology also allows safety content to be regularly updated, supplemented, or changed without a major cost to time, effort or budget.  Unlike many other single-issue mediums, this maintains STAY ALIVE’s relevance and audience attention over time.The prototype trainer plays an important role in the STAY ALIVE research project.  In addition to proving the concept of delivering first person PoV safety awareness training via game-enabled, distributed simulation technology, the prototype training scenario will be a discussion piece and testing ground throughout the research process.  The STAY ALIVE team may look into performance measurement and tracking capabilities, to provide a richer training experience through feedback and after-action review.  Community ideas for other features such as physical and mental degradation effects (due to smoke or chemical inhalation, asphyxiation, heat exposure, or fatigue) are being sought as well.  Suggestions might come from a breadth of fields including simulation, gaming, education and training, cognitive science, human factors, occupational safety, physiology and emergency response.4. Awareness and ActionSTAY ALIVE is intentionally generalizable to all environments and job types, so it can open awareness to many sources of risk.  This story serves as an excellent example:Rick Smolan was in a Korean hotel with a friend and two children when a fire started in the middle of the night.  Rick describes his own fearful paralysis and relief at his friend’s quick response.  Gene knew to cover the vents and door jambs to block out the smoke, to cover themselves with wet towels for heat and smoke protection, and to move toward the window for air.  Thanks to Gene’s general fire safety knowledge and problem-solving skills, applied quickly and appropriately, they were not among the eleven who died that night.5STAY ALIVE is designed as a stand-alone simulation, but since most safety training is job-specific (focusing on the facility, equipment and procedures about which the employee should be aware, and how to do or not do a series of tasks) rather than human-specific (types and amounts of bodily risk, and what human strengths or weaknesses contribute to potential harm), STAY ALIVE may also supplement existing training.  For example, awareness of human decision-making frailties reinforces pilots’ training to trust their instruments when disoriented.  It is considered so critical to preserving life and craft that the top aviation schools around the world focus an entire section of the curriculum around it.  STAY ALIVE could provide such support.Equally importantly, STAY ALIVE’s message can be applied not only to personal behavior within buildings but also to buildings’ capacity to support safety.  Here are some examples from Kennedy Space Center: a) One colleague said that despite regular viewing of the applicable facility safety video, and experience working there, he still had no idea which door to use for escape from that facility.  In the event a fire broke out while there, he was certain he would die.b) One of the authors happened to be in a restroom when the power went out.  Not only was there no emergency lighting in the restroom, neither the hallway to which it connected nor the nearby “cube farm” offered any indication of what danger might have caused it or which escape route to choose.  Had the area filled with smoke, only the bottom 18” of the walls and cubicles would have been left as a navigational guide, and they all look exactly the same.c) Colleagues who advise design teams in the new Constellation program regularly discuss the need for workers to be equally able to escape in an emergency as work in facilities nominally.  They seek a visual aid to support their assertions.STAY ALIVE is designed to provoke insight, and perhaps solutions, for such situations.5. SummaryDespite prolific use of simulation for training in a variety of disciplines, and the equally prolific research indicating simulation’s high levels of immersion and presence improve training dramatically, few safety training methods effectively employ first person point of view to make the experience truly engaging and memorable.  Various life experiences common today indicate a continuing need for generalizable, transferable safety awareness and response training that targets not only special populations but more general ones as well.  STAY ALIVE researches this niche with a prototype simulation, widely distributable, that grabs attention and holds it long enough to make clear to people that they may not be as prepared as they think they are.  STAY ALIVE can elicit interest in personal safety government, public, and private sectors. 6. References[1]	Owens, S. “Why Employees Can’t or Don’t See Risk.” Presentation, Region IV VPPPA, 2002.[2] Bowman, D. and McMahan, R.  “Virtual Reality: How Much Immersion is Enough?” Computer, July 2007.  At http://www.computer.org/portal/site/computer[3]	Gopher, D., Weil, M., Bareket, T. (1994). Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, Volume 36, Number 3, September 1994, pp. 387-405(19).[4] Federal Aviation Administration, Flight Standards District Office.  Memo dated February 11, 2002, Larry Kreider, Manager.[5] Smolan, R.  “Rick Smolen: A Girl, A Photograph, A Homecoming.” Filmed Presentation, December 2007.  At http://www.ted.com/index.php/talks/rick_smolan_tells_the_story_of_a_girl.htmlAuthor BiographiesMichelle Ruder, eight-year member of the Human Factors & Ergonomics Society and President of its Space Coast Chapter, as well as Safety Representative for ASRC Aerospace, contributes human factors expertise with emphases on creative design processes, interface usability, user support system development and safety.  She has participated on Simulation & Analysis of Launch Teams (SALT),  Distributed Observer Network (DON) and Exploration Launch & Landing Analysis (ELLA) development teams, in research on habitability measurement and SCAPE suit design upgrades, as well as suggested improvements to lunar analogue integrated test data collection and Emergency Life Support Apparatus (ELSA) implementation and training.  Michelle also has publications on impacts of seating design on children and adults.  From University of Minnesota, Cornell University, Florida Institute of Technology and University of Central Florida, she speaks to classrooms and conferences around the country.  In addition, she has acted, directed, danced and developed a dance curriculum she teaches to this day.  She also enjoys travel, outdoor activities, and home renovation in her spare time.  Luis Bares, a member of both the Space Coast’s and the University of Central Florida’s respective Human Factors and Ergonomics Society chapters, brings a strong background in modeling and simulation, with an emphasis on human-system interaction.  He has been an integral part of UCF’s Team Performance Laboratory, where his research focused on interface design, usability testing and human performance measurement for the military’s unmanned air and ground vehicle development efforts. During his academic and professional career, he has authored several publications ranging from topics in decision making and situational awareness to alternative simulation systems.  As a contractor at KSC through ASRC Aerospace, Luis has aided with the Simulation & Analysis of Launch Teams (SALT) effort, which aimed to provide beneficial modeling capabilities to ground operations for launch systems. Having received his baccalaureate from UCF, he is currently working on his Masters degree in Modeling & Simulation. In his spare time Luis educates others on the benefits of incorporating Human Factors and simulation principles across various different industries.Priscilla Elfrey is a member of the SISO Conference Committee and formerly initiated and chaired its Space Community Forum and the Joint Session on Large Complex System Simulation at EuroSIW 2008. A producer, organizer and speaker at conferences in the US and abroad, she has worked extensively in government, academia, organization development, entertainment, international exchange, and training. She has led NASA simulation outreach since 1993.was a founder of two off-off Broadway theatres, produced and wrote broadcast television forums on simulation and award winning NASA videos on commercial use of space. A graduate of Barnard College, she did graduate work at Columbia University, NYU, the Moreno Institute and Cornell School of Industrial and Labor Relations and was the first woman Associate Dean of Yale College. She was a Fellow of Calhoun College at Yale University and of the Center for Electronic Communication at Florida Atlantic University.  She is the author of The Hidden Agenda, Recognizing What Really Matters at Work, John Wiley and Sons publisher and writes on simulation for the general reader. 