Registry Federations to Accelerate Human Behavior Model Development and Re-UseMartin R. Stytz, Ph.D.Sheila B. Banks, Ph.D.Institute for Defense AnalysesCalculated InsightWashington, DCOrlando, Fl  32828(407) 497-4407, (703) 338-2997(407) 353-0566 HYPERLINK "mailto:mstytz@ida.org" mstytz@ida.org ,  HYPERLINK "mailto:mstytz@att.net" mstytz@att.net ,  HYPERLINK "mailto:mstytz@gmail.com" mstytz@gmail.com HYPERLINK "mailto:sbanks@calculated-insight.com" sbanks@calculated-insight.comKeywords:  information retrieval, information registries, intelligent actors, simulation scenario re-use, simulation semantics, data tagging, human behavior model re-use, semantics independence, coalition interoperabilityAbstract:  The search for, discovery, and posting of information about human behavior and distributed simulation scenarios are key to future improvements in human behavior modeling and distributed simulation.  The improvement of human behavior modeling and distributed simulation capabilities and data repository contents along with the storage of this information within the large networks and databases that comprise modern distributed simulation environments makes improved retrieval of human behavior modeling information, ontologies, and simulation environment information the key to improvements in these technologies.  Only by improving the retrieval of needed information about specific simulation environment scenarios and human behavior models will their development become easier, more accessible, more reliable, and more rapid.  The new information retrieval tools must be able to locate the required information as needed without regard for the semantics for the stored information; instead, only the semantics for the request for information should be important.  These semantics are captured in registry federations.  The use of registry federations marks a major departure from current practice, wherein the semantics of a data repository, usually captured in tags, must be known and understood by the requestor in order to retrieve the desired information.  We propose using registry federations to bridge the gap between requestor and data repository semantics, thereby allowing requests to be distributed and displayed using the requestor’s semantics but the data is retrieved from each repository using the repository’s semantics.  As a result, there is no need to standardize upon a single semantics to retrieve information, instead any data repository can be queried using a requestor’s semantics simply by building the appropriate registry federation.Humans have usually been forced to locate the information that they require by acquiring information about the repositories that they want to access.  Furthermore, humans had to locate the repository before the information could be accessed via a query.  As a result, the search for information was usually constrained by the knowledge possessed by the user, the type of model being used, and the simulation environment.  Information requests had to be precise and exact in order to retrieve the desired information; relevant information that did not exactly meet the criteria established in the search request would not be retrieved even though it would have been useful or relevant.  Even if the retrieval process is aided by the use of tags and indexes, more complications are raised than are resolved.  Conceptually, tagging is a simple process; data is tagged with metadata that serves to describe key aspects and content of the information.  The overwhelming deficiency of tagging has been long known, dating back to the first libraries and catalogues: no two people, operating independently, will apply a consistent set of tags to a set of information (such as books) in the same manner nor will they use the same tags to try to retrieve the same information.  We address the information discovery and retrieval problem using registry federations.The paper is organized as follows.   The first section provides an introduction to the research topic and registry federations. The second section provides background and details concerning federated registry data operations.  The third section presents a discussion of the operation of registry federations, their advantages, and data interoperability issues raised by the use of registry federations.  The final section contains a summary and future work.1.	IntroductionThe construction of complex, high fidelity, and realistic human behavior models for simulation environments of complex battlespaces and of other complex situations remains a challenge because the data required by the human behavior models (HBM) are difficult to obtain, and once obtained for one project the modeling information is difficult to locate and re-use for another project.  The current difficulties posed for data exchange and human behavior model data re-use, in addition to human behavior model data collection, are responsible for the current inability to achieve high fidelity simulations of human behaviors within simulation environments.  Because the cost of acquiring human behavior model data and simulation environment data is likely to remain high and because of the likelihood that available human behavior modeling and simulation data will remain distributed across numerous databases, techniques must be developed that allow the developer to overcome these barriers.  The new techniques for facilitating human behavior modeling and simulation environment data reuse must minimize the cost of retrieval of the data so that developers will employ the techniques for development of new human behavior models and simulation environments because re-use of available data minimizes development cost and improves model quality.  We address techniques for facilitating human behavior modeling and simulation environment data reuse in this paper.The need for our work arises from the need for accurate representations of humans and of the environment in the rapidly changing modern military battlespace and from the flow of large volumes of information, which means that large volumes of information are required to construct and operate high fidelity simulation environments and human behavior models.  The pace and volume of information flow within military operations creates an environment that overwhelms the individual with information in the real world, and so must in the simulation environment.  Constructing the required complexity and variety is currently challenging due to the weaknesses of semantic tagging or indexing, which has led to the current dearth of high fidelity environments that present complex, realistic scenarios that re-use a significant amount of data.  We address this situation by improving access to data about battlespaces and human behavior without requiring tagging, indexing, or extensive searching for data, in-depth expertise about data repositories, or the use of arcane or highly specific technical jargon related to the contents of any data repositories.  Instead, the information that is required will be able to be retrieved using terminology that is both appropriate but also in common-use from the individual’s point of view.The problem faced in human behavior modeling and simulation system information discovery is different in some regards from the problems faced by the business sector.  Department of Defense (DoD) search and retrieval solutions should reflect these differences.  For example, in the business world, speed of information aggregation, accuracy, currency of information, and breadth of information available to the user are as important factors as the speed with which a query is processed.  In the business environment, semantics are relatively constant and consistent, from a user’s perspective. In the DoD environment, semantics can vary greatly from query to query based upon the information required and the data repositories that are accessed.  In the business arena as in the DoD, a further important factor is that the user must be prevented from accessing information for which they lack authorization.  Other important factors that come into play in a commercial environment are support for ad hoc queries, and support for queries into data repositories that have different semantics for each repository.  These same factors are also significant for DoD users.  However, solving the access control issue is, we believe, key to any successful DoD solution because unless this issue is solved, users will make incorrect conclusions about the data that they need and that is available because they will base their conclusions on assessments of the results of the queries that they pose. The access control issues will compound the semantic differences; as a result DoD user queries will not provide accurate insight about the data that is available and that is relevant to the user but that they cannot be apprised of due to access restrictions.   Simply, in the DoD, currently users must acquire access authorization to data before they can determine if they need the data.The access authorization issue can be resolved without risk of security compromise by engineering and through the use of properly constructed registries that can allow a search to be conducted for information using user semantics in conjunction with repository-specific semantics without search-time inspection of the content of any repositories.  The registries, when coupled with the appropriate ontologies, provide the links to the location(s) of the desired information without providing the data or providing access to the data.In sum, while re-use of data and data acquisition are aided by using traditional technologies for semantic interoperability such as tagging, indexing, and cross-referencing, these techniques are not sufficient for DoD purposes.  These approaches are inadequate to the data acquisition task for three reasons:  1) the approaches suffer from a high error rate due to inconsistencies in understanding and working definitions for terminology, 2) the high cost and difficulties encountered when correcting human errors, and 3) the inability of the approach to exploit the DoD’s adoption of service oriented architecture (SOA) technologies (adoption of a SOA approach will require low-latency access to the contents of distributed databases, frequent updates of their contents, migration of portions of data for performance purposes, duplication of data, and support for peer-to-peer activities.)  Tagging and indexing are error-prone when selecting tags for data and when people are trying to retrieve the data based upon the tags.  Tagging and indexing rarely provide robust semantic interoperability and are extremely difficult to use with consistency for retrieval or assignment of tags across a large, diverse population.  Our approach to achieving semantic interoperability in support of human behavior modeling data re-use is based on the insight that re-use can be achieved by adopting the use of registry federations to exploit all available data.There are two large untapped data resources that the DoD should better exploit.  First, the human behavior modeling (HBM) development community must start to exploit data that is available but unused because it is categorized in a manner that does not readily map into current HBMs.  For example, HBM data could be extracted from after-action reports and lessons learned reports, both of which are currently captured electronically and would allow exploitation of the increased amount of electronic data, but their format, syntax, and semantics do not readily map into current human behavior models.  Second, the HBM community must start to extract HBM data from existing human behavior models even though the data is closely tied to the reasoning systems that use their HBM data. The required steps, which are deeply dependant upon semantic interoperability, might be able to be achieved by extensively tagging the data from both sources (operational and existing HBMs) using tightly defined and ultra-precise terminology, but doing so would be very costly and prone to error.  The history of tagging technology indicates that the approach will not succeed, no matter how much effort is expended.  Instead, the HBM community requires the equivalent of semantic interoperability via tagging of information that is relevant to the assembly of human behavior models without the cost or error of traditional tagging.  The required capability for semantic interoperability in support of human behavior modeling and simulation environment data re-use can be achieved using registry federations, since they decouple user semantics from the data repository semantics.The basis for our approach is the knowledge that any search terms that a user, machine, or group [9-14], hereafter jointly termed a principal, desires to locate, retrieve, and possibly employ are terms that the principal is authorized to use.  These terms are used to access registries that indicate where the desired data is located.Using the registry-based approach, data retrieval from a data repository consists of four major activities.  In the first step, the principal accesses the registry to determine the location of potentially relevant data.  In the second step, the registry provides the location of data relevant to the query.  In the third step, the principal uses the information provided by the registry to access data repositories for data.  In the fourth step, the principal receives the data from the repositories.  In general, data access restrictions and authorization need only be considered when data retrieval is executed (in step 3), and not when the location of the data within a user’s context is being determined.  Of course, when information is posted to a repository, all of the registries associated with the repository must also be updated; but the update need only contain the fact of the existence of the new data value and its semantics and not the actual data value.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.  The next section provides background relevant to our work and details concerning federated registry operations.  Section Three contains a discussion of the operation of registry federations, their advantages, and the challenges imposed by registry federations for the purposes that we propose.  The final section contains a summary and suggestions for future work.2.	BackgroundHuman behavior modeling [1-8, 15-61] addresses the issues that must be overcome in order to achieve realistic behavior and reactions for HB in simulators.  The required behaviors and reactions are achieved by developing behavior models that can be used to compute a reasonably accurate analog of the output of a real human’s decision-making process. The most important aspects of developing the behavioural model are knowledge acquisition, which calls for acquiring the information needed to effectively model human behaviour within the simulation environment; knowledge representation, which calls for putting the knowledge base into a form that can be accessed readily and used for analysis and decision making during simulation operation; and assembling the decision making apparatus that performs decision making. Knowledge acquisition and knowledge representation jointly determine the information about the human mental models that is brought to bear in the entity decision process.A human behavior model employs knowledge representations that are useful for the decisions and situations to be faced by the decision system coupled with information about the domain in which the decisions are to be made.  Performing human behavior modeling requires the acquisition of domain-specific knowledge about the information that humans use in the decision-making process, such as doctrine and tactics, for the domain of operation. The military services currently have several projects wherein human behavior modeling and improving the quality of human behavior portrayed in the modeling and simulation (M&S) synthetic simulation environment, are key.  Successful employment of human behavior models within a synthetic environment requires that the human behavior models be usable, robust, flexible, and possess the ability to integrate knowledge as required.  A usable model is one that is readily configured and manipulated by the model user for model set-up, modification, and building.  A robust model responds appropriately to unplanned and unexpected events with a mechanism that allows for situation assessment, problem solving, and planning, and provides for graceful degradation of model capabilities.  A flexible model is one that will allow the incorporation of doctrine, tactical, and knowledge changes in a manner that produces behaviors that are appropriate within the simulation context but not outwardly predictable.Unfortunately, the M&S community lacks the means to build and re-use models that are usable, robust, flexible, and possess the ability to integrate knowledge as required.  Instead, within the M&S human behavior representation (HBR) community, we have no methodology that supports re-utilization of knowledge acquisition (KA) products, which so critical to the human behavior modeling effort, nor any facility to find available products, models, or data or to access them.  Our current behavior models utilize specialized development environments, if any exist at all, which makes the use of or modification of a specific model by a non-expert programmer (non-expert in the sense that the person is not intimately familiar with that specific model) very difficult and the discovery and re-use of existing knowledge products very difficult if not impossible.  Our objective is to redress these problems by improving access to existing knowledge products.In this paper, we use the following terminology.  A registry is a database containing terms, locations, and the variety of contexts for the terms within a single repository.  A registry federation is a set of registries constructed to enable rapid, efficient federated search.  Federated search using registry federations enables efficient, rapid search for information across large multi-organizational distributed data repositories and databases using the repository-specific indices, or registries.  Searching using registries is performed using user-specific semantics to access data using repository-specific semantics. Using the federated registry-based approach, data retrieval consists of four major activities.  In the first step, the principal accesses the registries to determine the location of potentially relevant data.  In the second step, the targeted registries provide the location of relevant data.  In the third step, the user accesses the data they are authorized to obtain using the information provided by the registries.  In the fourth step, the user receives the data.  This model for information retrieval can be used to extract HBM data from previously untapped sources and from existing systems that possess human behavior models.A federated search is the simultaneous search of multiple online repositories using multiple search engines.  Federated search can provide efficient and rapid search for and discovery of information across large multi-national, multi-agency, and multi-organizational distributed repositories (usually simply databases) that is currently possible only when the principal has previously been granted access rights to these repositories.  The federated search process consists of the following steps:  1) a principal entering a search query through the federating interface (portal), 2) the transformation of the query into the appropriate syntax for each repository and transmission of the query to the disparate data repositories, 3) merging the results collected from the repositories at the portal, 4) sorting the results collected from the repositories at the portal, and 5) presenting the results in a succinct and unified format with minimal duplication coupled with maximal insight to the principal.Metadata is data about data. An item of metadata may describe an individual datum, or content item, or a collection of data including multiple content items.  Metadata can facilitate the understanding, use and management of data. Queries performed that exploit metadata can spare users from the task of performing more complex filtering operations manually.  The metadata required for effective data management varies with the type of data and context of its use. If the metadata is structured into a hierarchical arrangement, metadata is more properly called an ontology or schema.  Data and metadata can change their roles; hence, metadata can itself be considered data.  Therefore, it is possible to create metadata about metadata.  When supporting large numbers of applications or large numbers of users to create meta-metadata.  Metadata is typically stored in a metadata registry (MDR).The need our work addresses is the development of a capability that can best be described as being the equivalent to individualized, customized tagging for all of the information available that is relevant to human behavior modeling and distributed simulation assembly.  The resulting capability will insure that the semantics and intent behind any request for information retrieves exactly the information that the user needs and wants without forcing the principal to learn the specific semantics for every information repository to be accessed.3.	Registry Federation OperationThe current state of large of technologies for search and post of information in distributed repositories and the distributed repositories’ capability to support network centric operations is primitive.  Successful search depends upon access to documents and other content in the data repository, some prior knowledge about the repository and its semantics, and search of a data repository must be conducted using the context and semantics of the dataset in the repository.  The information discovery and retrieval problem is not unique to the DoD, but also exists to a lesser extent in the commercial world.The approach most widely employed in the commercial world for the discovery and retrieval of information addresses the problems faced by sales and supply chain management.  These problems include synchronization of data throughout the enterprise, data distribution, real-time updates and access, and data accuracy, and discovery of needed data.  Generally, in the commercial world and the current DoD enterprise, data access is expected to follow established patterns for each user, patterns that are defined by the users’ taskload, which in turn defines the tasks and information needs for the user, resulting is relatively consistent access and usage patterns.  While the DoD Discovery Metadata Standard (DDMS) may seem to be a solution to the problem for the DoD, we contend that it is incomplete as a final solution.  First, its use requires markup of data using predefined tags.  The tagging process is notoriously difficult, prone to error, prone to misinterpretation, and unable to express the nuance of the context of a user’s context.  Data tagging makes no allowance for variations in tasking, principal’s context, principal’s semantics, environment changes, or any other issue that may alter a principal’s data needs in a way that tagging cannot support.   Tagging provides a one-dimensional categorization of repository content, when in fact what is needed is an approach that will identify the specific content that is required for a specific context with a minimum of principal guidance.  The second issue that we have identified is that the DDMS standard does not apply to other portions of the federal government, allied nations, or non-government organizations (NGOs), which further limits the principal’s ability to employ the standard to discover and retrieve required data.A solution is needed that does not require wide-scale standardization and that allows a principal to pose queries using terms common to the principal’s tasks, task context, and terminology.  Before discussing our approach, allow us to explain why we contend that simply adopting business solutions, or adopting them with tagging, is not the answer to the challenges to be addressed.Traditionally, locating and posting information has been accomplished using tagging.  Conceptually, tagging is a simple process; data is tagged using metadata to describe key aspects and content of the information so marked.  While simple in concept, the deficiency of this approach is one that has been long known, dating back to the first libraries and catalogues; no two people, operating independently, will apply the same set of tags to a set of information (such as books) in the same manner nor will they use the same tags to try to retrieve identical information.  This difficulty has been the impetus for the development of many cataloging and indexing systems; starting with the Dewey Decimal System, and progressing on to the Library of Congress Catalog Number, and the International Standard Book Number (ISBN) systems, which are perhaps the best known efforts.  However, none of these or similar approaches can accommodate the scope and complexity of the current web of information available within the DoD data repositories that contain information that can be of use for human behavior and simulation efforts.  We can, however, for the purposes of the research we undertook, assume that tagging has been performed and that our task is to determine how to augment tagging and so better serve the DoD principal.  Our contention is that the problem faced by the DoD for information discovery (and posting) is fundamentally different than the problems faced by the business sector and that DoD search and retrieval solutions that are implemented should reflect these differences.   We identified one factor that is common to both a commercial environment and a DoD environment is support for ad hoc queries.  In the business world, speed of information aggregation, accuracy, currency of information, and breadth of information available to the user are as important factors as the speed with which a query is processed.  The semantics for a business are relatively constant and consistent, from a user’s perspective.  However, in the DoD, the most important factor for a business is that the user is prevented from accessing information for which they lack authorization. The factors affecting information discovery (and posting) are also significant for DoD principals; but the access control issue is crucial.  Addressing access control is crucial because DoD principals will make incorrect decisions about the data that they need unless access control is addressed so that an accurate portrayal of the data that is available and that is relevant to their queries is available to each principal.  One final factor that affects DoD query requirements is support for queries into data repositories that have different semantics.The access authorization issue can be resolved without risk of security compromise and provide a better view of available data by engineering and through the use of properly constructed registries that allow a search to be conducted without search-time inspection of the content of the data repositories.  The registries, when coupled with the requisite ontologies, provide the links to the location(s) of the desired information without providing the data or providing access to the data, as illustrated in Figure 1.  Additionally, and for the DoD principal an issue that is important, the use of registries lays the foundation for an approach to addressing the search and post challenges posed by the disadvantaged and the intermittently connected principal.Using the registry-based approach, data retrieval from a data repository consists of four major steps.  In the first step, the principal presents a query to the registry to determine the location of potentially relevant data.  In the second step, the registry returns the location of data relevant to the query to the principal.  In the third step, the principal uses the information provided by the registry to formulate the appropriate queries to access data repositories for the required data.  In the fourth step, the principal receives the data from the repositories.  In general, data access restrictions and authorization need only be considered when data retrieval is executed (in step 3), and not when the location of the data within a principal’s context is being determined.  Of course, when information is posted to a repository, all of the registries associated with the repository must be updated; but the update need only contain the fact of the existence of the new data value and not the actual data value.The registry-based approach does not require pre-authorization of the principal for access to every data repository where data and information that the principal might need could reside.  Instead, the approach that we propose only relies upon the minimal condition that any search term that a principal uses is a term that the principal is authorized to use and view because the data repository chose to make the term visible to all potential principals.  Because principals are authorized to use the term, all that needs to be done is to determine how to let the principal know where the data that is sought is located within the entire set of repositories that are relevant to the principal’s search without giving the principal direct access to the data.  The required information can be provided by the use of registry federations.Registry federations can be either ad hoc or permanent.  A permanent federation is a set of registries that is in high demand for data by principals.  For a permanent registry federation, registries subscribe to the federations and inform the federation of the type of data, relevant to the federation, that the registry can provide using metadata about the registry’s contents and the semantics for the repository that owns the registry.  Principals subscribe to the federations via the portal.  The registry federation provides the metadata describing the principal’s query semantics, metadata about the queries that the principal will post to the federation, and the semantics and the metadata and query for every “persistent” query (persistent queries are queries for data that the principal must receive whenever the data or metadata associated with the query changes.)  Ad hoc federations are similar to permanent federations, except that a portal forms an ad hoc federation in response to a specific query or a few queries that have unique or peculiar semantics; the federation processes the query in the same manner as a permanent federation and then disbands.  The registries in a federation should at least span all of the information that a principal might require from their repositories; therefore, a federation must be able to vary its registries dynamically based upon principal activity.  Within a federation, a given registry provides a semantically-oriented linkage between search terms and the relevant locations for the data within the repository from which the registry was derived.A registry federation, as illustrated in Figure 2, is the union of a number of registries, a union that hides the fact that multiple registries and repositories are in use and that the terms used in each registry have not been harmonized (or standardized) to a single set of semantics.  A registry can be considered to be a semantics translation device.  A registry is aware of its subscribers’ semantics, its repository’s semantics, and transforms queries and data postings from the semantics of a federation subscribed to a registry and vice-versa.  The registries modify and improve the queries and postings by attaching semantics to the transaction without interfering with the transaction (i.e., the transaction will still occur if one or more registries are unavailable.)A registry for a data repository is constructed using the semantics, terms, and the context that are inherent to the repository(s) that the registry is derived from and not any others, as illustrated in Figure 2.  When forming a registry, each repository registry manager determines the repository terms, context, syntax, and relationships in the registry that will be visible to all principals, and then places these items into the registry.  The registry is then populated using the designated terms and relationships using web crawler technology to extract the registry’s content.  In essence, instead of a web crawler moving from repository to repository cataloging the contents of each repository, page, and data item that the web crawler encounters, the repository has its own web crawler that operates in a restricted manner to identify the information that is allowed to be exposed and is needed by principals forFigure 1:  Notional Use of a Registry for Data Repository AccessFigure 2:  Relationship Between Principal, Registries, and Data Showing Registry Federationssearch operations.  The local web crawler makes possible the construction of the complex but secure registries that we require.  The identified information is exported to the registries that are coupled to the repository, according to the semantics of the registry and/or the semantics of the repository.  As a result, it is possible to locate data in the repositories using a wide variety of terms, the principal does not need to know the semantics of a data repository in order to determine if the desired data is held by the repository.  New data is available via the registries as soon as it is catalogued by the crawler into the appropriate indexes for the repository based upon the semantics of the repository and of the significant user-bases that the repository services via one or more federations.  Tagging can be performed on the data at any point in time, including before and after the data is placed into a repository or at any other time that is convenientTo relieve the principal of the burden of remembering the number and location of the registries, groupings of registries are formed into federations based upon commonalities in the semantics, context, information provisioning demands, ability to provide relevant content to a class of queries coupled with experience that indicates that the set of registries frequently is required in order to respond effectively to user queries.  Similarity assessments can be made based upon the similarity of the metadata that each registry must provide.  The federation presents a single interface, or portal, to the underlying registries within the federation for each principal.  A federation supports discovery of information by allowing a principal to search repositories by exploring the content of all of the registries in the federation using a single query that is formulated without regard for the semantics or context of the underlying registries or repositories.  One data construct that is crucial to our approach is the DoD MetaData Registry (MDR), which is the foundation for housing some or all of the metadata registries that are required.  The MDR is designed to store metadata, both the ontology and the semantics, which allows it to be used to host and help to assemble some or all of the metadata registries that may be required.  In fact, the DoD MDR can be exploited at three points in a query activity:  1) to determine how the principal’s search activity should be specified given the context of a given registry portal; 2) to determine how the search at a portal should be constructed so that the search is consistent; and 3) how a search should be executed at a registry so that the activity is consistent with the ontology and semantics of the underlying repository(s) for each registry in a federation.  The MDR is used at all phases of a query, including the principal’s interaction with the available portals (since each portal can have its own semantics), in order to insure that the proper syntax and semantics are applied at all stages of the query.The system that we propose operates as follows when supporting a human query.  The federating interface serves to interpret the query before it is dispatched.  The interpretation is accomplished using the ontologies and taxonomies in the registry federations associated with the user (by virtue of the user’s center of interest (COI), semantics of the query, the MetaData Registry (MDR), and prior query history) to determine which repositories can potentially be of use in addressing the query.  The interface transmutes the query from the user’s semantics to the semantics of each targeted repository and dispatches the query to each repository.  Once the response from each repository is formed, it is returned to the federating interface where the interface uses its resources to translate the query response from the repository’s semantics into the user’s semantics.  Once the transmutation has been accomplished, the federating interface then ranks the responses according to the semantics of the user’s query, thereby allowing the user to determine which responses to the query are the most important.  As illustrated in Figure 3, query processing consists of two distinct phases.  The first phase prepares the registries to respond to a query.  There are three major steps in this phase.  In the first step, labeled A in the figure, the repositories are examined using the metadata in the MDR and the guidance provided by each repository manager to extract the cataloging and indexing data in the repositories that will be used later using the “web crawlers”.  The second step, labeled B in the figure, uses the cataloguing and indexing information to form the metadata registries for each repository and to form the federations.  Multiple metadata registries can be formed from each repository; our goal is to form at least one metadata registry for each repository that expresses the semantics and data release options that are relevant to the repository.  The third step, labeled C in the figure, uses the metadata in each registry conjunction with metadata in the MDR to form meta-registries for the registries and the registry federations.The second phase, supporting query processing, can be decomposed into seven steps.  In step one, the query is presented to the portal, which takes the context and semantics and data from the MDR and the Meta-registry federation to determine the registry federations to be accessed, to formulate the queries for those federations, and to create any ad hoc registry federations that might be required.  In the second step, meta-metadata about the repositories is supplied to the portal so that the portal can form queries for the targeted registries that are semantically correct from both the principal and registries’ points of view.  The third step is to present the queries to the registry federations and to receive their response, which is a set of links to the desired data.  In step four, the portal presents the results, ranked by significance, to the principal.  The principal then determines which data is desired/required.  In step five, the portal dispatches the data access requests, using the repositories’ semantics and query format, along with access certificates to the target repositories.  In step six, the repository returns the data to the portal in repository format and semantics and the portal translates the response into principal semantics.  In step seven, the portal presents the rank-ordered results of the query to the principal.Figure 3:  Use of the MDR in Conjunction with a Registry FederationFor performance reasons, data will have to be replicated under some circumstances so that our approach will satisfy each principal’s performance requirements, always subject to the user’s possession of a proper clearance and need for the information.  While replication introduces data management challenges because of the difficulties posed when data or services change, these challenges can be addressed using registries to maintain a record of the location of the replicated data.  4.	Summary and Future WorkThe federated registry approach both exploits and advances the capabilities, technology, and philosophy called for in the DoD Net-Centric Services Strategy and the Global Information Grid (GIG) Architecture Federation Strategy.  We contend that the keys to successfully conducting a federated search in the information environment of the immediate future lie in the exploitation of two technologies: 1) registries used to catalogue the content of data repositories and 2) ontologies, derived from Center of Interest (COI) and Digital Data Management Standard (DDMS) semantics, that allow a principal to search the registries using terms that are meaningful and correct within the context of each registry and within each user’s context. Registries are the primary method used to locate information.  Registry federations are formed and disbanded as required in order to meet a principal’s needs.  The use of registries, their network location, and content are hidden from the principal, and from a principal’s point of view:  a search using registries cannot be differentiated from a traditional search by content of a single database.  Two key technical differences between current approaches to search, such as those employed by Google™, and the approach to search proposed in this paper are the challenges posed by registry updates and the need for broadly scoped, detailed metadata throughout the search space.  Typically, registry updates must be a pro-active process controlled by the repository administrator or the registry manager; web crawlers are used and controlled within a repository to locate and categorize data within the repository.  Our use of web crawlers is unlike that used by Google™, wherein the web crawler belongs to the search engine and the web crawler has to enter the repository in order to catalogue the repository contents.  In our approach, the data’s owner controls the crawler and the web crawler is a repository tool used by the repositories to push metadata information to the registries that are uniquely associated with the repository.  In our approach, the data’s owner determines data visibility and there can be multiple views into a repository, in the Google and other currently popular approaches the search engine and crawler determine data visibility and there is a single view into a repository.  Additionally, information push and search are both enabled and made increasingly accurate in our approach by the use of ontologies (and their taxonomies) within the registries; thereby allowing principals to conduct searches that are independent of the context of the registries that form the registry federation that is used to answer the query.  The broad scope of metadata associated with each repository registry insures that information pushed to the registry is stored and indexed appropriately and that when a registry is searched, the principal’s context for the search and the context for the registry are both correctly considered.Addressing the challenges posed by these technologies requires changing the semantics of the original search request into a request that is semantically equivalent within the context of each registry that services the request.  Insuring correct semantics can only be achieved by using, for each registry, an ontology and a taxonomy that is derived from and tied to the specific registry and its associated repository(s).  The key to insuring that the correct context and semantics are employed is the exploitation of the capabilities provided by the DoD Metadata Registry (MDR) for storage, retrieval, and reconciliation of the ontologies and taxonomies developed for each registry.  The existing MDR provides a framework within which a comprehensive ontology, taxonomy, and metadata suite that spans all of the registries can be housed.  When coupled with the data in the MDR, the registries allow a principal to search for data using terms that are semantically significant to the principal while also insuring that the search is conducted within each registry using a context that is semantically correct and significant for the registry.  Each repository can construct one or more registries and searching a registry yields the same results (pointers to data locations), as would a search of the actual repository itself.  There are a number of technical challenges that remain to be addressed.   The integration of the web crawler capability along with the semantic, ontologic, and release guidance needed to construct the registries and meta-registries will have to be accomplished.  One other legacy issue that must be addressed is that of data tagging.  There is a role to be played by information tagging.  For example, whenever the data is relatively static and has only one or a very few semantic interpretations, tagging data is a valuable adjunct to the approach presented here.  The approach here does not advocate the elimination of tagging, but augmentation of it.  The proper mix of tagging and registry federation guided operations will have to be determined by experimentation.  In our view, there are three additional technical activities that should be undertaken to advance the registry federation approach.  First, the search results obtained when using the MDR should be improved by insuring that all of the information required by the principal is retrieved while also insuring that minimal extraneous data is presented to the principal.  Second, experimentation to determine performance impact and performance gains that are achieved if the MDR is duplicated should be performed.  Third, the ontological and taxonomic content and formats for a robust, expandable, flexible, and adaptable future MDR should be developed.ReferencesStytz, M.R. and Banks, S.B.  “Considerations for Human Behavior Modeling Interoperability within Simulation Environments,” Proceedings of the Fall 2006 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 11-15 Sep, 2006, pp. 575-586.Banks, S.B.; Stytz, M.R.; Dompke, U; and Sutton, J,  “Experimentation within the NATO Virtual Institute for Human Behavior Representation: A Process to Enable Multi-National Cultural Research,” Proceedings of the Fall 2006 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 11-15 Sep, 2006, pp. 341-350.Stytz, M.R. and Banks, S.B. “Metrics for Assessing Command, Control, and Communications Capabilities,” 2006 11th International Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium: State of the Art, State of the Practice, 20-26 June, 2006, San Diego, CA.Stytz, M.R. and Banks, S.B. “Issues and Solutions for Command Post Simulations,” 2006 11th International Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium: State of the Art, State of the Practice, 20-26 June, 2006, San Diego, CA.Stytz, M.R. and Banks, S.B.   “Metrics for Assessing Command and Control Performance and Capabilities in Network Centric Warfare,” SimTecT 2006 Conference: Advancing Simulation Technology and Training, Melbourne, Australia, 29 May – 1 June 2006, pp. 195-200.Banks, S.B.; Stytz, M.R.; Dompke, U; and Sutton, J,  “Extending Multinational Cultural Experimentation Through Use of a Virtual Institute for Human Behavior Representation, “ SimTecT 2006 Conference: Advancing Simulation Technology and Training, Melbourne, Australia, 29 May – 1 June 2006, pp. 233-238.Banks, S.B. & Stytz, M.R. “Exploiting Command Post Team Simulations:  Challenges and Solutions,” SimTecT 2006 Conference: Advancing Simulation Technology and Training, Melbourne, Australia, 29 May – 1 June 2006, pp. 411-416.Stytz, M.R. & Banks, S.B.  “Metrics to Assess Command, Control, and Communications (C3) Performance within a Network-Centric Warfare Simulation,“ Proceedings of the SPIE Conference on Enabling Technologies for Simulation Science X, vol. 6227, 17-21 April, 2006, CD-ROM.Computer-Supported Cooperative WorkGustavson, Paul.  “White Board PDU for Exercise Management and Feedback,” 13th DIS Workshop on Standards for the Interoperability of Distributed Simulations, Orlando, FL,  pp. 475-482, 18 - 22 Sept 1995.Hagsand, O.  “Interactive Multiuser VEs in the DIVE System,” IEEE Multimedia, vol. 3, no. 1,  pp. 30-39,  March, 1996.Schneiderman, Ben.  Designing the User Interface.  Addison-Wesley:  Reading, Massachusetts.   1992.Stytz, Martin R.  “Distributed Virtual Environments,” IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 19 - 31, May, 1996.Stytz, Martin R.; Adams, Terry; Garcia, Brian; Sheasby, Steven M.; and Zurita, Brian.  1997.  “Developments in Rapid Prototyping and Software Architecture for Distributed Virtual Environments,” IEEE Software, vol. 12,  1997..Stytz, Martin R.; Banks, Sheila B.; Kesterman, James J.; Rohrer, Jimmie J.; and Vanderburgh, John C.  “The Information Pod: An interface for Immersed Control in a Virtual Environment,” Interfaces ‘97 - Man-Machine Interaction, Montpellier, France, 28 - 30 May 1997.Human Behavior ModelingBanks, S.B. and Stytz, M.R. (1999) “An Approach to Enhance Human Behavior Modeling for Computer-Generated Actors,” Proceedings of the 4th International SIMTECT Conference, Melbourne, Australia, 29 Mar – 1 Apr, pp. 199-204.Banks, S.B. and Stytz, M.R. (1999) “User Modeling for Distributed Virtual Environment Intelligent Agents,” SPIE 13th Annual International Symposium on Aerospace/Defense Sensing and Controls:  AeroSense ‘99, Modeling and Simulating Sensory Response for Real and Virtual Environments, vol. 3694, Orlando, FL, 4-9 April, pp. 118-127.Banks, S.B. and Stytz, M.R.  (2000) Assessment of Potential Modeling and Simulation Research Initiatives:  Realistic Modeling of Human Behavior, Office of Naval Research Technical Report, Orlando, FL: Calculated Insight.Banks, S.B. and Stytz, M.R.  (2000) “Advancing The State Of Human Behavior Representation For Modeling And Simulation:  Technologies And Techniques,” Proceedings of the 9th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation, pp. 87-100, Orlando, FL.Benjamin, P. and Graul, M. (2006) "A framework for adaptive modeling and ontology driven simulation (FAMOS)," SPIE AeroSense 2006, Enabling Technologies for Simulation Science, Kissimmee, FL, 17-21 April.Baxter, J.W. and Horn, G.S. (1999) “A Model for Co-ordination and Co-operation Between CGF Agents,” Proceedings of the 8th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representations, Orlando, FL, 11-13 May, pp. 101-111.Brown, S.; Santos, E. Jr.; and Banks, S.  (1998) “Utility Theory-Based User Models for Intelligent Interface Agents,” Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligent 1418:  Advances in Artificial Intelligent -- AI-98, 378-392, Springer-Verlag. Bradshaw, J. M. (1996). "KAoS: An Open Agent Architecture Supporting Reuse, Interoperability, and Extensibility." Knowledge Acquisition Workshop (KAW'96), Banff, Alberta, Canada.Bradshaw, J. M. (1997). Software Agents, AAAI Press/The MIT Press, Menlo Park.Calder, R. B., Smith, J. E., Courtemanche, A. J., Mar, J. M. F., and Ceranowcz, A. Z. (1993). "ModSAF Behavior Simulation and Control." The Third Conference on Computer-Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation, Orlando, Fla., pp. 347-356.Carley, K. M., and Prietula, M. J. (1994). "ACTS Theory: Extending the Model of Bounded Rationality." Computational Organization Theory, K. M. Carley and M. J. Prietula, eds., Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ.Carley, K. M., and Prietula, M. J. (1994). "Computational Organization Theory." Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ.Chandrasekaran, B., Josephson, J.R., and Benjamins, V.R.,  (1999) “What Are Ontologies, and Why Do We Need Them?,”  IEEE Intelligent Systems, pp. 20-26, January/February.Cisneros, J.E.; Karr, C.R.; McCauley-Bell, P.R.; and Rajput, S.  (1996) “Threat Analysis using Fuzzy Set Theory,” Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation,  Orlando, FL, 23-25 July, pp. 455-462.Dean, T. and Boddy, M.,  (1988) “An Analysis of Time-Dependent Planning,” Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 49-54, AAAI Press, Menlo Park, CA.Eggleston, R. G.; Young, M. J.; and McCreight, K. L.  (2000) “Distributed Cognition:  A New Type of Human Performance Model,” Proceedings of the 2000 AAAI Fall Symposium on Simulating Human Agents, AAAI Technical Report FS-00-03, pp. 8-14.Everett, J.O.; Bobrow, D.G.; Stolle, R.; Crouch, R.; de Paiva, V.; Condoravdi, C.; van den Berg, M.; & Polanyi, L. (2002) “Making Ontologies Work for Resolving Redundancies Across Documents,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 45, no. 2, February, pp. 55-60.Fogel, L.J. V; Porto, W.; and Owen, M.  (1996) “An Intelligently Interactive Non-Rule-Based Computer Generated Force,” Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation,  Orlando, FL, 23-25 July, pp. 265-271.Funge, J. (1999) “Cognitive Modeling for Computer Generated Forces,” Proceedings of the 8th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representations, Orlando, FL, 11-13 May, pp. 491-497.Gagnon, F.; Howells, P.B.; & Simon, E.  (1999) “On the Use of Frameworks for Real-Time Simulation Applications,” The Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, 12-17 Sep., pp. 483-487, September.Gonzalez, A.J. and Murillo, M. (1999) “Validation of Human Behavior Models,” The 1999 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL., Sept. 12-17, pp. 50-57.Gruber, T.R.  “A Translation Approach to Portable Ontology Specifications,” Knowledge Acquisition, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 199-220, 1993.Harmon, S.Y. and Youngblood, S.M. (1999) “Validation of Human Behavior Representations,” The 1999 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL., Sept. 12-17, pp. 277-284.Holsapple, C.W. & Joshi. K.D. (2002) “A Collaborative Approach to Ontology Design,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 45, no. 2, February, pp. 42-47.Hudlicka, E. and Billingsley, J. (1999) “Representing Behavior Moderators in Military Human Performance Models,” Proceedings of the 8th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representations, Orlando, FL, 11-13 May, pp. 423-433.Kim, H. (2002) “Predicting How Ontologies for the Semantic Web Will Evolve,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 45, no. 2, February, pp. 48-54.Laird, J.E.; Johnson, W.L.; Jones, R.M.; Koss, F.; Lehman, J.F.; Nielsen, P.E.; Rosenbloom, P.S.; Rubinoff, R.; Schwamb, K.; Tambe, M.; vanDyke, J.; vanLent, M.; and Wray, R.E. III.  (1995) “Simulated Intelligent Forces for Air:  The SOAR/IFOR Project 1995,” Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation, Orlando, FL, 9-11 May, pp. 27-36.LaVine, N.D.; Kehlet, R.; and Peters, S.D. (1999) “A Client-Server Approach to CGF Behavioral Representation,” Proceedings of the 8th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representations, Orlando, FL, 11-13 May, pp. 411-421.Louis, S. and Miles, C. (2006) "Learning to play like a human: case injected genetic algorithms for strategic computer gaming," SPIE AeroSense 2006, Modeling and Simulation for Military Applications, Kissimmee, FL, 17-21 April.Malak, M.  (1998) “A Software Component Framework for HLA Tools,” The Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, pp. 1079-1086, Orlando, FL.Mitchell, T.M. (1997) Machine Learning.  Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.Murray, G.; McIllroy, D.; and Stewart, S. (1999) “Representing the Human Component in Operational Analysis Simulation,” Proceedings of the 4th International SIMTECT Conference, Melbourne, Australia, 29 Mar – 1 Apr, pp. 265-270.Oh, J. (2006) "Evolutionary algorithms and multi-agent systems," SPIE AeroSense 2006, Modeling and Simulation for Military Applications, Kissimmee, FL, 17-21 April.Pew, R. & Mavor, A. (eds.) (1998) Modeling Human and Organizational Behavior: Application to Military Simulations, Washington, DC:  National Academy Press.Puckett, J.M.; Johnson, K.; and Wise, B. (1999) “Using Finite State Machines for Behavior Representation with Composable Object Models in NASM,” The 1999 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL., Sept. 12-17, pp. 208-212.Ritter, F.E., Nigel R. Shadbolt, N.R., Elliman, D., Young R., Gobet, F., & Baxter, G.D.  (1999)  Techniques for modelling human performance in synthetic environments: A supplementary review, Technical Report No. 62, ESRC Centre for Research in Development, Instruction and Training, Department of Psychology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.Rouse, W.B. and Boff, K. R. (2005) Organizational Simulation.  Wiley, Hoboken, N.J.Santos, E., Jr.; Shimony, S. E.; & Williams, E. M.  (1995) On a Distributed Anytime Architecture for Probabilistic Reasoning, Technical Report AFIT/EN/95-02, Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Air Force Institute of Technology.Shoham, Y. (1993). "Agent-oriented programming." Artificial Intelligence, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 51-92.Sierhuis, M., Clancey, W. J., Hoof, R. v., and Hoog, R. d. (2000). "Modeling and Simulating Human Activity." AAAI Fall Symposium on Simulating Human Agents, North Falmouth, MA, pp. 100-110.Stytz, M. R., Adams, T., Garcia, B., Sheasby, S. M., and Zurita, B. (1996) “Rapid Prototyping for Distributed Virtual Environments,” IEEE Software, vol. 14, No. 5, pp. 83-92, Sep-Oct.Stytz, M.R.; Banks, S.B.; and Santos, E. Jr.  (1996) “Requirements for Intelligent Aircraft Entities in Distributed Environments,” Proceedings of the 18th Interservice/Industry Training Systems and Education Conf., on CD-ROM, Orlando, FL.Stytz, M.R. and Banks, S.B. (1999) “Robust Computer Generated Actor Migration,” Proceedings of the 1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, Florida, 15-20 September, pp. 695-703.Stytz, M.R. and Banks, S.B.  (2000) “An XML-Based Approach to Actor State Migration for Computer Generated Actors,” Proceedings of the 2000 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, Florida, 17-22 September, pp. 29-39.Stytz, M.R. and Banks, S.B.  (2000) “Enabling Reasoning System Migration For Computer Generated Actors Using XML,” Proceedings of SimTecT 2000: Advancing Simulation Technology and Training, Sydney, Australia, 28 February – 2 March, pp. 115-122.Tambe, M., Johnson, W. L., Jones, R. M., Koss, F., Laird, J. E., Rosenbloom, P. S., and Schwamb, K. (1995). "Intelligent Agents for Interactive Simulation Environments." AAAI Magazine, (Spring '95), pp. 15-39.Valente, A., Russ, T., MacGregor, R., and Swartout, W., (1999)  “Building and (Re)Using an Ontology of Air Campaign Planning,” IEEE Intelligent Systems, pp. 27-36, January/February. A registry is a database that contains terms, the variety of contexts for the terms (expressed using ontologies, taxonomies, definitions, use cases, and definitions) and links for each term within its separate contexts, used to link words and phrases to their locations within a larger, possibly distributed, repository. An ontology is a data model that represents a set of concepts within a domain and the relationships between those concepts.  Ontologies are useful for information knowledge representation about a domain and its constituent parts. A unique number assigned to a bibliographic record at the Library of Congress. Ghenawat, S.; Gobioff, H.; and Leung, S. (2003) “The GOOGLE File System,” SOSP’03, October 19–22, 2003, Bolton Landing, New York,