Net-Centric  Information  Sharing  for  M&S David H BroylesSpace and Naval Warfare Systems Center Atlantic1 Innovation DriveHanahan, SC 29406(843) 218-4834	 david.h.broyles@navy.mil John S MooreNavy Modeling and Simulation Office1333 Isaac Hull Ave SEWashington, D.C 20376-5012(202) 781-1685	john.s.moore3@navy.milKeywords:XML, Net-Centricity, Interoperability ABSTRACT:  Building Modeling and Simulation (M&S) tools, whose data is visible and accessible because each piece of data is described in accordance with the DoD Discovery Metadata Specification (DDMS), is a goal necessary to meet the net-centric information sharing requirements of the global information grid (GIG).  DoD has been working on the fundamental standards required to start this transformation for years and has finally reached the "opening kickoff" to realizing the GIG environment.This effort began over a decade ago with the DoD Services creating a common set of descriptions for the fields in their M&S resource repositories/registries (MSRR).  What was then "just good database management" became the starting point for developing the M&S extension to the DDMS.  This extension is presented in detail by Roy Scrudder at this Workshop and is included here to present a complete picture.This paper reports on the status of enabling, per the DDMS, the initial set of tools and services which include the M&S Catalogs, the DoD Standards Vetting Tool (SVT), the DoD Verification, Validation and Accreditation Documentation Tool (VDT), the navy Capabilities and Requirements Tool (NCRT) and the M&S extension to the DDMS.  The specification extension is already approved.  The other tools and services - the focus for this paper - will be released in their initial configuration by the end of September 08. The M&S Catalog will serve as a registry during the transition and testing of new transitions, data types, metadata specification changes, etc.  Once ready, the approved metadata will transfer to DoD’s Metadata Registry (MDR).  By using precise metadata, “holdings” in centralized repositories are no longer required to allow accessibility.  By using DDMS compliant metadata, it does not matter where the “holdings” are physically located.  This will require users and suppliers of data to rethink how data is stored and retrieved and hopefully enable more efficient and effective methods than currently in use.This paper reports on the status of the initial tool/service developments that offer M&S consumers and producers the first look at how sophisticated resource discovery features, based on standardized Metadata, can work.  Following a brief history of the tools developed by the Communities and Services that comprise the M&S Steering Committee, we demonstrate why Metadata generation by indirect authoring is a critical target for efforts to provide M&S content discovery.1.  Introduction1.1  The Problem of DiscoveryOnline discovery of sources based solely on non-structured keywords far too often provides too many results, the majority of which are not even relevant to the users desired intention.  Discovery is defined as the “ability to locate data assets through a consistent and flexible search.”   With the typical keyword search, the user can refine the search but will still come up with diminishing relevant returns.  Keyword search engines return haystacks, when it’s the needles that are being requested.  The problem is the current web is missing an information structure.  This paper addresses the progress to date to standardize the set of Metadata used to describe resources in the Modeling and Simulation Resource Repositories (MSRR’s) and other applications, documents and databases.  [1] One cannot solve the problem of discovery by building a single database, which obviously would provide for very relevant query results.  Nor can discovery be solved with faster, more flexible search engines; Google can search the equivalent of 70 miles of stacked documents in 0.5 seconds.  [2] The solution must provide accurate, useable results.  This requires that we implement the semantic web and overcome our decades old lack of accepted terminology for describing M&S data.1.2 Extensible Markup Language (XML) vs. HTMLSo what makes XML any better than a web page?  Metadata can and has existed as HTML tags from the beginning of the web.  The HTML code snippet below will find, such as the code snippet below to represent the keyword “Document Title”:<meta name="KEYWORDS" meta name/> content= "Document  Title, 07/0708,Security, MSName, SponsorOrProgramManager    Title,ProgramIdentification, Preparer, DistributionStatement <title>Document Title Page</title>HTML keywords do expose information for search and will therefore provide results.  However XML establishes order and provides structured information which produces better, more relevant results.  Additionally, the generation of standardized reports is possible across disparate systems eliminating the dependence on a single database.  . SHAPE  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1:  XML Representation of Document TitleFigure 1 shows the XML structure developed for the same keyword (“Document Title Page”) provided in the HTML example.  Both methods will provide search results, only the XML structure can provide context and break through the keyword search limitation.1.3  The Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Extension to the DoD Discovery Metadata Specification (DDMS)Development of a metadata specification extension to the DoD Discovery Metadata Specification (DDMS) to describe M&S data is the “first and longest pole” in the net-centric journey.  This is the foundation for the “card catalog” (registry) of M&S assets made available via the Global Information Grid (GIG).  The M&S extension to the DDMS, because of the data field definitions the users are developing, enables inferences to be drawn regarding potential model reuse and federation.The discovery metadata specification extension defines the elements used to describe M&S resources and data posted to community and organizational shared spaces. [2] 2.0  The M&S Information EnvironmentThe Navy Modeling and Simulation Office (NMSO) has been implementing the necessary steps for effective M&S resource discovery for the past six years by developing the framework for the M&S Information Environment (MSIE).  The driver for the MSIE came from the DoD Net-Centric Data Strategy as six broad goals:Visible – Is an information resource discoverable by most users?Accessible- Is it available on the network, and are tools readily available to use it?Understandable – Can it be intelligibly used?  Are the semantics well documented?Trusted – Is the source, accuracy and currency of he data available to users?Interoperable – Can it be combined or compared with other information?  Can it be mediated?Responsive – Is the data what users need?  Are robust user feedback mechanisms in place to improve it?This effort, done in conjunction with the other Services, created the initial versions of the discovery metadata, VV&A Documentation Tool, Standards Vetting Tool, and Capabilities & Requirements Tool.2.1 DoD M&S Management ToolsThe Discovery Metadata Specification work has occurred in parallel with the development of some M&S tools and services that rely upon the specification.  These tools contribute metadata to the M&S Catalog and are:  the VV&A Documentation Tool (VDT), the M&S Standards Vetting Tool (SVT), and the Navy’s Capabilities & Requirements Tool (NCRT).  The VDT is the first tool for VV&A to be built using the M&S schema extension and was the basis for the MILSTD 3022 .  Discoverable metadata is generated as a by-product from users performing tasks under assistance of the M&S tools.  Discovery Metadata is focused on tagging data so the resource is clearly marked and defined.  Structural Metadata is focused on describing the framework and organization of information (the internal aspects).  The current M&S specification is focused on defining Discovery Metadata.The Navy Capabilities & Requirements Tool (NCRT)The Navy M&S Communities identified the need for an M&S Capabilities & Requirements Tool (CRT) to help gather and prioritize their M&S requirements and capabilities.  The Navy M&S Governance Board (GB) Charter requires the prioritization of requirements to guide the budget proposals submitted to the Navy Modeling and Simulation Office (NMSO).   The CRT executes a sequential process to collect and prioritize Navy M&S communities’ requirements, identify which are common and cross-cutting (C&CC), and then produce a list of desired capabilities or projects based on the requirements.  The selected steps listed provide valuable information regarding current needs of the Navy M&S communities and capabilities which are desired to meet these needs:Navy M&S Governance Board (GB) Reviews Current Year's BudgetEach Community Produces Prioritized M&S RequirementsCommunities Identify Common & Cross-Cutting NeedsEach Community Collects and Prioritizes Projects Aimed at C&CC SolutionsCommunities and NMSO Prepare Recommended Projects ListThroughout this process information artifacts are being captured in M&S specification compliant XML.  Naval M&S requirements resident in the NCRT are available for searching and possible reuse in the M&S Catalog and in any future M&S specification compliant tools such as the VDT. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2: Navy Capability Requirements Tool (NCRT) - Requirement Info PageThe DoD VV&A Documentation Tool (VDT)The DoD VDT executes services to generate a core set of VV&A documents:  Accreditation Plan, Verification and Validation (V&V) Plan, V&V Report, and  Accreditation Report, as standardized in Military Standard (MIL-STD) 3022 [4] The VDT was developed as an XML application, meaning that it processes and manipulates data using XML.  The other tools mentioned in this paper are web applications, which produce data and metadata in XML format.  The distinction being that in a true XML application the presentation layer is separate from the underlying data structure.  This is illustrated in figure 3, which shows the MIL-STD 3022 template loaded within MS Word as XML.  The content is stored in XML with MS Word being used as the interface. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3:  VDT Offline InterfaceThe VDT assists the producer by extracting and publishing discovery metadata to the GIG.  As presented in 08S-SIW-003 the discovery metadata initially describes the conduct of a VV&A documentation effort (project-level metadata) and later describes specific VV&A documents (document-level metadata). Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 4:  VV&A XML Generation FlowFigure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 5:  Standards Vetting Tool Welcome ScreenThe DoD Standards Vetting ToolTo be released September 2008 the SVT replaces each of the Service’s unique M&S standards tools that support their standards vetting and management processes.  Each Service merged their respective requirements and functions into a cohesive environment and information system that can be utilized by all the Services and DoD.  The SVT data will be discoverable via the GIG’s MDR.3.0  M&S CatalogThe M&S Catalog is being developed to facilitate discovery of sharable resources by implementing publish and subscribe services for M&S metadata across DoD’s networks.  The M&S Catalog uses XML to represent, store, retrieve and interoperate metadata in a distributed environment.  This environment includes a metadata cataloger and a familiar search engine appliance.  Earlier in this paper, the limitation of keyword based search engines like Google, Yahoo, etc. was pointed out.  In this new capability, the benefits of search engine flexibility, speed and indexing are coupled with the specificity of discovery metadata.  This provides fast and accurate search results.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 6 M&S Catalog Conceptual Architecture4.0  M&S Catalog Use Cases This paper identifies three use cases that address basic user profiles.  These are the analyst, experimenter, test & evaluation personnel and trainer.  This list is in no way exhaustive, but does provide some general guidance on how the M&S Catalog is expected to be used.Use Case 1:  An experimenter wants to find M&S assets for a particular purpose.   "Asset" is to be interpreted broadly, and could be a particular model, simulation, dataset, organization, POC, etc.  The goal of the experimenter is to perform detailed concept analysis within a particular context Use Case 2:  A budget analyst may need information about M&S assets in financial context to accomplish things such as reduce technical risk and program cost;  Use Case 3:  A trainer may require a simulation infrastructure that supports a large number of simulated entities, including multiple aspects of each (e.g., physical movement through a simulated environment. To accomplish this, the trainer must be able to search for those elements which are compatible or interoperable to that infrastructure.Use Case 4: A tester may want to find What V&V has been accomplished, or is planned, to establish model credibility? 5.0  ConclusionsBuilding the cited M&S tools with the underlying definition and structure of the M&S specification allows not only benefits for the end user, but also creates cost savings for the development of the tools.  Immediate benefits of reuse were realized with the development of the VDT using the M&S specification.  Defining the document security schema for the VDT was accomplished by pointing to an existing security extension to the DDMS; a separate tool specific table to define security was not required to be built as the underlying schema pointed to the existing DDMS security schema.The examples cited and approach taken belies the underlying specification structure, which has improved the software development lifecycle by using existing schema extensions and taking advantage of the reuse benefit of a standardized means of describing M&S resources.This work is just the very beginning of reaching our net-centric information sharing and interoperability goals.  Obviously there are many more sets of data from tools, users, and providers that need to be transitioned.  Probably even more important, is for Communities to build their DDMS complaint specifications so all their non-M&S information stays out of the M&S specification and in their specification where it belongs.  The last thing the M&S discipline needs is to be seen as manipulating their information!!Beyond that, Navy and others are actively working on the metadata specification for structural data – what we call phase two.  Finally, the third big step towards automated interoperability is well underway at our research oriented academic institutions – making applications/software into collections of modules that can be changed faster than one changes their shoes.  We call that phase three and we look forward to seeing you as we get there.6.0  References[1]	Department of Defense.  Department of Defense Directive 8320.02, Data Sharing in a Net-Centric Department of Defense, April 2007.[2]	Cooper, K. (2000, September 5).  Internet at school is changing work of students and teachers.  The Washington Post, p. A2.[3]	Curtis Blais, “Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) Documentation Schema Design,” Technical Report, Naval Postgraduate School, 31 July 2008.[4]	Department of Defense: MIL-STD-3022, Department of Defense Standard Practice Modeling and Simulation Verification, Validation, and Accreditation Documentation Templates, January 2008.[5]	Standardized Documentation for Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (08S-SIW-003), Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization, Spring 2008[6]	Department of Defense: M&S Community of Interest (COI) Discovery Metadata Specification (MSC-DMS), Version 1.0.1, January 2008.7.0  Author BiographiesDAVID H BROYLES Is a Scientist at SPAWAR Systems Center Charleston and supports the Navy Modeling and Simulation Office. JOHN S MOOREIs Director of the Navy Modeling and Simulation Office (NMSO).  He is a graduate of the U.S Naval Academy and has served on the USS Simon Bolivar (SSBN 641), USS James Madison (SSBN 627), USS Omaha (SSN 692), USS McKee (AS-41), was in SPAWAR 30 1989-94 and has been with the Navy M&S Office since 1996 under OPNAV N6, N61, N60, N6/7 and ASN(RDA) Chief System Engineer.  http://metadata.dod.mil/mdr/irs/DDMS/ http://dodssp.daps.dla.mil/assist-update/15-feb-2008.pdfI do not get this section.  The use cases seem to be all Acquisition and it is not obvious what they are trying to tell me