DOD Instructions 8500.2 RTI Information Assurance (IA) RequirementsScott HolbenAccenture (Gestalt now part of Accenture)9432 Baymeadows Road Suite 155Jacksonville, FL 32256904-625-2260scott.holben@accenture.comKeywords: IA, FISMA, DIS, HLA, TENAABSTRACT It is acknowledged by the DOD SISO community that current Runtime Infrastructure (RTI) standards will require formal specification to ensure integrated application and enclave perimeter security. This specification will facilitate FISMA compliance and also satisfy DOD acquisition JCIDS/5000 net-centric requirements.  DODI 8500.2 “Information Assurance Implementation” defines 109 IA controls (also called security countermeasures or safeguards) associated with classified Mission Assurance Category III systems. This scope and complexity will overwhelm many systems engineers and software developers new to the DOD IA disciplines. This paper identifies those IA controls that will impact existing legacy simulation applications to facilitate the development of requirements of future security conscious RTIs. The goal is to facilitate the establishment of requirements for Common Criteria RTI security profile(s) that will be adopted internationally. (This paper assumes familiarity with SISO paper 07F-SIW-25,”The Emerging DOD Distributed M&S FISMA Security Wall.”) About Accenture Defense Accenture’s Defense group provides leading services and methodologies that help Department of Defense, Intelligence Agencies and Federal Agency clients achieve high performance in support of the warfighter. The addition of mission services to Accenture’s consulting, technology and outsourcing offerings means that clients can meet future goals, mitigate risk and realize cost savings. Visit www.accenture.com/defense for more information..1. IntroductionSISO paper 07F-SIW-025 (Fall 2007 SISO Conference) identified the significant distributed M&S framework security capability gaps that emerged when the Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 (also called FISMA or Public Law 107-347) is applied to US Government information systems providing distributed constructive, virtual or live simulation capabilities. Any updated or new RTI standard intended for US federal government consumption must explicitly address and provide security services. These security services should adequately address the confidentiality, integrity (includes authenticity and non-repudiation), availability and information security concerns to reduce overall capital expenditures required by any federal agency to achieve FISMA compliance. Each federal agency can develop its own set of Information Assurance (IA) policies to satisfy FISMA statutory and Office of Management and Budget’s (OMB) Circular Number A-130 Appendix III regulatory law using NIST guidance. The Department of Defense designed key 8500 IA series directives, instructions and manuals to ensure FISMA compliance for both classified and unclassified systems.With the assistance of information technology acquisition loops (Observe, Orient, Decide, Act - OODA) , DOD enterprise and component Chief Information Officers (CIO) will eventually take a bigger picture view to ensure FISMA-compliant RTIs are developed. This is because the CIOs are held accountable for controlling both IT expenditures and implementing IA policies. DOD Instruction (DODI) 8500.2 “Information Assurance Implementation,” established by the Assistant Secretary of Defense for the Networks Information Integration CIO (ASD(NII)/DOD CIO), lists the minimum set of IA controls that must be addressed to acquire and operate information systems.[1] This set of controls is determined by an information system’s assigned confidentiality level (i.e., classified, sensitive, public) and the Mission Assurance Category (i.e., MAC I, MAC II and MAC III) necessary for the system to be deployed in the targeted operational environment(s). The MAC level characterizes the system’s integrity and availability requirements. The preponderance of Air Force and Navy distributed M&S simulations operate within classified MAC III environments. Hence, this paper will address the set of DODI 8500.2 IA controls that apply to the development of simulation applications.The purpose of this paper is to illustrate a means to reduce the number DODI 8500.2 IA controls that must be considered as drivers for the security requirements in the design of distributed M&S applications. This approach will also be helpful in developing requirements for emergent IA-enabled RTI frameworks. The catch is that it will take years to systems engineer, architect, design, integrate, test, certify and accredit a reusable RTI with inheritable IA capabilities that can be leveraged by simulation application components. In the meantime, many existing legacy applications whose Authorizations to Operate (ATO) or Interim Authorizations to Operate (IATO) are about to expire must be transitioned to support IA compliance using DODI 8510.01 the “DOD Information Assurance Certification and Accreditation Process” (DIACAP) which took effect on November 28th, 2007. [2] This requires a short-term plan for instituting DIACAP IA controls to achieve compliance with FISMA law. DODI 8510.01 recently replaced the “Interim DOD DIACAP Guidance” that superseded the older DOD Information Technology Security Certification and Accreditation Process (DITSCAP) on July 6th, 2006. Both the new DIACAP and the superseded Interim DIACAP establish guidance for transitioning from the obsolete DITSCAP process to the newer DIACAP process. The DIACAP is considered FISMA compliant while the DITSCAP is not. This paper digs a little deeper to facilitate this transformation concerning IT security.  The information herein is meant to complement that provided by the Defense Acquisition University (DAU), not replace it, through the provision of substantial technical detail that can facilitate compliant software development.The focus of this paper is on defining how to get a legacy DOD distributed M&S software-based application through a DIACAP “type accreditation” process from a software developer contractor’s perspective. The objective is to allow the application’s deployment within multiple operational classified MAC III enclaves without requiring the application’s reaccreditation at each individual site to which it will be deployed. It is assumed that contractor development of the unclassified code will continue  in the contractor’s own computing environment. The application developed by the contractor will be deployed on operational classified customer enclave equipment, with each enclave having a valid DIACAP “system accreditation.” These classified enclaves are both owned and managed by the DOD customer. This author further assumes that it is the DOD customer’s responsibility to interconnect the enclaves as required to enable the application to fulfill the distributed simulation’s business needs. Finally, this author assumes the reader is familiar with the DODI 8500.2, or has access to the DIACAP Knowledge Service Portal, in order to be able to answer emergent questions concerning specific details of the individual IA controls. Due to size limitations for this paper, it is impossible to provide a comprehensive discussion of the IA controls. This paper instead focuses on creating an approach to facilitate the process for developing a DIACAP Implementation Plan (DIP), without getting lost in the details of the IA problem space. As cost figures accumulate for accrediting individual distributed M&S software applications, CIO portfolio management OODA loops will facilitate the process of establishing a sound business case for developing an IA-enabled RTI standard. The objective driving the development of a secure IA-enabled RTI is the expected DIACAP application accreditation costs savings and the corresponding DIACAP accreditation schedule savings.2. The Hidden Marriage of the ISSE and DIACAP Processes for IA-enabled IT If systems are mission-critical or mission-essential, DODI 5000.2 requires them to be officially designated as such. [3] A mission-critical system meets the definitions of “information system” and "national security system" in the Clinger-Cohen Act, the loss of which would cause the stoppage of warfighter operations or direct mission-support of warfighter operations. A mission-essential system meets the definition of “information system” in the Clinger-Cohen Act, that the acquiring component head or designee determines is basic and necessary for the accomplishment of the organizational mission. An information system that is neither mission-critical nor mission-essential is designated as mission-support.Complex IT systems that were accredited with the obsolete DITSCAP Process or are using the newer DIACAP Process are likely to share one very important common point for systems designated as mission-critical or mission-essential. That is, the National Security Agency’s (NSA) approved Information System Security Engineering (ISSE) process either was employed or will be initiated before Milestone B to help ensure the integrated DODAF architecture meets regulatory IA requirements. Also, it is likely that NSA personnel were utilized to execute the ISSE process for systems or applications designated as mission-critical or mission-essential. The ISSE process is the key for establishing a lower-risk DIACAP implementation plan for IA-enabled IT.Unfortunately, DODI 8580.1 “Information Assurance in the Defense Acquisition System” only requires systems designated as mission-critical or mission-essential to develop an “Acquisition IA Strategy”.[4] This means that those systems designated as mission-support which are IA-enabled IT (or major applications, in OMB Circular A-130 parlance) might unknowingly skip the ISSE process that the “Acquisition IA Strategy” would typically trigger.    The ISSE process is documented within the NSA’s Information Assurance Technical Framework (IATF) Release 3.1. [5] This process, as defined by the IATF, is used to implement the Defense-In-Depth, which is a DOD Directive 8500.01 requirement. [6] Defense-In-Depth is the DOD approach for ensuring an “adequate IA posture” is built into operational IT/NSS systems through: 1) integration of technologies, people and operations, 2) layering of IA solutions within and among IA assets, and 3) selection of IA solutions based on their relative level of robustness. To easily learn more about Defense-In-Depth, visit  HYPERLINK "http://www.nsa.gov/snac/support/defenseindepth.pdf" http://www.nsa.gov/snac/support/defenseindepth.pdf.The overall ISSE process is comprised of six activities which fundamentally mirror the substantial elements of the systems engineering waterfall process, including five feed-forward activities or phases: 1) “Discover Needs” 2) “Define System Requirements” 3) “Design System Architecture” 4) “Develop Detailed Design” and 5) “Implement System.” These are coupled with an additional activity called “Assess Effectiveness,” all of which together form a set of general purpose feedback loops. The ISSE process is closely coupled with traditional systems engineering and is performed by ISSE Practitioners (ISSEP). The execution of the ISSE process does not have to be the sole responsibility of NSA personnel if IA professionals have appropriate IA training certifications. This point is especially true for mission-support systems. In the past, the NSA has offered ISSEP training courses.Currently, the DODI 8570.01-M “Information Assurance Workforce Improvement Program” defines IA credentials required by IA professional roles but does not provide explicit guidance for minimum ISSEP certification requirements. [7] However, it is likely that ISO/IEC 17024 accredited organizations such as the International Information Systems Security Certification Consortium (ISC)2 Certified Information Systems Security Professional - Information System Security Engineering (CISSP-ISSEP) credentials will become relevant in the ISSEP certification process. The person (or persons) fulfilling the CISSP-ISSEP role must be familiar with the IA guidance from many federal agencies defined by NIST for unclassified systems, not just DOD and NSA guidance. Unfortunately, the current edition of the CISSP-ISSEP Core Book of Knowledge (CBK) is somewhat inadequate for DOD simulation communities involved with DIACAP application certification efforts. What is sorely needed by the various distributed M&S communities is a set of lists defining how the DODI 8500.2 IA controls that the ISSE process will begin to address during its six activities: 1) “Discover Information Protection Needs”, 2) “Define System Security Requirements”, 3) “Design System Security Architecture”, 4) “Develop Detailed Security Design”, 5) “Implement Security System” and 6) “Assess Information Protection Effectiveness.” This paper adopts the very common systems engineering technique of establishing traceability to elemental requirements. This traceability can be used to identify and partially metric, in terms of IA control requirements, the value provided by the ISSE process. This information will be extremely useful for both software application systems engineers and program managers. Starting in Section 4.0, this paper takes a “DODI 8500.2 IA control mapping exercise to the ISSE Process” one step further by assuming that a legacy application must be DIACAP accredited for use within an operational classified MAC III environment. This is a real-world scenario not directly addressed by the ISSE process literature examples. That is, the ISSE literature examples this author has discovered all assume a clean sheet design that starts from the very beginning of the application’s System Development Life Cycle (SDLC).This information will be extremely valuable for program managers pursuing DIACAP accreditation efforts that have hit the wall for developing the DIACAP Implementation Plan (DIP). The DIP is defined within the DIACAP, DODI 8510.01. However, for simulation application purposes, it is essentially the schedule for achieving the overall system’s set of IA controls - resulting from DODI 8500.2 business rules and any extra IA controls required by the sponsoring DOD component.Program managers will have hit the “DIACAP Wall for the DIP” when their schedule for developing the DIP slips significantly, and they realize the team they are managing has never heard of the ISSE process before. The DIACAP Wall for the DIP can also be reached when the DIP is posted with little traceability to ISSE work products; the schedule begins to slip drastically because too many ISSE steps were skipped. According to the DIACAP, the application’s Program or System Manager (PM/SM) is ultimately responsible for ensuring ISSE is employed to implement or modify the IA component of the system architecture and develop, track, resolve and implement the DIP. The DIP for a system should also be used to explicitly document: 1) IA controls that will be inherited from other systems, 2) IA controls that are not applicable because the associated threats are nonexistent, and 3) IA controls that are cost prohibitive for the system to implement. For clean sheet design efforts, the ISSE process should be primarily executed across the JCIDS/5000 “Technology Develop” Phase and the “System Development and Demonstration” Phase. Once the fourth ISSE Process phase, “Develop Detailed Design,” is finished, the DIP can be defined and executed after JCIDS/5000 Milestone B with manageable program cost, schedule and/or performance risk(s). A system’s un-graded DIACAP Scorecard should be established by the DIACAP Team from the System’s Engineering (SE) and ISSEP work products, for example: Information Management Model (IMM), Information Protection Plan (IPP), Information Management Plan (IMP), System Security Context, System Security Requirements and Preliminary System Security CONOPS. The CISSP-ISSEP CBK describes these work products and the IATF Release 3.1 Appendix H contains substantial details about the IMM and IPP products. The SE is ultimately responsible for the IMM and the ISSEP is responsible for the remaining work products listed above. To develop these work products, the SE and ISSEP will solicit the help of personnel fulfilling the following roles: User Representative (UR), Technical Architect (TA), Information System or application Owner (ISO), Information Assurance Manager (IAM) and Information Assurance Officer (IAO). The UR represents the operational interest of the user community and the security interests of the system’s data owner(s). According to NIST Special Publication 800-37, “Guide for the Security Certification and Accreditation of Federal Information Systems,” the ISO is “responsible for the overall procurement, development, integration, modification, or operation and maintenance of an information system.” [8] For the US Air Force, excluding all space and SAP/SAR program efforts, the program component’s system DAA will assume the ISO role once the program relinquishes its DAA responsibilities to the Air Force Network Operations Cyber Command (AFNETOPS/CC) DAA. The IAM is what was traditionally known as the Information System Security Manager (ISSM) and the IAO the Information System Security Officer (ISSO) defined in the National Industrial Security Program and Operating Manual (NISPOM). [9] Precise responsibilities of the IAM and IAO are defined in the DOD 8500 series. The ISO role, as defined by NIST SP 800-37 and the Air Force’s “IT Lean Reengineering and SISSU Process Guidebook,” appears to be the same or very similar to the IAM/ISSM role mentioned above. [10]A minimal DIACAP team is comprised of the Designated Approval Authority (DAA), Certifying Authority (CA) plus the UR, PM, IAM and IAO. The CA assigns grades to the IA controls listed in the DIACAP Scorecard for the system or application under consideration. The first DIACAP certification effort for a system or software application takes place after Milestone B and before the completion of Milestone C. A neutral operational testing agency which is U.S.C. Title 10 compliant will provide technical testing results to the CA. If the certification effort is successful, the CA will not assign any Category I findings (security vulnerabilities that may manifest) to the individual IA controls listed on the DIACAP Scorecard. The DAA will sign the ATO, IATO or an Interim Authority to Test (IATT). According to the DIACAP, “the accreditation decision is communicated via the DIACAP Scorecard and accompanying IT Security Plan of Action and Milestones (POA&M), if required.” The ATO, IATO and IATT authorizations indicate that the DAA is willing to accept the risks associated with the IT/NSS system or application operating in its intended operational environment. The DIACAP ATO is good for three years. The IATO and IATT are suboptimal authorizations because additional time or operating constraints are added to the system, when it operates with a Category II finding. An IATO lasts no longer than 180 days and requires the ISO to create and submit a POA&M. The POA&M is a schedule identifying the resources needed to rectify all Category II findings and, potentially, Category III security shortcomings if sufficient funds are available. The POA&M is also very likely to be a classified document because it identifies IT system weaknesses. Advertising system vulnerabilities will increase the odds of the system being successfully attacked. The POA&M satisfies the FISMA requirement to define planned remedial actions to address IA deficiencies. For systems, the PM is held accountable for the development of the system-level POA&M. The ISO creates the system-level POA&M and the PM and IAM execute the remedial actions and update the system-level PO&AM status. The DAA and DAA Representative monitor the status of this system-level POA&M. It should be obvious that the content of a POA&M must be configuration controlled information to satisfy annual FISMA reporting requirements. If a system or application does not obtain its ATO before the expiration of the second IATO, the system is effectively decommissioned with the issuance of a Deny Authorization to Operate (DATO) unless the component CIO becomes directly involved with the accreditation effort.  The Air Force has taken this one step further by requiring the approval of the functional CIO before a system can be operationally deployed with any CAT I findings. 3. Prior to the JCIDS Initial Capabilities Document (ICD)Three very important system attributes must be assigned very early in the acquisition lifecycle to facilitate IA requirements development, certification and accreditation efforts. These three system attributes are: 1) its classification (i.e., classified, sensitive, public), 2) its Mission Assurance Category (i.e., MAC I, MAC II, MAC III), and 3) its designation as “mission-critical,” “mission-essential,” or “mission-support.”The definitions for the classification and mission assurance category system attributes were addressed in SISO paper 07F-SIW-025. The MAC rating of a system is significant in that it will drive who is to fulfill the role of IA signatory for the Air Force. The Air Force has introduced the concept of an Authorization to Connect (ATC) and an Interim Authorization to Connect (IATC). These accreditations complement the ATO and IATO accreditations for system to operate in a standalone mode.  The implication is that the Air Force assumes a system’s ATO is equivalent to a “stand-alone accreditation” which is meant for a self-contained (not distributed) location operation. The ATC/IATC accreditation allows a system or application to be connected to the Air Force’s portion of Global Information Grid (GIG) when system or application operates. The distinction between the ATO and ATC may be traceable to Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instructions 6211.02B “Defense Information System Network: Policy, Responsibilities and Processes” and the NIST Special Publication 800-47 “Security Guide for Interconnecting Information Technology Systems.” [11] The Air Force ATC signatories are as follows: AFNETOPS/CC or CV for MAC I systems, AFCA/CC or CV for MAC II systems, and AFCA/EV or Deputy for MAC III systems. [10] According to DODI 8500.2, paragraph E3.4.2, the information owner must establish the classification, mission assurance category, sensitivity, need-to-know requirements for information and information systems as early as possible in the IT acquisition lifecycle. Using the specification of a system’s classification and MAC, it is possible to determine the set of IA controls that must be addressed by the system using the NSA-defined ISSE process.  The Air Force’s “IT Lean Reengineering and SISSU Process Guidebook” indicates that the ISO is responsible for establishing the system’s classification and MAC. This will require the ISO to hold discussions and negotiate the system’s classification and mission assurance category needs with the information owner(s). It is not clear if a MOA (Memorandum of Agreement) will need to be established documenting the agreement(s) between the ISO and the one or more information owners, or if the ISO and user representative(s) will negotiate, with the UR acting on behalf of the information owner(s).DODI 5000.2 requires systems to be designated as mission-critical or mission-essential. The designation of systems being mission-critical or mission-essential will be made by a component head, a combatant commander, or their designee. It is worth noting that an application used by different components may have different system mission designations. For example, a COCOM commander might designate a simulation as being mission-support while a JFCOM training component head might designate the application as being mission-essential. As noted earlier, according to DODI 8580.1, mission-support systems do not require an Acquisition IA Strategy. The following identifies how the designation of systems as mission-critical, mission-essential or mission-support will impact the system’s IA requirements for MAC III rated systems. In theory, systems designated as mission-critical, mission-essential or mission-support should not impact system IA requirements. However, this is not precisely accurate upon a thorough examination security classification guidelines or the DIACAP Knowledge Service, see  HYPERLINK "https://diacap.iaportal.navy.mil/" https://diacap.iaportal.navy.mil/.Mission-critical MAC III systems will be required to support Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) identification and authorization requirements, specifically IA control IATS-1. Additionally, mission-critical MAC III systems are not likely to receive DAA approval of the use of public domain software, see IA control DCPD-1. Finally, both mission-critical and mission-essential systems require the protection of backup and restoration of assets, see DODI 8500.2 IA control COBR-1.4. Identifying the IA Controls That Are Not ApplicableAccording to Table I, the system development process for a classified MAC III system needs to address 109 IA controls. These IA controls will be implemented with a combination of management, operational and technical resources using Defense-in-Depth to establish an adequate IA posture and to share risks within a net-centric environment. Table 1The 109 IA controls are listed in DODI 8500.2 Attachments 3 and 4 of Enclosure 4 on pages 76 through 92. A detailed examination of the IA controls on pages 79 and 80 of Attachment 3 reveals that IA controls DCSS-1, IAKM-1, ECAT-1 and ECCD-1 are overshadowed by the more robust IA controls DCSS-2, IAKM-3, ECAT-2 and ECCD-2 in Attachment 4 on pages 85 through 88. Per DODI 8500.2 guidance, the more robust set of IA controls in Attachment 4 will trump the first set of four in Attachment 3. After this first culling, the set of 105 (109 - 4) IA controls is consistent with the information provided in the DIACAP Knowledge Service that contains a set of 105 baseline IA controls that must be addressed by the IT system.  In summary, the number of IA controls might be slightly less then what the Table 1 indicates due to IA control precedence rules.To make the accreditation process realizable, it is necessary to identify other “low hanging” IA controls that can be legitimately discarded early in the acquisition lifecycle because the threats associated with them are essentially non-existent. For example, a number of vulnerabilities are specific to particular information technology service types. If an application’s implementation never utilizes those service types, the IT risks associated with the services will never materialize. In risk management parlance, this approach to IA is called “risk avoidance.”  The following IA controls can be associated with risk avoidance options:If the acquisition or outsourcing of dedicated IT services is not required by the application, there will be no need to support DCDS-1 (pg. 76) “Dedicated IA Services.”If the application does not support mobile code, DCMC-1 (pg. 78) “Mobile Code” will not apply to the application.  According to the National IA Glossary, mobile code is the “software modules obtained from remote systems, transferred across a network, and then downloaded and executed on local systems without explicit installation or execution by the recipient.” [12] Examples of mobile code include: ActiveX controls, shockwave movies, JavaScript, VBScript downloaded via URL or email attachments, binary executables, Java applets, Postscript, PDF, flash animations, etc. Many Web-enabled application use mobile code; hence, it may be difficult to take a risk avoidance stance for avoiding the need for this IA control. DOD Instruction 8552.01 is the official Mobile Code policy. [13] It identifies categories of mobile code, rules for which mobile codes are allowed, and assigns particular mobile code technologies to specific mobile code categories. “Prohibited mobile code includes all Category 1X mobile code, unsigned Category 1A mobile code, Category 2 mobile code that violates this Instruction’s usage requirements, all Emerging Technologies mobile code, and all mobile code that downloads via an email body or email attachment that executes automatically when the user opens the email body or attachment. Permitted mobile code includes signed Category 1A mobile code, unsigned Category 2 mobile code that executes in a constrained execution environment, Category 2 mobile code obtained from a trusted source over an assured channel, Category 3 mobile code, and mobile code that downloads via email that does not execute automatically when the user opens the email body or attachment.”If the application does not provide instant messaging capabilities, ECIM-1 (pg. 80) “Instant Messaging” will not apply to the application. The hosting enclave must ensure perimeter instant messaging firewall rules are enforced.If the application does not provide Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) capabilities, ECVI-1 (pg. 81) “Voice over IP” will not apply to the application. The hosting enclave must ensure perimeter VoIP firewall rules are enforced.If the hosting enclave computing devices do not support wireless communications, the ECWN-1 (pg. 81) “Wireless Computing and Networking” will not apply. See DOD Directive 8100.2 for more information on wireless networking policy.If the application does not provide email services and the enclaves where the application software applications are to be deployed do not support email services, the ECAD-1 (pg. 86) “Affiliation Display” will not apply to the application. It should be noted that SIP VoIP Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI) are very similar to email URIs and can convey the same semantic information an email URI can.  Hence, this IA control will not be exclusive to email addresses.If no Source and Method Intelligence (SAMI) information is to be processed by the enclaves, where the software application is deployed, IA controls ECCR-3 (pg. 88) “Encryption for Confidentiality” and ECNK-2 (pg. 89) “Encryption for Need-to-Know,” requiring the use of NSA-approved high robustness solutions will not apply to the application. If the application does not require users to have remote network access such as direct Internet Protocol Security (IPsec) Virtual Private Network (VPN) access used by telecommuters, the need to support EBRU-1 (pg. 91) “Remote Access for User Functions” with a remote access server disappears. Any remote network access will require strong authentication.If the application does not provide privileged function capabilities and will not be managed by an administrator in a remote enclave, the requirement to support EBRP-1 (pg. 90) “Remote Access for Privileged Functions” audit trails for each remote session with IAM or IAO reviews for every session can be ignored. Any remote access is protected by a security measure such as a VPN supporting a blocking mode. (It may still be wise to impose countermeasures to ensure the IT system prohibits remote access for privileged functions across enclave boundaries.)The IA controls that are italicized and bolded in this section are the 14 IA controls that have a reasonable probability of being eliminated for many existing distributed M&S applications. The list of applicable IA controls has thus been reduced from 109 to 95 without requiring much effort from the application developer. This section has identified several IA controls that are unlikely to impact distributed simulation application operations in distributed environments. It should be noted that, for an IA-enabled RTI that integrates with mobile code or provides VoIP, instant messaging, email services, the DCMC-1, ECVI-1, ECIM-1 and ECAD-1 IA controls must be addressed by the RTI.With the possible exception of the DCDS-1 IA control, if a risk avoidance approach is taken, the contractor still has to prove the services associated with the IA controls are not being utilized by the application developed for the DOD customer. This will require minimal application developer involvement to verify.5. Identifying the Inherited IA ControlsIndicating that an IA control is inherited is a technique to legitimately delegate the responsibility for its implementation to another entity. The DAA will ensure that the responsible entity has successfully implemented the IA control by checking its accreditation status before accrediting the overall IA package for the software application. In risk management terminology, this approach to treating IA risks is called “risk transference.”  This section identifies 45 additional IA controls that can be inherited (i.e., transferred) by simulation applications within distributed M&S environments. This reduces the count of IA controls about which the typical distributed M&S application developer is primarily concerned to around 50.If an application is to run on existing hardware already deployed within the operational enclave, the clearing and sanitization procedures of PECS-2 (pg. 91) “Clearing and Sanitizing” can be inherited from the enclaves in which the application is deployed.  Similarly, the support for PEDD-1 (pg. 91) “Destruction” is the responsibility of the enclave in which the application is deployed. The remaining 16 of 19  total IA controls associated with the enclave’s “physical environment (PE)” are very likely to be inherited by the applications: PEEL-1 (pg. 82) “Emergency Lighting,” PEFD-1 (pg. 82) “Fire Detection,” PEFI-1 (pg. 82) “Fire Inspection,” PEFS-1 (pg. 82) “Fire Suppression System,” PEHC-1 (pg. 82) “Humidity Control,” PEMS-1 (pg. 82) “Master Power Switch,” PETC-1 (pg. 83) “Temperature Control,” PETN-1 (pg. 83) “Environmental Control Training,” PEVR-1 (pg. 83) “Voltage Regulators,” PECF-2 (pg. 91) “Access to Computing Facilities,” PEDI-1 (pg. 91) “Data Interception,” PEPF-2 (pg. 91) “Physical Protection of Facilities,” PEPS-1 (pg. 91) “Physical Security Training,” PESP-1 (pg. 91) “Workplace Security Procedure,” PESS-1  (pg. 92) “Storage” and PEVC-1  (pg. 92) “Visitor Control to Computing Center.”The following two of two IA controls associated with the enclave’s “vulnerability and incident management (VI)” can be inherited by applications: VIIR-1 (pg. 84) “Incident Response Planning” and VIVM-1 (pg. 84) “Vulnerability Management.”The following three of five total IA controls associated with “enclave boundary defense (EB)” can be inherited by applications: EBBD-3 (pg. 90) “Boundary Defense,” EBCR-1 (pg. 82) “Connection Rules” and EBVC-1 (pg. 82) “VPN Controls.”The following two of five total IA controls associated with an enclave’s “personnel (PR)” can be inherited by applications: PRRB-1 (pg. 83) “Security Rules of Behavior or Acceptable Use Policy” and PRMP-2 (pg. 92) “Maintenance Personnel.”The following nine of 12 total IA controls associated with an enclave’s “continuity (CO)” can be inherited by applications: COAS-1 (pg. 83) “Alternate Site Designation,” CODP-1 (pg. 83) “Disaster and Recovery Plan,” COEB-1 (pg. 83) “Enclave Boundary Defense,” COED-1 (pg. 83) “Scheduled Exercises and Drills,” COEF-1 (pg.84) “Identification of Essential Functions,” COMS-1 (pg. 84) “Maintenance Support,” COPS-1 (pg. 84) “Power Supply,” COSP-1 (pg. 84) “Spares Parts” and COSW-1 (pg. 84) “Backup Copies of Critical SW.”The following four of 23 total IA controls associated with “security design and configuration (DC)” can be inherited by applications: DCID-1 (pg. 77) “Interconnection Documentation,” DCIT-1 (pg. 77) “IA for IT Services,” DCSR-3 (pg. 85) “Specified Robustness,” and DCHW-1 (pg. 77) “HW Baseline.” Only one of five total IA controls associated with “identification and authentication (IA)” can be inherited by applications. This IA control is IAKM-3 (pg. 86) “Key Management.”  Existing NSA COMSEC and CRYPTO doctrine practiced by the interconnected enclaves makes this possible.The following six of 34 total IA controls associated with the “enclave computing environment (EC)” can be inherited by applications: ECND-1 (pg. 80) “Network Device Controls,” ECCM-1 (pg. 88) “COMSEC,” ECCT-2 (pg. 88) “Encryption for Confidentiality (Data in Transit),” ECTC-1 (pg. 90) “Tempest Controls,” ECVP-1 (pg. 81) “Virus Protection” and ECMT-2 (pg. 89) “Conformance monitoring and testing.”The IA control EBBD-3 was one of the five IA controls mentioned in SISO paper 07F-SIW-025. The main issue with this countermeasure is whether existing enclave boundary firewalls securely support the protocols required by distributed M&S applications. Additionally, are the distributed M&S protocols themselves compliant with IA control DCPP-1 “Ports, Protocols, and Services?” This is a significant question driving the need for a wire-level RTI protocol. RTI protocols need to use open standards trusted by the DOD customer. It takes considerable effort to design protocols with few if any vulnerabilities.     Notice for the outline above that all the IA controls beginning with the letters “VI” can be ignored by the application development team. The same is true for the EB IA controls if EBRU-1 “Remote Access for User Functions” and EBRP-1 “Remote Access for Privileged Functions” do not apply to the application, as indicated in Section 4 of this paper. The IA controls beginning with “PE” can also be ignored for the most part by the application developer, with the exception of PESL-1 “Screen Lock.”5. Identifying the IA Controls that Have Shared Contractor and DOD Customer ResponsibilitiesThe IA controls in this section and the next two are associated with an IA “risk limitation” process. This section identifies 15 IA controls that may require a sharing of responsibility if they are to be implemented correctly.  The context for sharing responsibility for implementing the IA controls below must be carefully thought through.  It is unfortunate, but it is not possible for either the DOD customer or the contractor to assume complete ownership of some of these IA controls.  Ownership context can only be applied at the test-level. It is possible for one IA control to require multiple tests to demonstrate that it is functioning properly. One test could be the responsibility of the DOD customer within its enclaves, while another test could depend on contractor software development compliance results. The responsibility for all nineteen PE “Physical and Environment” subject area IA controls (the complete set of classified MAC III IA controls beginning with the letters PE) can be accounted for if the responsibility for the last outstanding/remaining PESL-1 IA control is assigned.  The PESL-1 (pg. 82) “Screen Lock” IA control is primarily the responsibility of the customer, typically implemented via the operating systems hosted within the customer’s enclaves. It is important for contractor applications to implement robust exception handling to appropriately handle operating system screen locks that can occur in the operational environment or application server-side locks typical within Web browser applications.Responsibility for all five of the PR IA controls for personnel can accounted for if the following three IA controls below are treated as shared responsibilities:The PRAS-2 (pg. 92) “Access to Information” and PRNK-1 (pg. 92) “Access to Need-to-Know Information” IA controls must apply to both the government and contactor personnel associated the application development effort will people involve handling classified information.The PRTN-1 (pg. 92) “Information Assurance Training” IA control must apply to the government and contractor “privileged users” as defined by the CNSS 4009 IA Glossary or to those fulfilling managerial IA roles, e.g., developers, administrators, maintainers, IAOs, IAMs, ISOs, ISSEPs, CAs, DAAs, etc.All twelve of the CO IA controls for continuity can be accounted for if the contractor assumes limited partial responsibility for the following three IA controls.  For COBR-1 (pg. 83) “Protection of Backup and Restoration Assets,” the contractor must provide information to ensure successful recovery.  Backup procedure technical controls (e.g., encryption, access controls) will be the most important procedures to address. The responsibility for the bulk of this IA control falls to the contractor’s DOD customer.For CODB-1 (pg. 83) “Data Backup Procedures,” the contractor must provide information to ensure that its application configuration files, accounts, activity logs, audit records, etc., are properly backed up on a weekly basis by the customer.For COTR-1 (pg. 84) “Trusted Recovery,” the responsibility is mostly inherited from the hosting enclave, but the deployment enclave must have the pertinent configuration information to ensure successful recovery of the system or application. Responsibility for nine of 23 IA subject area IA controls can be assigned if it is accepted that DCAR-1, DCCB-1 and DCCT-1 are the joint responsibility of the application contractor and the DOD customer’s hosting enclaves. If the application contractor is under a multi-year application sustainment contract, the DCAR-1 (pg. 76) “Procedural Review” will require the ISSEP and SE to annually review new IA polices and their impact on existing application architecture.DCCB-1 (pg. 76) “Control Board” is likely to be primarily the responsibility of the contractor for the software development. As described in section six, the customer’s IAM may be required to be part of this Configuration Control Board (CCB).For DCCT-1 (pg. 76) “Compliance Testing,” it is important that the development environment’s computers hosting the application under development are configured with the same OS configuration and security patches that will be used in the deployment environment to reduce application availability risks.The DCSD-1 (pg. 79) “IA Documentation,” control is an excellent example in which the responsibility for its implementation moves between the customer and contractor.  This point becomes evident when the application SRR checklist mentioned within the ECSC-1 IA control section, below, is examined in detail and responsibilities are assigned to each DCSD-1 STIG ID.In theory, possibly three to five years from now, DOD simulation enclaves may have standardized, general purpose Identification, Authentication, Authorization and Accounting (I&AAA) infrastructures, possibly with associated doctrine, which can be leveraged by simulation applications. Unfortunately, this is not the case today.  Most existing I&AAA capabilities are part of the deployed Operating Systems (OS). OS I&AAA mechanisms are of little use to simulation resources if the simulation resources have no direct need to be associated with OS files. Consistent general purpose I&AAA mechanisms are needed that utilize databases, XML, certificate or token technologies. For this reason, there will be little if any reuse of the following four of five IA controls. 1) IAGA-1 (pg. 85) “Group Identification and Authentication,” 2) IAIA-2 (pg. 86) “Individual Identification and Authentication,” 3) IAAC-1 (pg. 90) “Account Control” and 4) IATS-1 (pg. 80) “Token and Certificate Standards.”  Enclave support for these four IA controls is a significant capability gap for most DOD distributed M&S enclaves. The responsibility for ten of 34 EC subject area IA controls can be assigned if it is realized that ECSC-1, ECTM-1, ECRR-1 and ECWM-1 are shared between the DOD customer and the application’s contractor. ECSC-1 (pg. 81) “Security Configuration Compliance” with an associated enterprise  impact code of “high” or severity findings of CAT I  will require all IT AIS applications with IA or IA-enabled components to be configured in compliance with the DISA Security Technical Implementation Guides (STIG) available at  HYPERLINK "http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/stig/index.html" http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/stig/index.html and the NSA guidelines available at  HYPERLINK "http://www.nsa.gov/snac/" http://www.nsa.gov/snac/. Compliance with documents found at  HYPERLINK "http://www.cisecurity.org/" http://www.cisecurity.org/ is also valued. Legacy application compliance efforts will focus on code changes to make them compliant with their associated STIGs.DISA Security Readiness Review (SRR) scripts at  HYPERLINK "http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/SRR/index.html" http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/SRR/index.html are also used to check compliance when an effort desires to obtain an IATT. Two important application checklists are available at  HYPERLINK "http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/checklist/application-security-checklist-v2r1-10.doc" http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/checklist/application-security-checklist-v2r1-10.doc and  HYPERLINK "http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/draft-stigs/asd-checklist.doc" http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/draft-stigs/asd-checklist.doc. Compliance with these two checklists   will have a profound negative impact on existing legacy simulation applications or simulations. It is extremely important to realize these two DISA application security checklists correlate STIG IDs, with DODI 8500 IA control names and associated non-compliance severity code ratings (e.g., CAT I, CAT II and CAT III findings.) The severity code rating for the IA control and STIG ID triplet will be important for determining legacy application development priorities, especially for legacy fielded applications that have not previously gone through a rigorous IA certification effort. Contractors should be forewarned, according to the DIACAP, that associating CAT I or CAT II findings with a fielded DOD application is considered classified information. Such associations with CAT III findings will, as minimum, be considered sensitive information.   ECTM-1 (pg. 81) “Transmission Integrity Controls” requires outgoing and incoming data files to have associated integrity checks such as parity checks, cyclic redundancy checks, hashes or cryptographic hashes.ECRR-1 (pg. 90) “Audit Record Retention” will require distinguishing between audit retention records for physically logging into a computer and logically utilizing application services.  This IA control effectively provides services required for “controlled access” or “restricted access” capabilities as defined within IA control ECAN-1.ECWM-1 (pg. 90) “Warning Message” will require distinguishing between session warning messages for physically logging into a computer and logically logging into an application service.What should now be very obvious from these analysis results is that many of the DODI 8500.2 IA controls beginning with the DC, IA, and EC prefixes will be the major roadblock to accreditation of nearly all existing simulation applications. In addition to the IA controls mentioned in this section, there are still 30 DODI 8500.2 IA controls that must be addressed. Many DOD simulation applications will literally “DIE-out” over the next three years unless they can be made secure and accredited. A simulation system’s contractor developer/manager will be responsible for meeting the IA requirements associated with many of the remaining 30 IA countermeasures.  6. Identifying the IA Controls Driving the Software Development and Configuration Management ProcessesGartner indicates 75% of security incidents are at the application level. Similarly, reducing vulnerabilities in commercially acquired products by 50% will reduce configuration management and incident response costs by 75% each. The concept of enforcing integrated software application security across the System Development Life Cycle (SDLC) thus has a basis for justifying its existence other than compliance with FISMA.It is important to realize that a number of the IA DODI 8500.2 IA controls address a specific characteristic associated with the software application’s development processes. The article entitled “Configuration Management in the Security World” provides excellent insight into how Configuration Management, one aspect of Accounting/Change Management, should incorporate aspects of security across the SDLC and can be found at: HYPERLINK "http://www.sans.edu/resources/securitylab/meyer_config_manage.php" http://www.sans.edu/resources/securitylab/meyer_config_manage.php.In addition to discussing the need for the traditional CM Plan (providing details for managing the “As-Planned,”   “To-Be” and “As-Built”  configurations), this article also articulates the need to apply CM to the Concept of Operations (CONOPS), Contingency and Continuity of Operations Plan (COOP) and, finally, to the security audit. The latter three CM responsibilities are the responsibility of the DOD customer while the first is handled predominantly by the application contractor.From an IA perspective, a well designed CM process for application development will allow an approved change request to be made to application code that was previously DIACAP accredited without voiding the ATO. The key to making such a process viable is to include the IAM in the Configuration Control Board (CCB) and have the IAM attend Project Engineering Review Meetings (PERM). Per the SANS article above, “The purpose of the PERM is to take an As-Planned requirement, and build a To-Be solution for future transition into the As-Built after approval from the CCB.” Unfortunately, the rank of a typical ISO being an O-6 or GS-15 will likely preclude any significant ISO involvement with the CCB process.  The key is to have the IA CCB takes an active role in making risk assessments that are part of an overall risk management process living across the application’s SDLC.  One of the responsibilities of the IAM is to actively assess and monitor situations that can be characterized as security relevant events. According to the DIACAP, security relevant events can “cause a harmful change in an IS or its environment, or that an IAM would consider worthy of notation, investigation, or prevention.” The IAM is the lowest security management rank which can assess what constitutes a security relevant event from a system CM perspective.  It is the responsibility of system users and privileged users to report potential security events to the IAO before they occur or once they realize they have occurred. The IAO then updates the IAM. If the risk level associated with the submitted change request is deemed unacceptable by the IAM, DAA approval must be required before any change can proceed.This ability to change the application’s production code will still require security testing to validate that the security posture has not been compromised after the PERM change request is approved.  The key here is to prove the new code or the code changes have little to nothing to do with the IA-enabled services and do not introduce new vulnerabilities. More importantly, the DAA needs to endorse such a CCB process to allow continued code development across the application’s SDLC. The following IA controls are very likely to be part of such a software development and configuration management process. (The IA controls with leading asterisks were identified earlier in this paper.).  Instead of delving into a description of each IA control, the worst possible severity codes are listed with the IA controls, when available.  The sources for the CAT code assignments originated from the DISA checklist described in the ECSC-1 IA control listed above. Otherwise, the impact codes are listed.*DCCB-1 (pg. 76) “Control Board,” CAT III*DCCT-1 (pg. 76) “Compliance Testing,” CAT IIDCII-1 (pg. 77) “IA Impact Assessment,” CAT IIIDCPP-1 (pg. 78) “Ports, Protocols, and Services,”  CAT II*DCMC-1 (pg. 78) “Mobile Code,”  CAT IDCPD-1 (pg. 78) “Public Domain Software Controls,”  CAT IIDCSQ-1 (pg. 79) “Software Quality,” CAT IDCPR-1 (pg. 79) “CM Process,”  CAT IIIDCSW-1 (pg. 79) “SW Baseline,” CAT IIIDCSL-1 (pg. 79) “System Library Management Controls,” CAT II. ECPA-1 (pg. 80) “Privileged Account Control,”  CAT IIECPC-1 (pg. 80) “Production Code Change Controls,”  CAT IIIECSD-1 (pg. 81) “Software Development Change Controls,” CAT II*ECAD-1 (pg. 86) “Affiliation Display,” CAT IIECRC-1 (pg. 89) “Resource Control,” CAT IPart of the configuration control board’s job is to ensure code scanners such as the ones referenced at  HYPERLINK "http://samate.nist.gov/index.php/Source_Code_Security_Analyzers" http://samate.nist.gov/index.php/Source_Code_Security_Analyzers are executed to perform denotation, axiomatic, operational semantic security code checks. A 100% parroting and testing code coverage level will also be required. 7. Assigning the Remaining IA Controls to the Six ISSE Process ActivitiesThe DIACAP does not require a formal “risk analysis” to be performed if all the IA controls are implemented (with the possible exception of the IA controls assigned to the “risk avoidance” bin) within the software or system. If it is too expensive to implement all the IA controls, a risk analysis must be performed to prioritize the need of the controls that are not implemented. A risk analysis for a system/application as a whole should then be repeated every three years until all the enterprise specified IA controls are implemented.Due to the extra burden of implementing certain DODI 8500.2 IA controls for distributed M&S applications, it is advised that a formal risk analysis be performed on a reasonable sample population of simulation applications to determine how different the simulation application threats are from typical DOD enterprise threats.  Managing risk for a system involving risk analysis is more complex because it involves a risk planning activity exercise that requires two products from the ISSE “Discover Information Protection Needs” activity.7.1 “Discover Information Protection Needs”The NSA’s Protection Needs Elicitation (PNE) is a seven step process for developing the Information Management Model (IMM) and Information Protection Policy (IPP) products.  The seven PNE steps are explained in Appendix H of the IATF Release 3.1. This particular activity accomplishes some of the more obvious tasks such as identifying stakeholders: sponsor, user representative, information owner, information system owner, IAO, IAM, PM, DAA Representative, CA, etc.  The following two DODI 8500.2 IA controls map cleanly to the Discover Information Protection Needs Activity.ECLP-1 (pg. 89) “Least Privilege” used to ensure the principles of separation of duties and least privilege, CAT IECAN-1 (pg. 87) “Access for need-to-know,” CAT IBecause both of these IA controls have associated CAT I severity codes, it will be very important to understand the affected documents, the IMM and IPP, in more detail. Establishing the IMM and IPP are two important activities used to facilitate “risk planning.”  More documentation is needed to clearly articulate how the PNE Process, originating from the NSA, correlates with the risk management process documented in NIST Special Publication 800-30 “Risk Management Guide for Information Technology Systems.” [14] The OMB has granted NIST, through OMB Circular A-130, jurisdiction for establishing guidance for unclassified systems. The CNSS and NSA establish guidance for classified systems. Other than jurisdictional separation, the NSA PNE and NIST SP 800-30 processes are very closely related and should be officially correlated to one another.  Additionally, there is a substantial lack of IA literature correlating the ISSE process with the DIACAP and the JCIDS/5000 phases and milestones. The remainder of this section describes the PNE IMM and IPP products in greater detail. This gap of integrated IA programmatic literature is creating substantial confusion for DOD PMs and SEs new to IA who are trying to establish executable schedules.  The IMM documents system processes, data, users, access rules and the mission relationships among them. The core diagrams for documenting the IMM are found in the following three common forms: 1) Yourdan “Structured Analysis” 2) Spreadsheet and 3) Integrated Definition (IDEF). The IMM is an important requirements control document that must be understood by a system’s senior management. Its contents are the first stage toward defining a system’s access control privileges. The IMM embodies the principles of “least privilege” and “separation of duties.” It is divorced from the design of the system and used to establish the baseline for threat analysis. The “information domains,” identified from the development and analysis of a “least privileged” IMM, are used as the basis for threat analysis.An information domain is one in which people and processes all have clearance, authorization and need-to-know to access a common set of information. Additionally, all security labels (either explicit or implicit) associated with an information domain’s data must be the same.  This is what is referred to as a dedicated mode of operation in which “open access” transactions occur that do not require additional identification, authentication, authorization and accounting services. Many information domains can be associated with an application; an even larger set of information domains can be associated with an enclave or a Community of Interest (COI) that crosses enclave borders.  One or information domains can be associated with sub-enclaves. Unlike COIs, sub-enclaves always reside within an enclave’s borders. It is difficult to create a useful risk assessment unless the IMM information domains are identified. This is because information domains form the basis for risk assessments. Obviously, there is innate value in identifying the information and processes associated with an information domain since these are where security measures must be applied. Information domains supply the context for providing security services to counter threats (i.e., adversaries, accidents or nature). Adversaries might use passive, active, close-in, insider or distribution attack methods to break into security domains. Sometimes the DODI 8500.2 definition of an IA-enabled application is insufficient to permit early determination (relative to the SDLC) of whether an application will become IA-enabled. The following rules are useful to identify an application’s IA status. The first few rules also highlight additional features that make the IMM an important program document:When an application must support more than one "information domain," it must be IA-enabled.When an application must directly support “privilege users” separately from regular users, it must be IA-enabled or leverage an OS that is IA-enabledWhen an application provides either "controlled access" or "restricted access" capabilities, as defined by ECAN-1, it must be IA-enabled.If a COI, enclave or sub-enclave is associated with only one information domain, then it requires at least "controlled access" capabilities.If a COI, enclave or sub-enclave is associated with more than one information domain, then it requires at least "restricted access" capabilities.When a system is Public Key enabled (PK-enabled) it is IA-enabled.When particular mobile code technologies are used, the application must be IA-enabled because PK technologies will be used.It is important when creating the IMM to identify the roles of personnel that are considered to be logically “internal” and “external” to the system.  The same is true for identifying the IMM’s system or application processes. This is because the threat environment inside a system or application will be different than that outside.  Hence, the strengths of an information domain’s IA services (i.e., access control, confidentiality, integrity, availability, non-repudiation, security management) will be different for protecting the information domain’s resources when connected to people or processes in different information domains residing either inside or outside the system’s boundaries.To use an analogy, information domains are security atoms. An information domain’s services (confidentiality, integrity and availability) are security quarks. Security compounds such as sub-enclaves, enclaves and COIs must be carefully crafted to provide protection from the insiders. There are specific rules for how the security atoms can be cajoled (or coerced) to form trusted bonds that facilitate authorized communication. Those rules are derived from federal and enterprise policies, guidance and best practices.      IT security for distributed M&S will require a healthy dose of risk management to determine achievable levels of IT security capabilities that will meet cost objectives. IT risk can be viewed as the product of the likelihood that a threat will materialize and the value of the information or system that the threat may compromise, from confidentiality, integrity and availability perspectives. The IPP is a critical resource in prioritizing the value of security services for all information domains supported by a system. The development of an IPP is a significant task required to successfully perform IA risk management. The core of the IPP is created using a cell-by-cell operation on the “Threat Likelihood Analysis Matrix” and the “Impact Analysis Matrix” using the static “Information Threat Combination Matrix.” The threat likelihood matrix characterizes the threat environment, and the impact analysis matrix characterizes the impact the system will have on the organization trying to fulfill its mission. The information domains established during the development of the IMM constitute the rows for these two matrices. For DOD hosted simulation applications, the columns of these two matrices represent unauthorized disclosure (lack of confidentiality), unauthorized loss or modification of data (lack of integrity) and system and denial of service (lack of availability). The contents of an IPP can drive the need for controlled interfaces when cross-domain communication involves considerable risks requiring exceptional confidentiality or integrity capabilities. The IPP is useful for both the security architect and designer in executing the ISSE “Develop Detailed Security Design” activity. Without the IPP, it becomes extremely difficult to justify and specify the robustness requirements of a system’s logical information domain’s security services and, subsequently, the architectural components or configuration items that will be used to implement logical security services. This means it will not be possible to establish the Common Criteria ISO 15408 Evaluation Assurance Levels (EAL), an information assurance confidence factor, and the corresponding Strength of Mechanism Levels (SML) for IA or IA-enabled COTS or GOTS components with any firm system requirements traceability. The DOD “Robustness Strategy,” described in IATF Chapter Four, and the data found in CJCSM 6510.01 Appendix H to Enclosure C are used to facilitate the establishment of requirements to drive IA control DCAS-1 “Acquisition Standards” requirements. Failing to meet the DCAS-1 requirement will result in CAT II findings.Currently, it is predominantly cultural issues that prohibit development of simulation applications with the rigor defined here. Typical distributed simulation events have substantial information domain complexity and the security classification guidelines applied to interconnected systems can vary significantly from event to event.  Developing aggregated event-specific IMMs and IPPs when interconnecting systems will be incredibly complex.The value of adopting a common set of enterprise IA controls is that much of the headache of the complex risk assessment is swept under the rug as long as no PL3+ capabilities are needed. 7.2 “Define System Security Requirements” To keep this paper’s length within reason, description of the remaining ISSE activities focuses on categorizing the remaining DODI 8500.2 IA controls.Identify constraints.IATS-1 (pg. 80) “Token and Certificate Standards”IAGA-1 (pg. 85) “Group Identification and Authentication”IAIA-2 (pg. 86) “Individual Identification and Authentication”  IAAC-1 (pg. 90) “Account Control”ECML-1 (pg. 89) “Marking and Labeling”ECTP-1 (pg. 81) “Audit Trail Protection”ECRG-1 (pg. 81) “Audit Reduction and Report Generation”ECAR-3 (pg. 87) “Audit Record Content”ECAT-2 (pg. 87) “Audit Trail, Monitoring, Analysis Routing”ECLC-1 (pg. 88) “Audit of Security Label Changes”ECLO-2 (pg. 88) “Logon”ECCD-2 (pg. 88) “Changes to Data”ECTB-1 (pg. 90) “Audit Trail Backup”*ECRC-1 (pg.89) “Resource Control”*ECRR-1 (pg. 90) “Audit Record Retention”*ECWM-1 (pg. 90) “Warning Message”*ECND-1 (pg. 80) “Network Device Controls”2) Identify physical system boundary requirements.ECIC-1 (pg. 88) “Interconnections among DOD Systems and Enclaves”*DCID-1 (pg. 77) “Interconnection Documentation”3) Identify internal and external interfaces.*DCPP-1 (pg. 78) “Ports, Protocols, and Services”*All the IA controls previously identified as being “risk avoidance” candidates in Section 4.4) Identify modes of operation.DCSS-2 (pg. 85) “System State Changes”7.3 “Design System Security Architecture”DCBP-1 (pg. 76) “Best Security Practices”DCFA-1 (pg. 77) “Functional Architecture for AIS Application”7.4 “Develop Detailed Security Design” ECCR-2 (pg. 88) “Encryption for Confidentiality (Data at Rest)”*ECCR-3 (pg. 88) “Encryption for Confidentiality (Data at Rest)”*ECTM-1 (pg. 81) “Transmission Integrity Controls”ECNK-1 (pg. 89) “Encryption for Need-to-Know”*ECNK-2 (pg. 89) “Encryption for Need-to-Know”DCCS-1 (pg. 76) “Configuration Specification”DCNR-1 (pg. 78) “Non-repudiation”DCAS-1 (pg. 85) “Acquisition Standards”7.5 “Implement System Security”After the DIP is established, the system can be implemented.  Component, functional, performance and preliminary security testing will occur during the Implement System Phase.7.6 “Assess Information Protection Effectiveness”The Enterprise Mission Assurance Support System (eMASS) or the Air Force’s Enterprise Information Technology Data Repository (EITDR) workflow will drive the C&A testing for a system or application. The security portions of the Test and Evaluation Master Plan (TEMP) or Integrated Test Plans (ITP) will require the system’s integrated DoDAF diagrams, Information Support Plan (ISP) or Tailored Information Support Plan (TISP) to perform either black or white box security C&A testing during Development Test and Evaluation (DT&E) and Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E). The IA control below encompasses both DT&E and OT&E.*ECMT-2 (pg. 89) “Conformance monitoring and testing” occurs across the entire lifecycle of the system or application. This will involve unannounced penetration testing.8. IA Controls of Interest to Contracted Simulation Application Development EffortsApplication contractors delivering simulation software products are likely to be responsible for complying with at least some aspect of approximately 49 IA controls. The list of IA controls, shown below, may not be a perfect match for all classified simulation MAC III applications, but it is very close to the optimal one. The list takes an extreme “risk avoidance” stance and does not list any of the IA controls in Section 4.COBR-1, CODB-1, COTR-1, DCAR-1,    DCAS-1, DCBP-1, DCCB-1, DCCS-1, DCCT-1, DCFA-1, DCII-1, DCNR-1, DCPD-1, DCPP-1, DCPR-1, DCSD-1, DCSL-1, DCSQ-1,  DCSS-2, DCSW-1, ECAN-1, ECAR-3, ECAT-2,    ECCD-2, ECCR-2, ECIC-1, ECLC-1,   ECLO-2, ECLP-1, ECML-1, ECNK-1, ECPA-1, ECPC-1, ECRC-1, ECRG-1, ECSC-1, ECSD-1, ECTB-1,    ECTM-1, ECTP-1, ECWM-1, IAAC-1, IAGA-1, IAIA-2, IATS-1, PESL-1, PRAS-2, PRNK-1, PRTN-1The subset of IA controls above covers managerial, operational and technical controls. This list still is not developed sufficiently to arrive at the full set of security requirements an RTI application programming interface must support either directly or indirectly to minimize IA application development cost and deployment schedules.The IA controls focusing on technical security services (e.g., identification, authentication authorization, marking, access, accounting and encryption, i.e., authentication, confidentiality, integrity, non-repudiation) are the primary ones an IA-enabled RTI API or “Trusted RTI API” should render, working in cooperation with an enclave’s “Trusted RTI Server.” The following is a list of the controls a Trusted RTI API can potentially be inherited if properly designed. IAIA-2 (CAT I, pg. 86) – password lifecycle policy enforcement and management servicesIAAC-1 (CAT II, pg. 90) - inactive, suspended and terminated “account deactivation services”IAGA-1 (CAT II, pg. 85) - appropriate group authentication services IATS-1 (CAT II) – identification and authentication using DOD PKI (i.e. X.509 v3 issued by DOD trusted sources) certificates and hardware token (e.g., Common Access Cards configured using DOD’s RAPIDS and DEERS systems or something similar) ECLO-2 (CAT II, pg. 88) – logon attempt security services ECWM-1 (CAT II, pg. 90) – warning message services on a per-session or dialog basis ECNK-1 (CAT I, pg. 89) – NIST-certified encryption with adequate Common Criteria assurance level per DCAS-1 that is rendered to all RTI data in transit across the network ECCR-2 (CAT I, pg. 88) – optional NIST-certified encryption for RTI data at rest services with adequate Common Criteria assurance level per DCAS-1 ECTM-1 (CAT II, pg. 81) – incoming and out-going integrity services for files being sent across the network using the RTI  DCNR-1 (CAT II, pg. 78) – appropriate NIST FIPS validated cryptography is used to implement encryption, key exchanges, digital signatures, and hashes ECML-1 (CAT I, pg. 89) – per DOD 5200.1R, provide data tagging labeling services for data at rest that is not approved for public releaseECAN-1 (CAT I, pg. 87) – discretionary access control services (e.g., IBAC, RBAC, ABAC and database views) to enable open, controlled and restricted transaction capabilities for predefined parceled data exchanges or continuous streamed data exchangesECRC-1 (CAT I, pg. 89) – RTI system object pooling requires unused objects, even if previously encrypted, to be scrubbed of all residual data before authorizing assignment, allocation, or re-allocation, similar to the NSA’s Controlled Access Protection Profile (CAPP) ECCD-2 (CAT II, pg. 88) – access control mechanisms, supporting at least discretionary capabilities, exist to ensure data is accessed and changed only by authorized personnel.  Access and changes to resources are recorded in transaction logs.  Users are notified of time and date of the last change in data contentECIC-1 (CAT II, pg. 88) – an ECCD-2 compliant access control mechanism is used to connect (within an enclave) or interconnect (between enclaves) DOD information systems operating at the same classification but with different need-to-know.  A controlled interface (e.g., cross domain solution, guard, firewall, border router) is required when the DOD system is required for interconnect DOD systems operating at different classification levels or to interconnect DOD enclaves to non-DOD systems or networks. ECAR-3 (CAT II, pg. 87) – compliant audit record capabilities for persistent or periods processing modes of RTI operation ECTP-1 (CAT II, pg. 81) – the integrity of audit trails for controlled and restricted access transactions must be protected to protect against unauthorized modifications or deletionsECAT-2 (CAT II, pg. 87) – continuous on-line monitoring of audit trails and alert mechanism to alert personnel of any unusual or inappropriate activity (e.g., ECLO-2 successive login failures). Additionally, the IA applications privileged user has the capability to establish criteria to disable the system if serious IA violations are detected.ECTB-1 (CAT II, pg. 90) – support must be provided to allow a privileged user or process to roll audit records not less than a weekly basisECLC-1 (CAT II, pg. 88) – logging support for the creation, deletion or modification confidentiality or integrity labels (this tends to be a more of a CDS capability)ECRG-1 (CAT II, pg. 81) – audit reduction and report generation tools to handle the volumes of dataDCPP-1 (CAT II, pg. 78) –applications must comply with ports, protocols and service regulations per DOD corporate and component guidance [15] [16].   DCMC-1 (CAT I, pg. 78) – applications must comply with mobile code policies per DODI 8552.01. ECIM-2 (CAT II, pg. 80) – enabling instant messaging services to be rendered across enclave boundary in order because they provide official value-added authorized services.  ECVI-1 (CAT II, pg. 81) – application constraints for using VoIP services are very similar to that of providing instant messaging services plus there is a STIG for configuring commodity VoIP components, see  HYPERLINK "http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/stig/VoIP-STIG-V2R2.pdf" http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/stig/VoIP-STIG-V2R2.pdf.ECAD-1 (CAT II, pg. 86) – preventing inadvertent disclosure of information, DOD URIs indicating their origin or destination associated with users or processes are required to use a naming convention to specify association with contractors (.ctr) and foreign nationals  (e.g., .ca, .uk, .se), e.g. sip:john.doe.ctr.uk@army.mil or mailto:john.doe@army.mil. EBRP-1 (CAT II, pg. 90) – the risk to provide remote privileged functions by a trusted RTI capabilities may not warrant the inheritance of this IA controlEBRU-1 (CAT II, pg. 91) – the risks to provide “remote access to user function” at the network level by a trusted RTI are probably too great to warrant the inheritance of this IA control.DCBP-1 (CAT I, pg.76) – the trusted RTI itself can ensure “best practices” such as Single-Sign On (SSO), Public Key Enabling (PK-enabling), smart cards and biometrics by lowing the cost of application developers to utilize such technologiesDCAS-1 (CAT II, pg. 85) – the ISSE process can be used to ensure components comprising the Trusted RTI have traceability back to the “robustness strategy” to determine the Common Criteria EAL assurance levels to drive acquisition requirements within the trusted RTI.  In due time the Trusted RTI would have its own protection profile to drive RTI DCAS-1 acquisition requirements.DCSS-2 (CAT II, pg. 85) – the Trusted RTI’s integrated DoDAF views will have collective state diagrams specified to ensure the distributed system maintains a secure state when internal components change their local resident state intentionally or unintentionallyPESL-1 (CAT II, pg 82) – screen lock can be viewed as a system state for a local computer.  The Trusted RTI can be designed to ensure screen locks do not damage the integrity of the application from the RTI’s side of the equation.9. Recap and RecommendationsSecurity is a process involving the integration of people, operations and technology. Having IA controls including end-game IA compliance tests enables IA compliance to be measured. The DOD adopted the Defense-In-Depth strategy to provide first and second lines of defense against passive, active, insider and close-in and distribution attacks. Implementing this strategy and the 8500 series requirements require delineation among the following four types of IT systems when fielding operational networks: enclaves, applications, outsourced IT and platform IT. These four types of IT are all important to DOD simulation customers, but the first two are of the most importance to the simulation customer. Outsourced IT will allow prime contractors to share sensitive or proprietary simulation capabilities on their own networks with DOD customers. Simulation platform IT is often associated with missile seekers or virtual training simulators to fly, drive or navigate (e.g., aircraft, tanks, ships).The IA controls analysis in this paper briefly examined all of the DODI 8500 IA controls for a classified MAC III simulation application and allocated each at least once to risk management options, software development processes and the six ISSE activities. This categorization will be useful for IA newcomers to grasp where in a system’s SDLC IA controls should begin to be addressed. Little if any literature directly addresses which IA controls a simulation application developed by a contractor will be responsible to provide. The analysis here provides a good idea of what simulation application contractors will be responsible for to ensure IA compliance.Parallel efforts, similar to this paper, must establish the classified MAC III DODI 8500.2 IA controls that apply to “Enclaves” and “Outsourced IT.” These definitions will enable development of an integrated set of DOD IA controls that must be satisfied by a next generation RTI providing integrated security services for a classified MAC III environment. Together, these three studies will be essential to develop the baseline DOD classified MAC III security profile. Technically an IA-enabled RTI is considered a “component” of a system and not a system in and of itself.  This means the IA-enabled RTI itself will not have to go through a DIACAP accreditation process. Instead, it should proceed through the Common Criteria Evaluation Assurance Level certification process.  This will require the development of a NIAP-approved protection profile.This author is of the opinion that as small a number as two secure RTI frameworks should be developed and considered as part of an overall simulation to verify that DODI 8500.2 IA controls can be inherited from an RTI framework. Once this is accomplished, it makes sense to have a DOD user community formalize the DODI 8500.2 RTI Protection Profile (PP) and, hopefully, involve NIST/NSA to obtain approval of the new profile and a subsequent listing of the protection profile at  HYPERLINK "http://www.niap-ccevs.org/cc-scheme/pp/" http://www.niap-ccevs.org/cc-scheme/pp/. Legitimizing an RTI protection profile is an important step for commercializing IA-enabled RTI. DOD’s acquisition regulations require the use of the Common Criteria Evaluation Assurance Levels (EAL) to characterize the confidence of COTS security-enabled IT products.ISO 15408 IA-enabled RTI Security Targets (ST) for particular COTS or GOTS components can then be established as the basis of a security evaluation established frameworks. If the vendor’s frameworks security target tests are successful, ISO 15408 Common Criteria EAL ratings are assigned to the Target of Evaluation (TOE). The validated Common Criteria (CC) product ratings for a Net-centric Trusted RTI framework will then be posted at  HYPERLINK "http://www.niap-ccevs.org/cc-scheme/vpl/" http://www.niap-ccevs.org/cc-scheme/vpl/ if the certification is accomplished by a trusted commercial lab. 10. Conclusions and RecommendationsThis paper touched on IA topics that are both managerial and technical in nature. The first portion of the paper focuses on managerial value-added issues to streamline IA software development efforts. The latter portion delves into the 109 classified MAC III DODI 8500.2 IA controls. This paper, or possible updates to it, may eventually become a template for IA controls analysis of DODI 8500.2 IA-enabled distributed M&S applications. Finally, the IA controls of an IA-enabled application are refined and generalized to establish what an IA-enabled (trusted net-centric) RTI should allow an application to inherit. This paper addresses primarily the application.  A similar effort must address the Trusted Net-Centric RTI server infrastructure that is an integral part of DOD simulation environment’s enclaves. Finally, a third effort is needed to address “Outsourced IT” IA-enabled requirements.Once these efforts are complete and integrated, the first stage for formalizing requirements for an IA-enabled RTI (or “Trusted RTI”) can be specified. A program effort should be created to certify the Trusted RTI concept in accordance with DODI 8510.01, the DIACAP. After a few DIACAP success stories using the Trusted RTI technology, a Common Criteria protection profile can be established to commercialize the technology for use and legitimize the RTI technology for use within the DOD acquisition process.There is a long and bumpy road ahead to make simulation frameworks compliant with DOD acquisition policies if the M&S community is to make simulation compliant with FISMA as seamlessly as possible.  This paper is an initial attempt to address this green field opportunity.11. References [DODI85002] "Information Assurance (IA) Implementation,"  HYPERLINK "http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/850002p.pdf" http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/850002p.pdf, Feb. 6, 2003[DIACAP] "DoD Information Assurance Certification and Accreditation Process (DIACAP),"  HYPERLINK "http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/851001p.pdf" http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/851001p.pdf, Nov. 28, 2007[DODI50002] "Operation of the Defense Acquisition System,"  HYPERLINK "http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/500002p.pdf" http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/500002p.pdf, May 12, 2003[85801] "Information Assurance (IA) in the Defense Acquisition System,"  HYPERLINK "http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/858001p.pdf" http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/858001p.pdf, July 9, 2004[IATFR31] 3 "Information Assurance Technical Framework," Release 3.1, Sept. 2002[850001] "Information Assurance (IA),"  HYPERLINK "http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/850001p.pdf" http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/850001p.pdf, Oct. 24, 2002[857001M] "Information Assurance Workforce Improvement,"  HYPERLINK "http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/857001m.pdf" http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/857001m.pdf, Dec 19, 2005[SP80037] 4 "Guide for the Security Certification and Accreditation of Federal Information Systems,"  HYPERLINK "http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-37/SP800-37-final.pdf" http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-37/SP800-37-final.pdf, May 2004[NISPOM] 4 "National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual," Feb. 28, 2006[ITLEAN] 4 "IT Lean Reengineering and SISSU Process Guidebook," Version 5,  HYPERLINK "https://wwwd.my.af.mil/afknprod/ASPs/docman/Process/ProcessDOCFunctions.asp?DocID=2292865&Function=ViewDocument&FolderID=OO-SC-AF-47-1&Filter=OO-SC-AF-47" https://wwwd.my.af.mil/afknprod/ASPs/docman/Process/ProcessDOCFunctions.asp?DocID=2292865&Function=ViewDocument&FolderID=OO-SC-AF-47-1&Filter=OO-SC-AF-47,  June 7, 2007[SP80047] "Security Guide for Interconnecting Information Technology Systems,"  HYPERLINK "http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-47/sp800-47.pdf" http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-47/sp800-47.pdf, Aug, 2002[IAGLOSS] "National Information Assurance (IA) Glossary,"  HYPERLINK "http://www.cnss.gov/Assets/pdf/cnssi_4009.pdf" http://www.cnss.gov/Assets/pdf/cnssi_4009.pdf, June 2006[DODI8555201] "Use of Mobile Code Technologies in DoD Information Systems,"  HYPERLINK "http://www.js.pentagon.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/855201p.pdf" http://www.js.pentagon.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/855201p.pdf, Oct 23, 2006[SP80030] "Risk Management Guide for Information Technology Systems,"  HYPERLINK "http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-30/sp800-30.pdf" http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-30/sp800-30.pdf, July 2002[DODI8551.01] "Ports, Protocols, and Services Management (PPSM),"  HYPERLINK "http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/855101p.pdf" http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/855101p.pdf, Aug. 13, 2004[AFI33137] "Ports, Protocols, and Services (PPS)Management,"  HYPERLINK "http://www.e-publishing.af.mil/shared/media/epubs/AFI33-137.pdf" http://www.e-publishing.af.mil/shared/media/epubs/AFI33-137.pdf, Jan. 7, 2005 Author BiographySCOTT HOLBEN is a Technical Architect at Accenture focused on ensuring that distributed M&S frameworks intrinsically provide information assurance capabilities.  Mr. Holben has over 20 years of simulation experience. OMB Circular Number A-130 applies to all US Government Federal Agencies.PAGE  