Evaluation of Applicability of JC3IEDM Based Information Exchange Standardization Efforts to Link-16 Based SystemsAnthony DeviviOld Dominion Universityanthony.devivi@ngc.comKeywords:Modeling, Link-16, JC3IEDM, C4ISRABSTRACT: Command and Control (C2) systems are critical components in decision-making systems in both the military and civilian domains. These systems act as the data evaluation and dissemination tools for larger Command, Control, Computer, Communication, Intelligence, Surveillance, and Recognizance (C4ISR) systems. Typical C2 systems accept wide varieties of inputs from many sources such as radars, weapons systems, simulators, operator input, and data from other C2 systems. The C2 system also determines what information should be translated and disseminated to other C2 platforms. In the tactical arena, this dissemination of the information is done through the implementation of a Tactical Data Link (TDLs) such as Link-16, Link-11, Link-4A or Link-22. These systems exchange information in a binary format as prescribed by the respective Military Standards (MIL-STDs) or Standards Agreements (STANAGs) that define them. However, the high cost, lack of modularity, and platform specific implementations of TDL systems has led to attempts to standardize and normalize information exchange between C2 systems. The most advanced of these efforts is the Joint Consultation Command and Control Information Exchange Data Model (JC3IEDM), which is administered by the Multilateral Interoperability Programme (MIP). This paper describes the findings of an effort to map between these disparate data models.IntroductionSystem interoperability has been a desired goal since the origin of warfare. The need to communicate information across a distance to another entity in a safe and reliable manner has been the driver for many projects around the world. To date, the most effective means of communicating this information has been through the implementation of a Tactical Data Link (TDL) system. Tactical data link systems connect to a C2 system through an established, well-known interface to exchange data. The TDL system uses an RF radio or satellite connection to transmit the information to other participating units within the network. The type of TDL system employed determines the waveforms used and any advanced features. The most well known and widely used of the TDL systems is Link-16.Link-16 is an RF based communication method that uses Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) technology to break the bandwidth into discrete intervals. Participating units on a Link-16 network are assigned certain intervals to transmit and receive information. Link-16 is the predominant TDL system used among U.S. military forces, as well as many of our allies. In fact, future international coalition operations will require Link-16 interoperability for combat operations and other units will be limited to supply missions [1]. Link-16 is so widely used, in part, because:Security: The data is secured using Reed-Solomon encoding which currently makes the possibility of unauthorized decryption highly unlikely.Reliability: The system uses frequency-hopping technology that makes the waveform exceptionally jam-resistant and reliable, even in a cluttered environment.Timeliness: Data is transmitted in near real-time, which allows for the most up to date tactical picture.Beyond Line of Sight Capability: The link has automatic relay capabilities to extend information exchange beyond the normal distance of the waveform.Extra Features: Link-16 also provides host systems with other features such as track extrapolation, improved positional quality, and dynamic bandwidth management.Link-16 data is transmitted in binary format, as defined by U.S. MIL-STD-6016 [2] and NATO STANAG 5516 [3], to better support the near real-time requirements of the system. This data format is typically referred to as the “J-Series” family of messages. These messages represent the total of all information that can currently be exchanged on a Link-16 network with fixed encoding. The message data is broken into “J-Words” of 70 bits each and a series of these words comprises a “J-Message”. Figure 1 shows an example of the format of a Link-16 J-Word and a possible Link-16 message [3].Figure 1: Link-16 Data StructuresThe JC3IEDM started in 1998 as a voluntary effort, called the Multilateral Interoperability Program (MIP), with the goal to “…achieve international interoperability of Command and Control Information Systems (C2IS) at al levels from cops to the lowest appropriate level, in order to support multinational, combined and joint operations” [4]. In 2001, the MIP merged with the Army Tactical Command and Control System (ATCCIS) to form the C2IEDM, the predecessor of the JC3IEDM. In 2004, the NATO Data Administration Group (NDAG) agreed to collaborate with the MIP effort to produce the JC3IEDM, which would be recommended as the data management implementation for NATO command and control systems.  This effort led to a data model for joint command and control interchange that provides a common interface, and exchange mechanism, and the flexibility to expand to accommodate future interfaces. The JC3IEDM data model consists of a relational database of entities containing data-rich attributes. Figure 2 shows a representation of JC3IEDM core entity relationships. This relational model serves as the common reference model that allows for semantic interchange for participants using the model. The JC3IEDM provides two methods to exchange the information:Message Exchange Mechanism (MEM): A suite of formatted messages conforming to the Allied Data Publication No. 3 (AdatP-3)Data exchange Mechanism (DEM): A data push implementation to replicate the database with co-operating systems over some communication mediumFigure 2: JC3IEDM Core EntitiesThe JC3IEDM data model has been the focus of many recent research and integration projects. It provides more flexibility and adaptability than the Link-16 specification. It can be, and in fact has been, extended to incorporate the needs of the C2 communities. It serves as the basis for newer national and service models, which design implementation specific models that conform to the JC3IEDM model but also fulfill specific operational requirements.ProblemThe JC3IEDM provides a data model and tools that allow C2 systems to share consistent, unambiguous information in a fast and reliable method. The model is unique in that is combines technical maturity and operational applicability by combining the contributions of data modeling and operational experts from over 20 countries across a time span of over 15 years. This model is especially prevalent in the new C2 systems and simulations in development. In a similar fashion, Link-16 is a staple of the command and control infrastructure. Military platforms around the world use the system, or have plans to implement the system in the near future. Deployed tactical systems use Link-16 every day to accomplish diverse missions and interoperate across platform and service lines. It is inevitable that platforms implementing these respective systems will need to interoperate in simulated and real environments.The problem arises in the disparate nature of these two data models. There exists a need to analyze these systems at the very lowest level (the individual fields), and at the higher level of the business objects (coherent messages or objects of information exchange), to determine if the JC3IEDM data standard is robust enough to incorporate the concepts contained in the Link-16 data standard. The author believes that an analysis and mapping of these two systems will lead to extensions of the JC3IEDM that can serve as the common reference model (CRM) that will enable systems implementing the respective models to interoperate. Figure 3 shows a graphical representation of the mapping process as entities in the Link-16 data model are mapped directly to existing JC3IEDM attributes, added to existing attributes or created in the new CRM.Figure 3:Mapping Between Data ModelsMethodologyAs previously mentioned, an evaluation of the application of the JC3IEDM model to the Link-16 data standard is important to the advancement of interoperability. This is especially true in the Live, Virtual, Constructive (LVC) community, where user communities are attempting to integrate Hardware in the Loop (HWIL) systems, some which are using Link-16, with virtual and constructive simulations, some of which are based on the JC3IEDM. Providing the guidance to translate a JC3IEDM command into a Link-16 message, and the reverse, would provide users with greater flexibility in coordinating and controlling simulation and HWIL interactions. The author presents that the mapping of the current, most relevant message fields, namely the Precise Participant Location Indicator (PPLI) and command messages, will provide the most immediate use to the community.This study follows a 3-step approach to evaluating the data models. Data Value Comparison: Examination of the Link-16 domain to determine if the JC3IEDM has the capability to describe these values. Field Level Comparison: Examination of the relationships between fields in the Link-16 data and fields in the JC3IEDM. This creates a data level mapping of the models. Structural Comparison: The final step examines how the mapping of the Link-16 data structures and context affect the meaning and intent of the message, and then attempts to recreate these structures within the JC3IEDM while preserving the meaning and intent of the information.Field Survey FindingsThe field level portion of the study examined each of the over 1000 fields in the Link-16 data model to determine first if the JC3IEDM data representation could express the data, and second if there was an attribute in the JC3IEDM that matched or could be matched to the Link-16 data field. The output was compiled in a web browser that is patterned after the JC3IEDM web-browsing tool. The Link-16 messages are grouped by functional area and a main page (shown in Figure 4) provides the interface for the user to browse to a specific message type.Figure 4: Link-16/JC3IEDM Browser Main PageThe hyperlink for the message type links to the Message Field Browser page. This page has every Link-16 field with color-coded indication if the JC3IEDM has a matching attribute (green), does not have a match (red), or needs expansion (yellow). The JC3IEDM attribute is also listed, with a hyperlink that opens the JC3IEDM web-browser page for that attribute. Figure 5 shows a Message Field Browser Page.Figure 5: Link-16/JC3IEDM Browser Message PageThe field name is a hyperlink to the explanation page (shown below in Figure 6), which contains information on the field as well as the JC3IEDM attribute, and any pertinent notes about the correlation or lack thereof. Figure 6: Link-16/JC3IEDM Browser Field PageThe results indicate that the models are more alike than not. There were no Link-16 data representations that were not expressible by the JC3IEDM data types, however this excludes the use of Link-16 to transmit voice data. The findings show that 29% of the Link-16 fields have a direct attribute in the JC3IEDM, and another 38% require an expansion of existing JC3IEDM data structures to accommodate the Link-16 values. Combined with the Link-16 fields not in need of mapping to the JC3IEDM, this means that the JC3IEDM model, with minor changes, can express almost 75% of the Link-16 data model. The field level comparison also found other points of interest and tension between the two data models. The following sections examine the categories of issues discovered.Complex MappingsThere were several instances where it required 2 or more data fields in one model to satisfy the information needs of the other model. An example is found in the J2.0 message, which contains the Land Platform field. This field indicates the type of platform being reported, and whose values could indicate a vehicle or a facility. While these are valid land objects, the JC3IEDM categorizes them into distinct groups of vehicles and facilities. Thus, the JC3IEDM makes a finer distinction about the types of entities, and the information in one field of the Link-16 data model is contained in either the vehicle-type-category-code or the facility-type-category-code.Possible Missing DataThere were alignments involving required data in one model that may not be available in the other. Both the Link-16 and JC3IEDM data models have established rules governing the content and exchange of data. The JC3IEDM clearly specifies which attributes are mandatory and which are optional. The Link-16 data model is not as clear about which fields are required. As mentioned previously, Link-16 messages are transmitted as a series of 70-bit words. The Link-16 messages are sequentially oriented and must be word complete – that is to say all 70 bits of a transmitted J-Word must be included. There is only one other general rule about word transmission – the Initial Word (I-Word) must always be transmitted and must be the first word in the message. The Link-16 specification does indicate that Extension Words (E-Words) must always be transmitted for certain messages, but these are exceptions and not the general rule. All Continuation Words (C-Words) are optional. Further, just because the field is within a transmitted J-Word does not imply that the field has valid or meaningful data. Many Link-16 fields have a value indicating “Invalid” or “No Statement”, and some have an associated validity field to indicate that the value contained in the field is valid. One such instance of this problem arises when data that contained in the JC3IEDM is optional but happens to be required in the Link-16 specification. One such instance of this is the reporting-data-real-data-exercise-use-only-indicator-code, which is optional in the JC3IEDM. This field correlates to the Exercise Indicator code, which is transmitted in the I-Word and has no meaningless values. Therefore, this field is always set to a meaningful value and always transmitted when the PPLI is transmitted. However, as the corresponding JC3IEDM field is optional, there could be an instance where a JC3IEDM data model did not contain a value for the field.JC3IEDM Expression ExpansionThere were instances where the Link-16 categorization of data implied that the JC3IEDM was incomplete. The field survey of the JC3IEDM indicated that there were several areas that needed expansion. As the data model started from a land based perspective, it is not surprising that there would be missing categories that are not often associated with conducting a land operation. The database contents reflect the need and use to date. However, the Link16 data model started as an Air Force communications scheme and was immediately incorporated into Naval operations [5]. This difference in focus brings new expressions and ideas to the JC3IEDM. One example of this is the JC3IEDM entity MATERIEL-TYPE. This entity has subtypes to indicate aircraft, vehicle, and railcar to just name a few. However, there is no subtype to represent a space type. This is obviously an omission due to a lack of necessity – ground based entities such as trucks and tanks don’t interact with space-based tracks. However, the Link-16 specification was designed, and later expanded, to exchange information on space tracks. In this area, the Link-16 data model is more expansive and incorporating. Incorporation of these new ideas and expressions into the JC3IEDM will certainly expand the abilities and extend support to more user communities.Conversion IssuesThere are possible conversion issues when aligning fields between the models. As would be expected when trying to align any set of heterogeneous models, there are unit conversion considerations when translating between the JC3IEDM and Link-16. Some of these are very simple problems, such as converting from one measurement system to another (i.e. feet to meters). However, there are more subtle problems. Take for example the Frequency DFI in the Link-16 data model. One of the associated DUIs indicates that the frequency is measured in increments of .125 hertz. However, the equivalent field in the JC3IEDM, network-frequency-discrete-frequency-quantity, measures the frequency in 1 kilohertz increments. Therefore, the resolution level of the JC3IEDM is insufficient to express the range of values in the Link-16 data model. Another problem arises from the need to interpret data values from one model to the other. This example involves the positional uncertainty of a reported entity. Figure 7 illustrates the problem when attempting to convert between the models. As Figure 7A shows the JC3IEDM representation of the positional uncertainty of an entity as expressed by the geographic-position-latitude-precision-code (X) and the geographic-position-longitude-precision-code (Y). The figure shows how the reported entity, the black point in the center, could be within the elliptical area defined by the margins of error. Figure 7B depicts the Link-16 data model that reports Positional Uncertainty as a discrete fixed radius, D, from the reported point.Figure 7: Model Uncertainty Representations The issue that arises is how to interpolate between a JC3IEDM uncertainty value and a Link-16 value. Should the total area of uncertainty be calculated and then rounded to the nearest Link-16 value, or should the maximum possible distance be used as the area of uncertainty reported. Figure 8 illustrates the two choices. Figure 8: Model Uncertainty OptionsFigure A shows the JC3IEDM area of uncertainty and the equivalent Link-16 area expressed as a circle. When the entity is reported from a JC3IEDM system to a Link-16 data model, the solid gray areas represent locations where the entity could not be but are still reported as possible locations. The textured gray areas represent locations that the entity may be in but are not reported as possible in the Link-16 realm. Figure B shows the other method of translating between the model’s differing representations. The area of uncertainty reported has a much larger section where the entity could not be, however there is no chance that the entity could be in a location that was not reported as possible.Message Mapping FindingsThe data fields in the Link-16 message represent only data without context. To create context, the fields must be transmitted with other fields in an appropriate order. The Link-16 messages are the business objects that deliver information content. The field level mapping considered only individual fields, if the values could be expressed, and any discrepancies that might exist. As seen with that mapping, meaning depends not only on content, but also on context. The form of the message must also be a consideration as all the fields that represent a coherent J-Word must be available within JC3IEDM structure, and in the same relationships to preserve the meaning of the message. This portion of the survey examined each J-Word in the PPLI and Command series (the J2, J9 and J12 messages) and distilled the relationships between the fields and the meanings into object diagrams. The object model diagrams use the JC3IEDM database entities and relationships to show the individual J-Words in the Link-16 messages. The entities are shown as blocks with attributes contained inside. For space reasons, not all attributes are enumerated in the diagram, but only those that are needed to draw a relation to another entity, or describe a Link-16 data value. The attributes are color coded based on the use of the JC3IEDM field in the Link-16 message according to the following scheme:Black: This is a JC3IEDM that is not present or needed in the Link-16 data model but is used to draw relationships between JC3IEDM entities.Green: The JC3IEDM attribute completely represents a data field in the Link-16 message.Blue: The JC3IEDM field needs to be expanded in some manner to accommodate the Link-16 data values.Red: The JC3IEDM field or entity does not exist and should be added to account for the Link-16 data.Figure 9 shows the notation for the possible entity and attribute states. The left image shows a JC3IEDM entity with 3 fields – one matching a Link-16 data field, one needing expansion, and one that needs to be added as an attribute to the entity. The image on the right shows the notation for the addition of a new entity to the JC3IDM. Figure 9: Message Mapping NotationThe object diagrams also show the relationships between the JC3IEDM entities to other entities, and between JC3IEDM entities and Link-16 J-Words. The relationship between JC3IEDM entities is shown with a solid arrow connecting the key attributes of the entities. Figure 10 shows how the primary key (location-id) in the ACTION-LOCATION entity migrates to the ABSOLUTE-POINT entity as a foreign key (absolute-point-id).Figure 10: Message Mapping RelationshipsEach object diagram represents a J-Word in a Link-16 message. The entities and attributes on the diagram represent the complete representation of the data fields and meaning of the entire J-Word. However, there can be, and often are, multiple J-Words in a Link-16 J-Message. The additional J-Words amplify or modify information that came in previous J-Words. As the J-Message is a single, coherent transmission of related fields, the object diagrams show the relationship across J-Word boundaries. There are two possibilities for how the data in additional J-Words is described:Additional Relationship: The data in a subsequent J-Word is expressed as an additional attribute in a JC3IEDM entity that has been previously described. The object model prepends the symbol + to indicate this relationship.Extension Relationship: The subsequent J-Word data results from an extension to a JC3IEDM entity that has previously been described. The object model encloses the tag with parenthesis to indicate this relationship.The object model uses tags attached to entities to indicate what and where the relationship applies. The tags indicate both where the originating entity is located and to what other words the entity has relations. The tags consist of an abbreviation of the J-Word to which the entity either refers to or is referred to. The abbreviations follow the format of initial word letter and number if applicable. Here are a few examples to demonstrate the tag nomenclature: +I – Indicates that the data represented is an addition to an entity described in the I-Word(C1) – Indicates that the entity is related to an entity described in the first Continuation Word (if it comes after), or has a relationship to some entity in the first Continuation WordAn example will better illustrate the relationships and methods used to describe them. Figure 11 is a portion of the J12.0 I-Word.Figure 11: Message Mapping Notation ExampleThe three JC3IEDM entities are shown with their relationships. The OBJECT-ITEM entity has a tag on it to indicate that the entity is used to extend data into the C3 word. The REPORTING-DATA entity has two tags attached to it that indicate that the entity has relationships to other J-Words. In this case, data in the first Continuation Word extends the REPORTING-DATA entity, and there are additional attributes added to the REPORTING-DATA entity in the second Continuation Word. Figure 12 shows sections from the C1 and C2 words. Figure 12: Message Mapping Continuation WordsImage A shows how the REPORTING-DATA primary key relates to an entity that is used in the C1 word, and image B shows how data expressed in the C2 word is an additional attribute to the REPORTING-DATA entity described in the I-Word. Note that the tags are bi-directional to make indexing between the J-Words easier. Given enough space, the above relationships would be expressed as shown in Figure 13.Figure 13: J-Word Condensed MappingAs previously mentioned, each object map represents a J-Word. Figure 14 depicts an example of an object map for an entire J-Word.Figure 14: Entire J-Word MapRecommendationsThe study created mappings for each message in the studied set. This resulted in the recommendations of the addition of 37 new attributes and two new entities to the JC3IEDM data model. Full details on the recommendations can be found in [6]. Along with the recommended expansions, there were other points of interest that arose as a result of the mapping activity. The following sections describe these points.Contextual Understanding Between ModelsThe JC3IEDM is a complex inter-related data model that makes it possible to express the Link-16 data model in many ways. Sometimes it is better to add an additional attribute to communicate the data and maintain the consistency of the information and models. There are other times when the business rules can simplify the nature of the model and the inter-relationships between them. One example of this is the Link-16 data model Airborne Indicator. This indicator informs the receiver if the aircraft is in the air or on the ground. In the JC3IEDM data model, the aircraft is a type of MATERIEL and has an associated MATERIEL-STATUS entity. The MATERIEL-STATUS entity has an attribute, materiel-status-usage-status-code, to indicate the status of the materiel, and it has three values – activated, deactivated, and unknown. The business rule governing this conversion is that if the aircraft is airborne, the material-status-usage-status-code shall be set to activated. If the aircraft is not in flight, the value shall be deactivated. Through this business rule, the JC3IEDM extends an existing enumeration but avoids the addition of another attribute. JC3IEDM Enumeration Attribute RangeThe JC3IEDM uses enumerated values to represent discrete data in attributes that are not primitive types, such as numerical values or text. This represents the concept captured in the model that, for that enumerated type, the referenced entity can only occupy one of those enumerated values at any given time. This is a constraint that is not shared by the Link-16 data model. Many Link-16 fields are represented by bit-fields that allow multiple values for the same datum. Others use many fields to express a similar idea, which causes problems in translation to the JC3IEDM data model. One such example is the JC3IEDM attribute organization-status-command-and-control-indicator. This attribute represents the command and control role played by that organization, which is in this case a UNIT that refers to an entity in the Link-16 data model. It is possible for that entity to have many command and control roles such as leader of the unit, mission commander or leader of a flight. However, it is not possible to express all of these attributes through the JC3IEDM enumeration without expansion to include combinations of these enumerations to form other values. The solution is to either expand the enumerated type or create new attributes to indicate the multiple possible roles that the entity can hold. Function ExpansionOne of the more interesting features of the Link-16 data model is the ability to specify not only data, but also how that data is to be treated by the receiving system. One example of this is the Force Tell indicator. Typical C2 systems sending and receiving Link-16 data implement filtering systems to help the operator focus on the pertinent data while eliminating clutter and noise. Transmission filters are applied so as not to overload the link or other combat systems with information that is unneeded. Receive filters are applied to delineate the operational picture to allow the commander to focus on a specific mission or functional area. Each of the filters is independent and user configurable. The problem arises when a user configures a filter to block a critical piece of information that must be received. For example, a platform performing an air-tasking mission may have surface tracks filtered because they are not pertinent to the mission task. However, the report of a hazard point or distressed unit should not be filtered out. The Force Tell indictor performs just that function. It allows the sending unit to determine if the information should bypass any filters on the receiving system. This is a specification of how the data is to be treated rather than just the information in the message content. The JC3IEDM has no attribute to indicate how the received data should be treated. Another instance where the message contents cause actions at the receiving system arises in a continuation word of the J12.6 message. This message has an indicator that instructs the receiving system to flag the display with a pointer to alert the operator to the track being referenced. This display function is not provided for in the JC3IEDM data model and would need to be added. The most logical place for both of these fields is in the REPORTING-DATA entity, which is used to specify the source, quality and timing of reported data. ConclusionsThe Link-16 and JC3IEDM data models are two pieces in a much larger interoperability problem space. Both systems have qualities that make them desirable technologies in the command and control arena, and both systems also have drawbacks. Each of these data models reflect the needs of the user communities that engage them. The dissimilarity of the models is indication that different communities intended them for different uses. Now the need exists to integrate these models into a system of systems architecture.There is still much work to be done to integrate these models. There needs to be involvement, information exchange and consensus among the users about how the data models are mapped. More extensive work is needed to translate other Link-16 messages to the JC3IEDM format, and any automation tools would be very helpful in this task. One major issue to tackle is the architecture to translate between the systems. It seems logical that terminal simulation software would be the logical tool to mediate between the two models, as shown below in Figure 15.This architecture places new duties on the terminal simulation. The trigger for translating from the Link-16 realm into the JC3IEDM database would be the receipt of message traffic. This is very straightforward. The more difficult task is determining when data from the JC3IEDM database should be formulated into a Link-16 message. The transmission rules for Link-16 can be complicated, and involve periodic transmissions as well as thresholds related to data change. These rules would need to be codified in any translation utility. Figure 15: Possible Bridging ArchitectureThis study is the first step on the path to bringing interoperability between these models. It examined every message in the Link-16 data model and showed that the JC3IEDM model could express the contained data. It also mapped a subset of the Link-16 message set to the JC3IEDM data model to prove that the information could be preserved in translation between the models. Hopefully, the products of these efforts - the Link-16/JC3IEDM Browser and the Message Mappings, will serve as useful starting points to engage the larger user communities. References[1] Golden Caron and Robinson, Brian, “Link 16 Comms Near Transformation”, last accessed at October 2007, online available at  http://www.DefenseSystems.com/issues/2_6/upfront/1110-1.html [2] MIL-STD-6016C Edition 3 2001[3] Tactical Data Exchange – Link 16, STANAG 5516 Edition 3.[4] Multilateral Interoperability Programme, Last update 10 March 2007, online available at  HYPERLINK "http://www.mip-site.org" http://www.mip-site.org[5] Allard, Kenneth C., “Command, Control, and the Common Defense”, Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.: 1990[6] Devivi, Anthony, “Evaluation of Applicability of JC3IEDM Based Information Exchange Standardization Efforts to Link-16 Based Systems”.  Thesis Paper, Old Dominion University, May 2008 EMBED PBrush   EMBED PBrush   EMBED PBrush   EMBED PBrush   EMBED PBrush   EMBED PBrush   EMBED PBrush   EMBED PBrush   EMBED PBrush   EMBED PBrush   EMBED PBrush   EMBED PBrush   EMBED PBrush   EMBED PBrush   EMBED PBrush  