UK Defence Common Simulation Infrastructure and ServicesDavid EdmondsonBharat PatelDefence Science and Technology LaboratoryIvely RoadFarnborough, HampshireGU14 0LXUK© Crown Copyright Dstl 2008+44 (0)1252 455443, +44 (0)1252 455046 HYPERLINK "mailto:dedmondson@dstl.gov.uk" dedmondson@dstl.gov.uk,  HYPERLINK "mailto:bmpatel@dstl.gov.uk" bmpatel@dstl.gov.ukKey words: Simulation, Infrastructure, ServicesABSTRACT: The UK MoD has defined the need for Defence Common Infrastructure and Services (DCSIS) aimed at providing common services backed by standards and governance, to MoD simulation systems across all application areas, including training, warfighting experimentation and test and evaluation. The objective is to improve overall cost effectiveness and coherency across MOD use of simulations. The approach to developing and implementing the DCSIS concept will be evolutionary and will involve alignment with existing and future MoD programmes, including convergence with C4I and operational systems.A Special Interest Group (SIG) involving a joint MoD/Industry team has been formed as part of the UK MoD’s Synthetic Environments (SEs) Tower of Excellence to conduct research and development work to produce a DCSIS Integration and Development Environment (IDE). The IDE will act as a prototyping capability for the ‘in-service’ DCSIS capability.This paper will describe the architectures, key components and stakeholders of DCSIS.  It will also present the implementation plan that will realise DCSIS, including the progress to date.  It will also address how such a service will be managed through life, including seeking alignment with similar programmes and engaging with relevant international activities (e.g. via SISO Study Groups, NATO MSG Research Task Groups), to share experience and best practice, and to adopt common standards where possible.1. IntroductionTraditionally seen primarily as a cost effective alternative to training or testing in the live environment, simulation is now seen to be the only practical way of reproducing the complexity and weapon performance of the modern battle-space and has become a key enabling capability for defence. It impacts on activities from research and development, analysis, experimentation, capability acquisition and test and evaluation through to training, exercising and mission preparation.The Directorate of Analysis Experimentation and Simulation (DAES) has produced a UK MoD Strategy for Simulation (including modelling and Synthetic Environments) [1] which highlights the lack of common simulation infrastructure and services, which has led both to duplication of effort and resources and the inability to rapidly deliver the same components, such as terrain databases, to all users.2. StrategyThe Simulation Strategy recommends that Simulation capabilities must be more reconfigurable and adaptable to meet future changing operational needs and be supported by common services and infrastructure to drive overall through life cost effectiveness. New simulation capabilities, and legacy systems on update, used across Defence, including for experimentation, acquisition, warfare development and training, are to:Be progressively networked Use open Industry standards and architectures Be acquired against common URD/SRD statementsMake maximum use of common services (e.g. computer generated forces, scenarios and geospatial data)Make maximum use of COTS technologyThe core of the Simulation Strategy is to ensure the interoperability, cost effectiveness and utility of MoD’s simulation investments by delivering a ‘Defence Common Simulation Infrastructure and Services’ (DCSIS) project.  A Service Orientated Architecture (SOA) option for the services will be investigated.  DCSIS will address the requirements for standard architectures, simulation data packs, networking, C4I convergence, security, nodes and common scenarios.  It will explore possible approaches (such as passive, mandated or market forces) and how they might be exploited. It will:Establish a system federation, including international links, using the common network provided by Joint Multi-National Interoperability Assurance Network (JMNIAN);Develop a synthetic wrap to improve Joint Collective NEC capability;Develop, field and maintain a data repository based on top-down requirements to drive consistency and economy in acquisition.3. Concept The DCSIS concept is to meet these strategic goals by providing common services, backed by standards and governance, to all MoD simulation applications. DCSIS should be able to support the use of simulation from early concept operational analysis work, through capability development and acquisition to training. As such DCSIS will have a large stakeholder community with different, but related, needs.The approach will be evolutionary rather than “big bang” and will involve alignment with existing and future programmes and convergence with C4I and operational systems. DCSIS will be implemented by a MoD and Industry team.The common services will include Computer Generated Forces, Synthetic Natural Environments, Data and Scenarios, SE Tools and Live Virtual Constructive connectivity. Network infrastructure will be required for both an intranet and a service delivery extranet; these may both be provided via the JMNIAN high bandwidth, low latency, secure network. It is expected that DCSIS will be built on a “hub and spoke” design where key services are delivered from the hubs, linking to other LVC simulation assets within MoD as and when required.  Linkages would also be provided to Industry and Allies. Dstl hosted a workshop in March 2007 to expose Industry to DCSIS and solicit opinions. They key findings were:- There is clear support from Industry for the DCSIS programme and a high expectation that it will work.- The technology to support DCSIS is seen as mature and an evolutionary approach is favoured.- JMNIAN is seen as a good network infrastructure for DCSIS though it would help smaller companies if there was a lower cost, possibly Internet based, access method.- A minimum set of standards should be applied to provide coherency without stifling development.- The DCSIS core team is seen as important and should be a combination of MoD and Industry.- A service covering Synthetic Natural Environments is seen as most beneficial.- One of the main barriers to the successful adoption of DCSIS is seen as stove-piped thinking. Demonstration of the benefits of simulation generally, and DCSIS in particular, will be important. This may be assisted by emphasis on a Concept of Use for DCSIS which supports Through Life Capability Management. - IPR and security issues could present problems, however there are lessons that can be learned from NITEworks (a MoD and Industry Network Enabled Capability experimentation programme) experience.4. Research and Development ProgrammeA programme of work will be undertaken to research and develop an Integration and Development Environment (IDE) that will act as a prototype of DCSIS and provide the means to mature and test simulation technologies, components, services and networks in readiness for transfer to a DCSIS operational capability.  4.1 SE TowerThe MoD has introduced a number of Towers of Excellence (ToE) which are aimed at developing a better understanding of the critical capabilities we require and the ways in which they can be most effectively delivered. They are co-operative groupings, led by the MOD, which bring together key players in the UK defence industry sector and leading UK academic establishments.  The Synthetic Environments ToE has special interest groups (SIGs) working on Interoperability; Synthetic Natural Environments; Exploitation of Commercial Simulation; Synthetic Environment Management, Exploitation of Synthetic Environments and Computer Generated Forces.A new SIG (SIG7) has been created to conduct the DCSIS research and development work which is being undertaken in two main phases: Definition; and Development of the IDE. 4.2 Definition Phase TasksIn the Definition phase, which will last 6 months, the DCSIS vision will be refined and the implementation plan, concept of use, and initial architecture of the IDE will be established. The activities of this phase are:4.2.1 Refining the VisionRefine the vision of DCSIS, to produce a definitive statement of the purpose, aims and needs for Defence Common Simulation Infrastructure and Services. Develop a Communications Strategy for the vision.4.2.2 Implementation PlanGenerate and update the Implementation Plan for DCSIS, including budgetary costs, development of the IDE, evolution of the prototype into the operational DCSIS, and the exploitation and joint use events.4.2.3 Concept of UseGenerate a Concept of Use for the Defence Common Simulation Infrastructure and Services. Identify a set of use cases to test the interactions amongst the stakeholders.4.2.4 Initial ArchitectureDefine an Initial Architecture for the Defence Common Simulation Infrastructure and Services, including the underpinning process that controls interactions between stakeholders.4.2.5 DCSIS Definition Document SetGenerate DCSIS Definition Document that can be maintained to reflect DCSIS development and capabilities over time. Produce a history and change record to allow the purpose of changes to be recorded to aid with further decision making.4.2.6 Detailed Plans for IDE development phaseDetail and maintain the implementation plan for the development of the IDE that includes prototyping and demonstration activities of DCSIS.Note that the first 5 tasks above refer to whole of DCSIS, and Task 6 is the detailed plan for the IDE research, development and demonstrations during the subsequent Development phase.  4.3 Development PhaseIn the Development phase, which will last 30 months, the IDE will be designed, integrated, tested and evolved. The IDE will be used as a DCSIS prototype and will demonstrate the concept of use in a series of training, analysis, experimentation, and capability engineering events.  This will lead to the transfer and exploitation of technologies and the development of the organisational requirements for the DCSIS operational capability.It is expected that in the development phase DCSIS will consist of a core which provides services based around five overlapping and interdependent technical areas. Services will be provided via a delivery extranet and supported by a collaboration intranet as shown in Figure 1.The activities of this phase will largely be determined during the Definition phase but it is expected that the main areas of research will be:4.3.1 DCSIS CoreThis is the operational core of DCSIS and the research will address how to:composition of DCSIS and overall structurelocation and accommodation requirements.core functions including processes and administration.policy and procedures for: V&V, reuse, standards.DCSIS business issues such as: intellectual property, software licensing, provision of services.Figure 1: Initial DCSIS Structure4.3.2 InfrastructureThe services will be provided initially through JMINAN but research needs to address:Internal and external network configuration and security.Provision of network to smaller companies, possibly via Internet.International networking.Intranet and extranet service requirements and delivery. File serving, web services, wiki etc.4.3.3 Computer Generated Forces (CGF)The CGF service is expected to be much in demand as well as an opportunity to ensure coherency and efficiency of battle-space context across MOD. The following topics will need to be addressed:EvaluationPopulation with red and blue forces.Levels of detail and aggregation.Local and remote provision and control.Scenario generation: tools and technologies, repository.4.3.4 Synthetic Natural Environments (SNE)An SNE service should provide efficiencies and be responsive support current operations. The issues to baeaddressed here are:Standards.Core tool selection, provison and training.Nature of industry participation.Co-location or distributed working.Involvement of information providers: DGC, Met office, Hydrographic office etc.4.3.5 Data and ScenariosProviding scenario advice and consistent data are essential for ensuring consistent context across the many defence applications.  The research will address:Required expertise: experimentation, analysis, militaryScenario developmentProcesses and tools: MSDLData and assumptions: Orbats, entity data.4.3.6 SE ToolsEnsuring the execution and output from the simulation will need development and investment advice in:Common tools: Visualisation, Exercise management, Logging/AAR, C4I representations, virtual simulations (e.g. desktop flight simulators).Runtime management: processes and standards.COTS tools: Evaluation and exploitation of commercially available tools.4.3.7 Live/Virtual/Constructive (LVC) IntegrationApplications will require any combination of LVC to achieve their aim. Specifying standards and tools to enable LVC integration will require understanding of:Standards: DIS, HLA, C-BML, JC3IEDM, TENA…Tools: AIME, Babel Box, AWES5. ExploitationAs part of Phase 2 DCSIS IDE will provide a prototyping capability that will integrate, test and demonstrate the capability and will utilise or complement other infrastructure and services capabilities such as:KITE: The Knowledge Integration and Test Environment: a collection of hardware and software used for integrating and testing products from the research programme,; demonstrating SE concepts and providing support to trials.JCBM ARTD: The Joint Command and Battlespace Management Advanced Research and Technology Demonstrator is an experimental facilty with flexible lab space for trials and extensive networking resources. It is the hub of the JMNIAN network and the UK point of presence for CFBLNet and other international networks.JMNIAN: The Joint Multinational Interoperability Assurance Network was originally developed as a secure high bandwidth, low latency network for test and evaluation but has been adopted by the simulation community as national network for distributed simulation. It is being installed into research, industry and training sites.NITEWorks: This is a MoD and Industry programme to conduct investigations into key issues for the development and use of Network Enabled Capability.JCNTC: The Joint and Collective Network Training Capability programme has been addressing the issues of successfully linking existing and future training facilities. Issues addressed include network connectivity, interoperability standards and common terrain provision.Synthetic Wrap: This programme has enhanced live and virtual training by the provision of additional constructive entities to provide a broader context for decision making and allow the use of ISTAR assets in decision making.It will ensure coherency with:CEDRIC: The Centre for Experimentation, De-Risking and Integration for C4I capability is the equivalent to a test range for C4I systems. It will provide the capability to represent the Future core network options and their development and support the delivery of an integrated set of future C4I capabilities with the ability to provide key functionality when under stress (applying the principles of graceful degradation and resilience).IMSSA: The Integrated Modelling and Simulation Support to Acquisition programme provides a help desk service to help the acquisition community make best use of simulation.  IMSSA could be a valuable resource for informing people about DCSIS.COTSEU: The Commercial Off The Shelf Software Evaluation Unit is a project has concentrated on using games based technologies for military applications, this includes the Joint Combat Operations Virtual Environment which is being widely deployed as a training system.5.1 EventsAs part of the development and prototyping process DCSIS will support a number of training and experimentation events as a way of clarifying requirements and testing solutions. Some of these will be identified during the Definition phase, others will be supported as opportunities arise.6. Progress A second Industry workshop was held in May 2007 to report on the outcome of the first workshop and present further developments of the DCSIS concept. This workshop was also intended to gather opinions on how to contract the DCSIS research and development. Industry participants were asked to submit outlines of how they thought the DCSIS research programme should progress and what their role in it could be.  We received a number of replies including a joint effort by Team ForSIS, a consortium of MBDA, Thales, BAE Systems and QinetiQ. We also received interesting responses from two smaller companies, SEA Systems and SCS. After further clarification as to how other companies would be involved and how SIG7 would interact with other SE Tower SIGs we decided to take the Team ForSIS approach to initiating the definition phase study and migrating to DCSIS IDE development.A statement of requirements and invitation to tender were generated and an acceptable response was received from Team ForSIS. A contract was let in January 2008 for the Definition Phase7. International LinkageDCSIS will also provide the primary support for conducting distributed coalition training exercises or experiments.We would like to make contact with others involved in similar infrastructure and services programmes to share experience and seek alignment through common standards and processes. If there is sufficient interest a SISO study group could be formed to progress co-operation.8. References[1] DAES, UK MoD: “2* Draft Strategy for Simulation (including modelling and Synthetic Environments)”, Nov 2007Author BiographiesDAVID EDMONDSON is a Principal Scientist and member of the Synthetic Environment and Collective Training team at the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Farnborough, UK. He is technical advisor on the SE Tower Interoperability SIG and is the Dstl lead for the DCSIS programme.BHARAT PATEL is a senior capability advisor within DSTL, UK MOD, for defence analysis, experimentation and simulation. He provides advice on strategy, development and exploitation of simulation for operational analysis, war-fighting experimentation, joint training, and operational readiness. He also advises on test and evaluation, and systems engineering research for autonomous systems. He has past experience in aerospace and maritime systems procurement, and aerodynamics research.Geospatial data includes terrain, atmospheric and hydrographic data and cultural information, to portray the environment surrounding the simulation entities. See: http://www.niteworks.net EMBED Visio.Drawing.11  