Enhanced Position Location Reporting System (EPLRS) and Situation Awareness Data Link (SADL)Technical Advice and Lexicon for Enabling Simulation(SADL TALES)Joe SorrocheASRC Communications, Ltd.USAF Distributed Mission Operations Center (USAF DMOC)4500 Aberdeen Dr., SE, Building 942, Kirtland Air Force Base, NM 87117505-853-0372, DSN 263-0372 HYPERLINK "mailto:joe.sorroche@kirtland.af.mil" joe.sorroche@kirtland.af.milGeorge DusoldLockheed Martin Information Systems and Global ServicesAir Force Research Laboratory, 6030 South Kent Street, Mesa, AZ 85212480-988-6561 x442, DSN 474-6442HYPERLINK "mailto:george.dusold.ctr@us.af.mil"george.dusold.ctr@us.af.milABSTRACT: The US Army’s Enhanced Position Location Reporting System (EPLRS) system supports their tactical operations on the battlefield with a digital data communications system. EPLRS uses a Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) architecture, and an anti–jam waveform with a built–in secure data unit to preserve data security. Situational Awareness Data Link (SADL) incorporates the EPLRS radio set onto the F–16 and A-10 aircraft.  By modifying the software and interface with the aircraft avionics, EPLRS is integrated with aircraft avionics to provide cockpit displays of data from other SADL equipped fighters as well as ground–based EPLRS locations.  The major SADL functions are:Air to Air (A–A) tactical & situational awareness (SA) capabilities, such as:Interoperability between aircraft which adds internal aircraft information onto the network for others to access and displaySupport multi–track target environments which adds internal aircraft radar track information onto the network for others to access and displayAir to Ground (A–G) tactical & SA capabilities, for interoperability between aircraft which adds internal aircraft air–to–ground information onto the network for others to access and displaySA information to avoid A–G fratricide, for interoperability between aircraft and ground network; this allows the aircraft to request positional data on “friendly” ground units from a ground based EPLRS networkA–G tactical & SA capabilities from a digital Forward Air Controller’s (FAC) message, for interoperability between Close Air Support (CAS) aircraft and Ground Forward Air Controller (GFAC) allowing the GFAC to digitally send target positional data.Gateway SA capabilities, to allow information exchange between EPLRS/SADL network and Link 16 networks through a common Gateway. There are immediate operational requirements for existing military simulations to exchange EPLRS/SADL data using a single interoperable standard.  The proposed DIS and HLA models are based on the SISO-STD-002 standard, formerly known as TADIL TALES. This paper describes the DIS and HLA modes, the process of EPLRS/SADL message exchange, and a DIS and HLA EPLRS/SADL radio frequency network model.IntroductionThis paper proposes procedures that may be used to develop a tactical data link protocol for simulating Enhanced Position Locating Reporting System (EPLRS) and Situational Awareness Data Link (SADL) in Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) and High Level Architecture (HLA).  There are many requirements for achieving fidelity among different users that can be met by establishing discrete, scalable, interoperable levels of fidelity for different users. This in turn will allow for a low cost initial implementation with a path toward upgrading to detailed EPLRS/SADL model as requirements evolve.The DIS simulation protocol for EPLRS/SADL is described in terms of Version 6 DIS Transmitter and Signal Protocol Data Units (PDUs). No changes are required to the Transmitter or Signal PDUs described in Reference 1. EPLRS/SADL specific enumerations have been created to populate the standard fields and records. The implementation of EPLRS/SADL exploits the fact that both these PDUs are variable length. In the case of the Transmitter PDUs, this paper will describe how the variable length modulation parameter fields will be populated.  In the case of the Signal PDU, EPLRS/SADL specific information is relegated to the variable length data fields. EPLRS/SADL Operating CharacteristicsEPLRS uses the same principle of frequency hopping Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) as Link 16.  The network time and capacity are divided into divisions called time slots. However, each time slot is much smaller, 1.953125 milliseconds each with 512 time slots per second. An epoch is 64 seconds long comprised of 32768 time slots. There are 1350 epochs in a 24-hour day. Therefore, the current epoch, set and time slot number can be calculated from the current time. The TDMA architecture requires that each EPLRS/SADL Unit (EU) must know when its transmit time slots occur. EUs must be synchronized with a common network time to receive and transmit on the network. In an EPLRS network, one EU in a network is designated as the Net Control Station (NCS).SADL incorporates the EPLRS radio set into the F-16 and A-10 aircraft, thus integrating both air and ground equipped EPLRS users into one common tactical picture.  Thus air and ground assets can access the same link for tactical data link information.  EPLRS/SADL uses both J series and Variable Message Format (VMF) messages to exchange tactical information. General RequirementsThis section describes general requirements for simulation of EPLRS independent of the simulation protocol used. The specific implementation under DIS is described in section 4.  The specific requirements for implementation under HLA are described in section 5.  The general requirements are:Simulators in compliance with this proposed standard shall at a minimum have the capability to identify the Needline of transmitted data to allow them to operate at Time Slot Allocation (TSA) mode level 0 and 1. All J-Series messages shall be bit encoded in accordance with the MIL-STD-6016 TADIL J specification. In the specification, each time slot contains one 35-bit header, padded to 48 bits, and a varying number of 75 bit messages, padded to 80 bits, unless the message type indicator specifies otherwise. All VMF Application Header messages shall be bit encoded in accordance with the MIL-STD-2045-47001C Connectionless Data Transfer Application Layer Standard.All VMF Messages shall be bit encoded in accordance with the MIL-STD-6017 Variable Message Format Standard.Regardless of level of fidelity, all transmission modulation parameter fields shall be filled with meaningful data. When the header indicates Reed-Solomon encoding, the data area shall still be comprised of non Reed-Solomon encoded TADIL J messages.Systems shall wait until the time slot occurs to transmit data in order to receive the latest update to data (i.e. time slots shall not be “pre-sent”). Receiving systems shall buffer messages after the time slot has occurred to account for network delays. The amount of time to buffer messages for a time slot shall be a runtime configuration item. The amount of time entered shall be the same for all participants in the EPLRS/SADL network and will cause the simulations to all “retire” a particular time slot at the same time. This effect is not important for lower levels of fidelity (TSA modes 0, 1) but is critical for all fidelity levels that tie a message to a particular time slot along with a Network Data Load (NDL). If the effects of messages arriving later than the time slot are not important (multiple JUs transmitting in the same time slot, contention access, or data arriving while the receiving JU is transmitting), or the physical network infrastructure has low delays (less than 3 msec), the buffer time can be set to a low number or to zero.All systems set at TSA level 2 or higher shall have their system times synchronized to a common time reference. Any error in the clock synchronization times (e.g. average NTP error) must be added to the network delays (the buffer time) before retiring a time slot. For real-time DIS or HLA simulation applications, NTP (or equivalent) is recommended. For non-real-time simulation applications, HLA time management is recommended.All systems should have some representation of a terminal clock time. If medium fidelity synchronization is to be accomplished, the system shall model a terminal clock (and its associated drift). At TSA level 2 or greater, if multiple messages are received with identical Message Security Group, net number, and timeslot number, receivers shall not process messages except from the closest transmitting entity (in the simulation space) as determined by the world coordinates location field in the transmitter PDU or attribute.Time slots shall be numbered sequentially. When the epoch is 1350, the last valid time slot is 32767 (end of the day).  The total number of timeslots is 44235450.Generated machine receipts shall use time slots as assigned in the network description. There is no special consideration given to machine receipts; they are treated as any other EPLRS/SADL fixed format message.Relay is accomplished by transmitting relay information in assigned time slots. There is no special mechanism necessary to simulate relay transmissions.Transmission messages shall only be sent with signal messages in conjunction with the following events: entering the EPLRS/SADL network, exiting the EPLRS/SADL network, during synchronization state changes, with PPLI messages, and with initial net entry messages.EPLRS/SADL implementation under DISThis section proposes the requirements for simulation of EPLRS/SADL using the DIS Signal and Transmitter PDU. For the DIS standard, transmission and receipt of PDUs, and general service requirements, refer to the IEEE Standard 1278.1a -1998. In implementing the Signal PDU, perceived data should be able to be sent on a configurable Uniform Datagram Protocol (UDP) port separate from all other DIS data. This allows datalinks to be selectively routed without additional hardware. This also allows gateways to forward data between legacy DIS datalink formats and the new standardized format.Transmitter PDU DescriptionAnnex A shows the format for the Transmitter PDU for EPLRS/SADL simulation.  Transmitter PDUs used in EPLRS/SADL simulation shall include all of the standard information, as well as the information described in the modulation fields. The Transmitter PDU shall contain the following fields:The Radio Entity Type Category field shall be set to 24 for EPLRS/SADL terminal.The Input Source field shall be set to 8 for Digital Data Device.Frequency. This field shall specify the SADL center frequency of 435000000.Transmit Frequency Bandwidth. This field shall contain the bandwidth of the SADL signal, representing the instantaneous bandwidth of the SADL signal. The field shall be represented by a 32-bit float value of 7000000, unless operating in communications mode 2 or 4.Modulation Type. The Modulation Type fields contain enumerations for the major and detail modulation fields:The Spread Spectrum field is a 16-bit Boolean array, and shall be set to 1 for frequency. The Major modulation field is a 16-bit enumeration, and shall be set to 7 for Carrier Phase Shift Modulation.The detail modulation field is a 16-bit enumeration, and shall contain a 0.The System field is a 16-bit enumeration, and shall be set to 7. (SADL is an EPLRS system).Crypto System. For SADL simulation under this standard this field shall be set to zero. Crypto Key ID. For SADL simulation under this standard this field shall be set to zero.Length of Modulation Parameters. These fields shall specify the length in octets of the modulation parameters that follow this field. This length shall be set to 8, representing 8 octets for the EPLRS Transmitter PDU.Modulation Parameters. These fields shall specify the modulation type specific characteristics of the Transmitter PDU. Modulation Parameter 1 shall contain the TSA mode with an enumeration of 0-4 for TSA level 0-4 as described in section 5.1.2. Modulation Parameter 2 shall contain the transmitting terminal’s primary mode. Setting the enumeration to 1 shall indicate that the entity is the Timing Master. Setting it to 2 shall indicate that the entity is a Net Participant.Modulation Parameter 3 shall contain the transmitting Radio Set Type, with the following enumerations: 0=None, 1=Net Control Station (NCS), 2=Manpack, 3=Airborne Vehicle, 4=Surface Vehicle, 5=Grid Reference, 6=SADL, 7=Gateway.Modulation Parameter 4 shall contain the synchronization state. For TSA mode level 0-3 this shall be set to 3 for “fine” synchronization.  For TSA level 4, it is initially set to 2 for “coarse” synchronization and the procedures in section 5.1.4.2 for medium-level synchronization are followed.Modulation Parameter 5 shall contain the Network Synchronization ID. For TSA modes 0-2, it shall be set to default. For TSA modes 3-4, it shall be a 32-bit random integer. Only an NTR can generate a Network Synchronization ID; all other participants shall use the ID obtained from the NTR to which they are synchronized.IEEE 1278.1a-1995 transmission rules for radios will apply.  A transmitter/signal PDU pair or transmitter/signal/transmitter PDU wrap will be implemented as required.Signal PDU DescriptionAnnex A shows the format for the Signal PDU. The Signal PDU includes all standard fields as described in Reference 1. When used for SADL simulation the following specific information is required:	Entity and Radio ID.  These fields shall contain the ID of the entity and radio transmitting the signal. Radios are numbered sequentially starting with 1.Encoding scheme. For J series messages, bits 0 – 13 shall contain the number of J words not including the TDL J header.  For K series messages, bits 0-13 shall be set to 0.  Bits 14-15 shall contain the value 1 to indicate an encoding class raw binary data.TDL Type. This field shall specify the TDL type as a 16-bit enumeration field, and shall be set to 5 for Situational Awareness Data Link (SADL) and shall be set to 24 for Enhanced Position Location Reporting System (EPLRS).Sample Rate. The sample rate shall be set to zero. Data Length. This field shall contain the length of data in bits beginning after the samples field.Samples. This field shall be set to zero.Data Field. The EPLRS/SADL network header portion of the Signal PDU Data Fields shall be set as follows:Needline Number. This field is a 16-bit unsigned integer, and shall be used to segregate information within an EPLRS/SADL network by creating virtual networks of participants.Needline Type. This field is an 8-bit unsigned integer (0-16) used to identify the type of needline used to for signal data transmission.  The Needline type determines the ability of establishing communication paths between radio sets in the network. This field shall be set with an enumeration in accordance with the needline types as follows:Duplex: Establishes a two-way communication path between radio-sets in the network Established by the Network Control Station (NCS)Dynamically Allocated Permanent (DAP) Virtual Circuit:  A temporary duplex needline that does not require NCS intervention.Simplex:  Establishes a one-way communications path between a single source and one or more destinations.Point - to - point:  Establishes a duplex path at a higher transmission rate.Carrier Sense Multiple Access (CSMA):  Establishes two-way communication path between multiple source and multiple destinations.CSMA Exclusive Needline:  NCS operator enters all Radio Set (RS) as assigned to the needline as sources in the needline library.CSMA Dynamic Source Index (DSI) Neeline:  NCS operator enters the needline data without specifying the RS IDs.  No source unit is entered.Muli Source Group Needline:  Establishes a CSMA - type needline, but each sender has a dedicated, guaranteed amount of time to talk.Division ID. This field is an 8-bit unsigned integer, and is used to identify the EPLRS division ID on which the radio set is transmitting. For EPLRS Division IDs from A-G this record shall be set to the values of 1-7 respectively.  On SADL units the Air Key, Ground Key and Gateway Key are the Division ID.  For TSA Mode 0 this record is not required and the field is set to “all F’s” indicating a no statement/wildcard.Guard Channel. This field is an 8-bit unsigned integer, and is used to identify the EPLRS guard channel on with the radio set is transmitting.  For EPLRS Guard Channels 0-7, this record shall be set to the values of 0-7 respectively.  (Guard Channel is the 1st digit of the SADL CHAN setting) For TSA Mode 0 this record is not required and the field is set to “all F’s” indicating a no statement/wildcard.Channel Hopping Frequency.  This field is an 8-bit unsigned integer, and is used to identify the EPLRS channel hopping frequency pattern on with the radio set is transmitting.  This record shall be set to a value of 0-7.  (Channel Hopping Frequency Number is 2nd digit of the SADL CHAN setting) For TSA Mode 0 this record is not required and the field is set to “all F’s” indicating a no statement/wildcard.Own #.  (SADL Radio only) This field is an 8 bit integer and shall contain the SADL Own # when transmitting on Air Key (Division ID).  Set to 0 otherwise.Padding.  This field is an 8 bit integer and shall be set to 0.  Time Slot ID. For TSA level 0-1, this field shall be set to zero. This field is comprised of 2 16 -bit unsigned integers, and shall contain time slot information. For the first 16-bit unsigned integer 0 represents the first time slot of the epoch, time slot 32767 represents the last time slot of the epoch.  There are 32767 time slots per epoch. (512 Time Slots per second).  For the second 16-bit unsigned integer, 0 represents the first epoch of the day, epoch 1350 represents the last epoch of the day.  An epoch is 64 seconds long and there are 1350 Epochs in a 24 hour day. Perceived Transmit Time.  NTP timestamps are represented as a 64-bit unsigned fixed-point number, in seconds relative to 0h on 1 January 1900. The integer part is in the first 32 bits and the fraction part in the last 32 bits. The precision of this representation is about 200 picoseconds, which should be adequate for even the most exotic requirements. See RFC1305 for detailed format. All F’s in this field shall indicate a no statement/wildcard.Message Data Header.  There are two 16 bit fields in the message data header.  The first indicates the number of octets in VMF Application Header.  The second indicates the length of VMF Message, in octets.Message Data.  The message format is defined by the User Message Format (UMF) Identifier in the VMF Application Header. For J series messages, the Link 16 header only includes the source track number.  All other bits are padding.HLA ModelIt is almost certain that the HLA implementation of the EPLRS/SADL protocol will form part of a larger Federation Object Model (FOM). The HLA implementation of EPLRS/SADL is therefore defined as a Base Object Model (BOM), as described in BOM Study Group Final Report: (SISO REF 005 2001). A BOM is defined as "a single aspect of simulation interplay that can be used as a building block" within a FOM.The EPLRS/SADL BOM is described in the Object Model Template (OMT).  In the HLA standard (Reference 2) the OMT is formatted in extensible Markup Language (XML).  However, at the time of writing, many federations still use the older HLA 1.3 (Reference 3) pre-XML OMT format. In order to facilitate implementation, two versions of the BOM will be created.  The file EPLRS_SADL-BOM.omd will contain the HLA 1.3 OMT tables, which are shown in Annex B of this paper.  A second file, EPLRS_SADLbom.xml, will be created that complies with the OMT XML format.Object Class DataSADL TALES BOMs define no new object classes. Instead the BOM defines a single complex data type SADLTransmitterStruct that corresponds to the tactical data link modulation parameters in the DIS Transmitter PDU shown in Annex A. An attribute of this complex data type should be added to the object class in the parent FOM corresponding to the DIS Transmitter PDU.  Modulation parameters of the Transmitter PDU shown in Annex A should map to the fields of the SADLTransmitterStruct complex data type attribute.Parent object class fields are also modified such that they refer to the corresponding Transmitter PDU fields (see Assumption 1 in section 4.2).NOTE: For a RPR FOM implementation, an attribute of the SADLTransmitterStruct complex data type should be added to the RadioTransmitter object class.Interaction Class DataThe family of interactions is a hierarchy in which the BOM’s base class for this interaction is a generic class - the TDLBinaryRadioSignal interaction. This class is an empty class, contains no parameters, and is neither publishable nor subscribable.  The specific parameters are properties of the various subclasses of this generic base class, and it is these subclasses that are published and subscribed to.A tactical data link interaction shall be added as a subclass of the TDLBinaryRadioSignal interaction, and contain the tactical data link network header parameters. The SADLMessageRadioSignal interaction contains the tactical data link message data.  Additional interactions shown in Annex B define the other types of EPLRS/SADL messages.The SADL TALES BOM design is such that the TDLBinaryRadioSignal interaction becomes a subclass of the parent FOM's equivalent of the DIS Signal PDU.Adding Tactical Data Link BOMs to the RPR FOMAdding a TDL BOM to the RPR FOM consists of three steps: adding the TDL Link Radio Signal interaction, adding the SADLTransmitterData structure, and adding the parameters necessary, as well as the associated enumerated and complex data types.  Adding the interaction is the same for both RPR FOM version 1.0 and 2.0. The manner of adding the SADLTransmitterData structure differs between the two RPR FOM versions.The TDLBinaryRadioSignal class shall be added as a subclass of the RawBinaryRadioSignal interaction class; this is done in order to allow access to the HostRadioIndex parameter in the RawBinaryRadioSignal interaction class. The HostRadioIndex parameter will tie the TDL message to a specific Host and Radio Transmitter.The SADLRadioSignal interaction class is added as a subclass of a new interaction class, the TDLBinaryRadioSignal interaction, which itself is a subclass of the RPR FOM's RawBinaryRadioSignal interaction class as shown in Annex B.SummarySADL TALES used the SISO Link 16 Standard as a guide so that the EPLRS/SADL tactical data link would have a DIS and HLA model similar to the Link 16 model.  The Link 16 HLA model was designed such that additional tactical data link BOMs could be created quickly, by simply adding interactions after the TDL Binary Radio Signal interaction.   Additional tactical data link DIS and HLA models will be created using the same methodology.A SISO standards product nomination will be submitted creating the SISO EPLRS/SADL Product Development Group. AcknowledgementsWe thank AFRL and DMOC for sponsoring this paper and supporting SISO participation for the EPLRS/SADL DIS and HLA standard.  From DMOC, we thank Chief Engineer Mr. Tom Brown, Mr. Jeff Wakefield, DMOC’s Technical Advisor, and Lt. Col. Donald “Drex” Dreschler, DMOC’s commander.References[1]	IEEE 1278.1, 1995, “Standard for Distributed Interactive Simulation – Application Protocols”.[2]	IEEE 1516 –2000 IEEE Standard for Modeling and Simulation (M&S) High Level Architecture (HLA).[3]	High Level Architecture Object Model Template Specification v1.3, 5 February 1998.Author BiographyMr. Sorroche is a Senior Systems Engineer with Arctic Slope Regional Corporation Communications (ASRCC), and has 19 years professional experience; 12 years experience in the Modeling and Simulation field. He currently works at the DMOC for the System Architecture Group, and has been the Engineering lead for the DMOC for many JEFX, Blue Flag, and Virtual Flag exercises. He is the Chair for the SISO TADIL TALES Product Support Group, the Link 11/11B Product Development Group Chair, and the SISO Liaison for the NATO Tactical Data Link Interoperability Testing Syndicate.  He has Bachelors and Masters of Science Degrees in Electrical Engineering from New Mexico State University.  He is a member of Tau Beta Pi and Eta Kappa Nu Honor Societies.   Mr. Dusold is a Software Engineer with Lockheed Martin at the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL), Warfighter Readiness Research Division in Mesa Arizona.  He completed a B.S. in Electrical Engineering from Pennsylvania State University in 1987, and has 20 years experience in real-time simulation and training; 7 years in distributed simulation.ANNEX A:  EPLARS/SADL DIS TRANSMITTER/SIGNAL PDUEPLARS/SADL Transmitter PDU Field Size (bits)Transmitter PDU FieldsDescription*96PDU HeaderProtocol Version8 bit enumeration Exercise ID8 bit unsigned integer PDU Type8 bit enumeration Protocol Family8 bit enumeration Timestamp32 bit unsigned integer Length16 bit unsigned integer Padding16 bits unused 48Entity IDSite16 bit unsigned integer Application16 bit unsigned integer Entity16 bit unsigned integer 16Radio ID 16 bit unsigned integerTDL Radio ID transmitting the signal.64Radio Entity TypeEntity Kind8 bit enumeration Domain8 bit enumeration Country 16 bit enumeration Category8 bit enumerationSet to 24 for EPLRS/SADL terminal Nomenclature Version8 bit enumerationNomenclature16 bit enumeration8Transmit State 8 bit enumeration 8Input Source 8 bit enumeration 8 - Digital Data Device16Padding 16 bits unused 192Antenna LocationX component64 bit floating point Y component64 bit floating point Z component64 bit floating point 96Relative Antenna Locationx component32 bit floating point y component32 bit floating point z component32 bit floating point 16Antenna Pattern Type 16 bit enumeration 16Antenna Pattern Length 16 bit unsigned integer 64Frequency 64 bit unsigned integerSet to 435000000 for SADL center frequency32Transmit Frequency Bandwidth 32 bit floating pointSet to 700000032Power32 bit floating pointPower in dBm64Modulation TypeSpread Spectrum16 bit Boolean arrayBit 1 set to 1: if Frequency Hopping used.  All bits set to 0 if not usedMajor 16 bit enumerationSet to 7 for Carrier Phase Shift ModulationDetail16 bit enumerationSet to 0System16 bit enumerationSet to 7. (SADL is an EPLRS system).16Crypto System 16 bit enumerationSet to 016Crypto Key ID 16 bit unsigned integerSet to 08Length of Modulation Parameters 8 bit unsigned integer Set to 8, representing 8 octets24Padding 24 bits unused 8Modulation Parameter #1Time Slot Allocation Mode8 bit enumerationInteger enumeration 0-48Modulation Parameter #2Transmitting Terminal Primary Mode 8 bit enumerationInteger Enumeration:1 – Timing Master 2 – Net  Participant8Modulation Parameter #3Radio Set Type 8 bit enumerationInteger Enumeration: 0 – None 1 – Net Control Station (NCS)2 – Manpack 3 – Airborne Vehicle4 – Surface Vehicle5 – Grid Reference6 – SADL7 – Gateway8Modulation Parameter #4Synchronization State8 bit enumerationInteger Enumeration: 2 – Coarse Synchronization3 – Fine Synchronization32Modulation Parameter #5Network Synchronization ID 32 bit unsigned integerTSA Level 0, set to 0TSA Level 2-4, set to 32 bit random numberEPLARS/SADL Signal PDUField Size (bits)Signal PDU FieldsValid RangeDescription96PDU HeaderProtocol Version8 bit enumeration  Exercise ID8 bit unsigned integer  PDU Type8 bit enumeration  Protocol Family8 bit enumeration  Timestamp32 bit unsigned integer  Length16 bit unsigned integer  Padding16 bits unused  48Entity IDSite16 bit unsigned integer  Application16 bit unsigned integer  Entity16 bit unsigned integer  16Radio ID 16 bit unsigned integer Shall contain the ID of the radio transmitting the signal.16Encoding Scheme 16 bit enumeration Bits 0-13 shall be set to 0. Bits 14-15 shall contain the value 1 to indicate an encoding class raw binary data16TDL Type 16 bit enumeration This field shall be set to 5 for SADLand shall be set to 22 for EPLRS32Sample Rate 32 bit integer This field shall be set to 016Data Length 16 bit integer This field shall contain the length of data in bits beginning after the samples field. 16Samples 16 bit integerThis field shall be set to 0160EPLRS/SADL Network HeaderNeedline16 bit unsignedinteger00 - FFNeedline Number. Used to segregate information within a Network. Creates virtual networks of participants.Needline Type8 bit unsigned integer0-7Needlines Types0 - Duplex		4 - CSMA1 - DAP		5 - CSMA Exclusive2 - Simplex		6 - CSMA DSI3 - Point-to-point	7 - Multi Source GroupDivision ID8 bit unsigned integer0-99EPLARS Division IDAir Key 0 – 99Gnd Key 0 – 99Gatway Key 0 – 7Guard Channel8 bit unsigned integer0-256Guard Channel is the 1st digit of the SADL CHAN setting. All F’s in this field shall indicate a no statement/wildcard.Channel  Hopping Frequency8 bit unsigned integer0-256Channel Hopping Frequency Number is 2nd digit of the SADL CHAN setting. All F’s in this field shall indicate a no statement/wildcard.Own #8 bits11 – 44Own #. (SADL Radio only)  Set to SADL Own # when transmitting on Air Key.  Set to 0 otherwise.Padding8 bits0Set to 0Time Slot IDTime Slot Number16 bits0-32767Time Slot number. 0 represents the first time slot of the epoch, time slot 32767 represents the last time slot of the epoch.  32767 time slots per epoch. (512 Time Slots per second). All F’s in this field shall indicate a no statement/wildcard.Epoch Number16 bits0-1350An epoch is 64 seconds long, 1350 Epochs in a 24 hour day.  Part of time slot identification All F’s in this field shall indicate a no statement/wildcard.Perceived Transmit TimeInteger Part32 bit unsigned integer0-4294967295,4294967295NTP timestamp format, NTP timestamps are represented as a 64-bit unsigned fixed-point number, in seconds relative to 0h on 1 January 1900. The integer part is in the first 32 bits and the fraction part in the last 32 bits. The precision of this representation is about 200 picoseconds, which should be adequate for even the most exotic requirements. See RFC1305 for detailed format. All F’s in this field shall indicate a no statement/wildcard.Fraction Part32 bit unsigned integer0-4294967295,429496729532Message Data HeaderLength of VMF Application Header16 Bit unsigned integerNumber of octets in VMF Application HeaderLength of User Data16 Bit unsigned integerNumber of octets in User DataVMF Application HeaderReference Connectionless Data Transfer Application Layer Standard MIL-STD-2045-40071C, Table 1User DataUser message format (UMF) as defined by the UMF Field in the application header.  MIL-STD-2045-47001C, Table IV.Signal PDU C2 Padding to double word boundary IAW Ref. 116 bits to increase total PDU size to a multiple of 32 bits. User Message Format (UMF) IdentifiersUser Message FormatEnumerationLink 16(J-Series Messages)0Binary File1Variable Message Format (VMF)(K-series message)2National Imagery Transmission Format System (NITFS)3Forwarded Message(FWD MSG)4United States Message Text Format(USMTF)5(DOI-103)6eXtensible Markup Language (XML)-Message Text Format (MTF)7UMF = 0, J-Series Header/MessageField Size (bits)Signal PDU FieldsDescriptionUser DataLink 16 Header used in SADL NetworkPaddingBits 0-3Padding (Not applicable in EPLRS signal)Source Track Number of SenderBit 4-18TN assigned to unit.  (If applicable)PaddingBits 19-47Applicable to SADLTADIL J Word #1TADIL J Word75 BitsReference TADIL J Message Standard 6016CPadding5 BitsTADIL J Word #N (to maximum number of messages)TADIL J Word75 BitsReference TADIL J Message Standard 6016CUMF = 2, VMF Header/MessagesField Size (bits)Signal PDU FieldsDescriptionUser DataVMF MessageReference Variable Message Format (VMF) Standard MIL-STD-6017.Signal PDU C2 Padding to double-word boundary IAW Ref. 1 Padding (if needed) to increase total PDU size to a multiple of 32 bits.ANNEX B:  SADL TALES HLA BOM TEMPLATESSADL TALES Interaction TableInteraction1Interaction2Interaction3Interaction4Interaction5RadioSignalApplicationSpecifcRadioSignalDatabaseIndexRadioSignalEncodedAudioRadioSignalRawBinaryRadioSignalTDLBinaryRadioSignalEPLRS/SADLRadioSignalLink 16 J-Series MessageBinary FileVMF K-series messageNITFS MessageForwarded MessageUSMTFDOI-103 MessageXML Message Text FormatSADL TALES Complex Datatypes in RPR-FOM 1.0Complex DatatypeField NameDatatypeCardinalityModulationStructSINCGARModulation[52]SINCGARSModulationStruct0-1EPLRS/SADLTransmitterData[56]EPLRS/SADLTransmitterStruct0-1SADL TALES Enumerated Values in RPR-FOM 1.0IdentifierEnumeratorRepresentationRFModulationSystemTypeEnum16Other0Generic1HQ2HQII3HQIIA4SINCGARS5CCTT_SINCGARS6JTIDS_MIDS8Link11_11B9EPLRS/SADL10SADL TALES Complex Datatypes in RPR-FOM 2.0Complex DatatypeField NameDatatypeCardinalitySpreadSpectrumStructSpreadSpectrumTypeSpreadSpectrumEnum161PaddingOctet2SINCGARModulation[52]SINCGARSModulationStruct0-1 (SpreadSpectrumType = SINCGARSFrequencyHop)EPLRS/SADLTransmitterData[56]EPLRS/SADLTransmitterStruct0-1 (SpreadSpectrumType = EPLRS/SADL_SpectrumType)SADL TALES Enumerated Values in RPR-FOM 2.0IdentifierEnumeratorRepresentationRFModulationSystemTypeEnum16Other0Generic1HQ2HQII3HQIIA4SINCGARS5CCTT_SINCGARS6JTIDS_MIDS7Link11_11B8EPLRS_SADL9SpreadSpectrumEnum16None0SINCGARSFrequencyHop1EPLRS/SADL_SpectrumType2