Bridging the Tactical Divide: Terminal Simulation Software as a Key Enabler of InteroperabilityAnthony DeviviOld Dominion University HYPERLINK "mailto:anthony.devivi@ngc.com" anthony.devivi@ngc.comKeywords:Modeling, Terminal, Tactical Data Links, Link-16, Link-11ABSTRACT: Tactical communications between participating units in an operational theater is accomplished through the implementation of a Tactical Data Link (TDL) such as Link-11, Link-16 or satellite communications (JRE, STJ). While these methods provide secure, reliable communications, they can also be barriers to interoperability because of their cost, complexity and limitations. However, inserting a terminal simulation (TS) system in place of a live terminal reduces expense, facilitates interoperability in a number of ways, and maintains the fidelity of the simulation to real world systems. This paper discusses how terminal simulations (TSs) are bridging the gap between simulation systems and tactical systems across multiple architectures through varying protocols and standards.IntroductionIn the realm of C4ISR, arguably the most important part of the acronym is the Communications. The need for secure, reliable and timely information exchange has never been more critical to mission success. One needs look no further than the television in prime time to see the myriad of corporations singing the praises of net-centric warfare and the global information grid. The information age requires information, and that means dissemination and aggregation. Aggregation is the task of the C2 system of the platform and involves correlating pieces of data into tactical information that commanders use to make decisions. Communications is the process of getting that data to those C2 systems. To date, the most secure, reliable and timely method for tactical communications are the Tactical Data Links (TDLs).Tactical Data Link systems are computer suites that take information from C2 systems and transmit that data to other players in the data link through some transmission medium, such as radios or satellite communications. Each TDL system is unique, defined partially by:Transmission Medium – such as the radio frequencies used, or the satellite connectionEncryption Methods – such as Reed-Solomon encoding or use of a external encoding system (KG-40)  Binary Message Sets – the J and M series messages are examples of Link-16 and Link-11 message sets (respectively)Functional Access Method – roll call, broadcast, and TDMA are common methodsIronically, the aspects that make the TDL systems so useful in the tactical arena are those that make them so difficult to integrate and interoperate with other systems. For example, there are a myriad of rules governing just the translation and forwarding of data between the TDL systems, not to mention simulation or test systems. However, integrating TDL systems into the modeling and simulation architecture is necessary to produce a realistic testing and training environment.The Barriers of InteroperabilityFor all the benefits of TDL systems, they are difficult to integrate with each other, and especially difficult to integrate with modern simulation systems. There are a number of reasons for this. Message SetsThe messages used by a TDL system are typically binary formatted in accordance with a military standard (MIL-STD) or a standards agreement (STANAG). These are difficult formats with often inter-related fields or world-view assumptions. For example, field values in some Link-16 messages are dependent on field values that came before, and Link-11 positions are relative to a reference point that is not distributed through the system. The classification of these message formats also limits access to the standards.Transmission MediumTerminals transmit data over the air, which means that to interoperate with another system requires another terminal. However, these transmissions have a range limited by the range of the waveform implemented, or suffer from limited throughput and time lags because of satellite connections. These are unacceptable restrictions in this era of coalition testing across the country and across oceans.CostTactical data link systems transmit encrypted data using terminals. These terminal systems use specialized equipment to exchange data with the host C2 system driving the data. Figure 1 shows the logical relationships between host and terminal systems. Figure 1: Host-Terminal RelationshipThe specialized interfaces and protocols make interfacing with these systems more difficult and more expensive. Terminals themselves are prohibitively expensive, making them inaccessible for many development and testing sites.PerceptionsPerhaps one of the most difficult barriers is the perception that communications do not need to be modeled. There is a long tradition of not simulating the data transfer between C2 systems in a realistic manner. While the technology and standards exist to model these networks to a very high level of fidelity, users rarely take advantage of it. However, interoperability simulations not modeling communications are making world assumptions that may prove invalid, and then could thus lead to false conclusions.Breaking the Interoperability BarrierTerminal simulations are proving to be a key enabling technology helping to bridge the gap between systems, both tactical and synthetic. Sites can realize a number of benefits by inserting TSs (in place of terminals) between host systems, or using TSs to enhance interoperability or features with real systems. Reduced CostTerminal simulations provide an economical means of establishing connectivity between systems. The TSs incorporate the required specialized interface cards (such as DDC 1553, SIO4 or NTDS) into a COTS based system at a fraction of the cost of a real terminal. Further, a TS system can incorporate more than one interface card, which allows the one system to act as multiple, independent terminals.Mitigates Terminal LimitationsTerminals have limitations based on the waveform used to transmit the data. These waveforms have different limitations but the same causes – distance and environment. Terminals can only send data a certain distance, which is a problem if the test scenario has participants within line of sight, but the actual sites are scattered across the country or world. Atmospheric effects such as rain, fog and dust can also limit terminal reliability and transmission distance. This makes test planning and execution only as reliable as the weather patterns. Terminal simulations do not suffer from these problems and are capable of reliable, long-distance transmissions. However, in some instances, these limitations are needed in the simulated environment, and so terminal simulations also have the ability to simulate adverse environmental conditions. Provide Greater FlexibilityTerminal simulations provide greater flexibility than terminals by allowing the user to configure the level of fidelity needed for the event. This allows systems to interact with TDLs without the need to reproduce complicated and expensive features that are unneeded, while still maintaining a higher level of fidelity for those systems that require it. This flexibility also allows the user to determine if, when and how lower and higher level simulations will interact. Better use of resourcesTerminal simulations can also provide sites with better use of limited resources. Space is often an issue for sites and terminals are not small pieces of equipment. However, TSs are typically the size of an encased computer chassis and offer significant space savings, especially considering that one TS can operate as many terminals. Terminal simulations can also provide the ability for sites to use the same TS system to run different exercises at the same time, without an overlap of data between them. Figure 2 shows an example of one such possible configuration.Figure 2: Virtual NetworksThe three sites are connecting 6 participants though 3 TS systems. However, the participants are actually in 3 different exercises, each on a virtual network as indicated by the background color of the host. Therefore, data from blue hosts will not be processed by gray hosts, and vice versa, even though they are using the same Ethernet connection to share the data. This allows sites to utilize 1 resource to satisfy the needs of multiple users simultaneously.ScalabilityTerminal simulations can provide the ability to add additional host interfaces of the same or different kinds to an existing hardware platform, often without the need for new software. This provides sites with true plug-and-play capability, and the convenience of adding capability quickly, efficiently, and cheaply.User FriendlyTerminals interfaces make it difficult to check status, get information, or interact with the message stream. The displays are small, the information is often displayed in cryptic ways with acronyms and hex values, and sometimes the information is not available through the interface. Terminal simulations are more modern and follow more user-friendly paradigms for user interfaces. Typically a quick status for interfaces is available on hand, and more information can be retrieved in a format that is palatable for humans to read. TS systems can also record data for later review or playback, and save human-readable information for after action review.Terminal Sims in ActionTerminal simulations are important components for testing, training and experimentation. Realistic tactical communication should be modeled at the appropriate level of fidelity for the situation, which is a sentiment that is slowly gaining acceptance among user communities. The following sections detail the variety of ways that terminal simulation systems are used today.Host ConnectivityTerminal simulations provide a cheaper, more flexible alternative to sites without terminals, or sites requiring connectivity beyond line of sight. Figure 3 shows two examples of standard configurations with tactical HWIL host systems using TSs rather than terminals to transfer data. The top drawing illustrates how Link-16 TSs provide connectivity between systems that may not have terminals, or are separated by distances greater than the horizon of the terminal signal. The TS system maintains the tactical interface with the host platform for exchanging data. The data is transferred Figure 3: Notional HWIL System Configurations through an Ethernet connection, which increases flexibility while reducing cost. In most cases, the distance between the host systems is unimportant, and it is very common for TS systems to connect hosts across the continent and across oceans. The lower illustration demonstrates how a Link-11 TSs reduces the need for infrastructure and provides scalable growth. One terminal simulation maintains the interface for 2 host systems, and exchanges the data between them. Should the site add another host system, the TS expands to include another interface card (subject to hardware configuration), which is a small price compared to purchasing another TS or a real terminal.Terminal simulations also connect synthetic hosts systems together. Synthetic hosts are those systems that emulate tactical hosts for the purpose of simulation injection, testing or experimentation. These systems are typically based on commercial systems (such as PCs) and use Ethernet connections for data exchange (as opposed to specialized hardware such as NTDS cards). Figure 4 shows an example of one such configuration. The synthetic hosts in this instance are federations of systems connected to the TS system through the HLA protocol. EMBED PBrush  Figure 4: Notional Synthetic Host ConfigurationHWIL/Synthetic Host InteroperabilityOne area where TSs can have a large impact on interoperability is through connecting HWIL and synthetic hosts into a virtual TDL communication simulation environment. Terminals represent a natural barrier separating HWIL and simulation systems. Terminal simulation systems are the perfect solution to realistically bind these systems together into a system of systems operating in a configurable synthetic environment. Terminal simulations should be core equipment for LVC environments. Figure 5 shows one example of a simulation environment where HWIL and synthetic hosts use TSs to enable communications while maintaining the desired real-world fidelity.Figure 5: HWIL/Synthetic Host EnvironmentThe example shows how TSs enable interoperability between tactical HWIL systems, simulators, and synthetic hosts. This benefits all participants because it provides a realistic way of testing real-world systems with simulations in a manner that is controllable, configurable, flexible and affordable.Bridging ArchitecturesTerminal simulations can also serve as natural bridges between simulation architectures that can cut costs and reduce infrastructure requirements. Sites that participate in interoperability testing generally rely on one or more modeling and simulation architectures to enable the tools and simulations that support the site. Some examples of these architectures are DIS, HLA, and TENA. However, not all sites support all architectures, which leads to difficulties when attempting to integrate the sites into a cohesive environment. One solution is to use gateways to translate between the protocols. However, this solution can be expensive and can introduce other problems. In some instances, it is cheaper and more convenient to use TS systems as a bridge between the differing architectures. Figure 6 provides a representation to show how TS systems can act as bridges between simulation architectures. The TS interacts with the host system normally. The TS also translates between the architecture specific applications, tools and simulations across the modeling and simulation domains. In essence, the TS architecture provides a common reference model for the exchange of TDL information across architectures.Figure 6: Multi-Protocol BridgeLive Terminal InteroperabilityTerminal simulations can also provide the ability for a host system that does not have a terminal and/or is incapable of truly driving a terminal to send data to a Link-16 live terminal for broadcast over the air. This is known as Virtual Host/Virtual Terminal functionality and functions as shown in Figure 7.Figure 7: Virtual Testing CapabilityIn the above example, 2 host systems connect to a terminal simulation in virtual terminal mode. The TSs implement the protocol and interface required by the host as if the host were connecting to a real terminal, or the typical terminal simulation used by the system. The data is then transmitted across the network to a TS in virtual host mode. The virtual host TS is maintaining the connection and interface to the live terminal and uses the appropriate protocol to transmit received data out on the airwaves. This is valuable functionality that allows HWIL and synthetic platforms to test live with fielded tactical equipment.Enhanced ServicesTerminal simulations have proven themselves useful in other ways other than as connectivity enablers. In certain instances, they are also capable of performing a non-invasive tap on the interface between the host and terminal. In this manner the TS gets all the information without affecting the functionality of the system. This allows a TS to provide extra services, such as bus-level data recording, multi-system comparison, and enhanced status and tactical displays without burdening the host or the terminal. One example of this occurred in November of 2007 on the USS Leyte Gulf. A prototype TS device was inserted into the ship configuration as a passive tap between the C2P processor (host) and the JTIDS terminal device. The data stream was recorded for after action review, and the entity data was converted and streamed to a networked computer equipped with Google Earthtm. The data from the tactical tap was combined with the visualization GUI and other overlay files (such as airways, and shipping lanes) to create a real-time 3-dimensional situation display, which is displayed on an LCD large-screen in the Computer Information Center (CIC). The data stream is also available to other entities participating in the Secure Internet Protocol Network (SIPRNET), which means that a commander sitting at a desk in Washington D.C. can view a 3D visualization of the tactical link picture as the ship perceives it no matter where in the world that ship is. The figure below shows portions of a screen shot from test data used to develop the application.Figure 8: Enhanced Terminal Simulation ServicesFuture EnhancementsSynthetic Host InterfaceThe terminal-host interface for TDL systems is complicated and plagued by the need for expensive, specialized software. Synthetic terminal-host interfaces are just beginning and lack standardization. There is a need for a commercial synthetic interface specification for TDL systems that uses concepts from the real systems (such as time latencies and data exchange size) but uses standard interfaces (such as Ethernet) and allows for flexibility with the data transfer. In this way, if a system does not need to model a certain function or feature, or if a basic system is needed to prove a new technology, a host interface can be stood up quickly and cheaply. This would also allow systems to build and test a host interface with a very small investment and have confidence in the product when they move to the real tactical equipment. As an example, consider a combat system under development that wants to incorporate a Link-16 interface. At the start of the program, the TS interfaces with the host over an Ethernet connection using a low fidelity interface. This allows the host to participate in exercises with other systems without having to implement the complicated and expensive 1553 specification. As the host program matures, it implements more and more of the real terminal interface over the Ethernet connection while testing with other systems (both live and synthetic). When fully implemented, the host system can move to the real 1553 interface with high confidence that the terminal interface will function as desired. Further, the system will have benefited from the extensive testing while under development.Expanded RealismTerminal simulations have generally been used at the lowest levels of resolution to provide cheap and convenient connectivity. The current capabilities of TSs meet or exceeds the general demand for the average user. However, there will come a time when the user community will need simulation of real-world events not currently modeled by TS systems. One such need on the visible horizon is accurate, VV&E models for the effect of environmental conditions on waveforms. Some TSs provide simulation of some aspects of environmental effects such as line of sight, terrain and corrupt data streams due to weather. However, these simulations tend to be very low fidelity and vary from system to system. There will be a need to determine how best to model environmental effects on waveforms in a realistic and consistent manner.ConclusionsIn essence there is a physical and conceptual separation between the tactical world and the simulation world caused by barriers such as equipment, cost and perceptions. Terminal simulations are the technology that can bridge that separation, enable interoperability at a high level of realism, and reduce cost while expanding capability and efficiency. These simulations offer real benefits such as lower costs, fewer restrictions, greater flexibility, improved resource use, and enhanced interfaces and functionality. Terminal Simulation systems are high fidelity, standardized, reliable solutions that provide users with a means to realistically model complicated TDL networks. They are also key technologies enabling interoperability across protocols and architectures. It is time for the community to engage these technologies to do more realistic testing and to further expand the depth and realism of the terminal simulations. EMBED PBrush   EMBED PBrush   EMBED PBrush   EMBED PBrush   EMBED PBrush   EMBED PBrush   EMBED PBrush   EMBED PBrush  