CALL FOR PAPERS AND PRESENTATIONS2009 FALL SIMULATION INTEROPERABILITY WORKSHOPandSPECIAL WORKSHOP ON PROCESSES, STANDARDS, AND LESSONS LEARNEDFOR REUSE OF SIMULATED ENVIRONMENT DATAsponsored bySimulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO)Florida Mall Conference CenterOrlando, FL21-25 September 2009SISO's Simulation Interoperability Workshops (SIWs) are semiannual events encompassing a broad range of model and simulation issues, applications, and communities, with the overall goal of identifying and supporting the development of products to facilitate simulation interoperability standards and reuse. Each SIW includes working sessions addressing interoperability and reuse requirements and issues; tutorials on state-of-the-art methodologies, tools, and techniques; and exhibits presenting the latest technological advances.Please see the web version of the Call for Papers, posted at http://www.sisostds.org (under "2009 Fall SIW") for more detailed information. Also monitor this page for subsequent updates.SPECIAL WORKSHOP ON PROCESSES, STANDARDS, AND LESSONS LEARNED FOR REUSE OF SIMULATED ENVIRONMENT DATACapitalizing on terrain database development efforts represents an important source of cost savings in view of the significant costs involved. Many standardization efforts have been undertaken since the origin of simulation, aimed at fostering reuse of terrain data base development efforts. SEDRIS is the best known international standardization initiative, with SIF being an important predecessor. However, other industry or government initiatives are being conducted in the area of simulation for training and/or mission rehearsal, with multiple solutions based on direct access to data provided by source data producers.The aim of this Special Workshop is to inform and discuss with the international simulation stakeholders some necessary newstandardization efforts in this area. This will provide an opportunity for the international community involved with terrain databases to discuss processes, standards, and lessons learned, and to establish the conditions for a possible synergy in standards development using the SISO standards process. This workshop will be based on presentations rather than formal papers. Presenters must submit detailed abstracts of their presentations for review and approval and approval by the Special Workshop organizing committee.KEY DATESIn order to meet the Workshop schedule, the following dates are critical:11 May 2009 	Abstracts due27 May 2009 	Abstract accept/reject notifications15 Jul 2000 	Papers due in electronic form31 Jul 2009 	Paper accept/reject notifications13 Aug 2009 	Final electronic copy of paper due24 Aug 2009 	Early registration and hotel registration deadline09 Sep 2009 	Presentations Due21 Sep 2009 	Spring SIW opensABSTRACT SUBMISSION INFORMATIONThe Workshop invites papers and presentations relating to distributed simulation standards, applications, and technologies, interoperability issues, and other topics identified below and on the SISO web site. Abstracts are reviewed and selected by Planning and Review Panels (PRPs) and leaders of the individual Forums and Groups. Papers are considered for presentation in one or more Forums and Groups. Abstract and paper format requirements are described in the "Author's Guide" posted on the SISO web site.Individuals who wish to participate should complete and submit an abstract, using the submission form provided on the SISO web site. If you have any problems or are unable to submit to the web site, please contact Pat Burgess <pburgess@ist.ucf.edu>, phone: 407-882-1372, fax: 407-658- 5059.EXPERIENCE WITH SISO STANDARDSSISO invites papers that report the results of experiences with SISO-developed standards and guidelines. We are looking forfeedback (positive or negative) on the utility of our products. If the author(s) indicate in both the abstract and in the completed paper that they are submitting a "SISOStandards Experiences" paper, these papers will be highlighted in a listing in the SIW Workshop Agenda.TOOLS ON PARADE SESSIONThe simulation community is currently supported by a thrivingcommercial marketplace of software tools. Innovations in automationabound, although it is sometimes difficult for users to grasp the wide range of options regarding what is available today in the tool marketplace. The purpose of the session is to inform the SISOcommunity of the wide variety of both government and commercial software tools that have been developed (or are being developed) to facilitate simulation activities.Representatives of various government and commercial organizations will provide an overview of the tools they have developed, including hosting information, key features, developmental status, and points of contact. Many of these representatives will be available for questions, furtherdiscussions, and demonstrations of their products in the exhibit area during the week. The length of the each presentation will be proportionally based on the number of presentations (five minute minimum, fifteen minute maximum). Priority for selection as a Tools on Parade presenter, and the time slots given, will first go to SISO Sponsors, then current SISO exhibitors, and then to current SISO attendees.If you wish to be considered for presenting at the 2009 Fall SISO Workshop's Tools on Parade session, please contact:Charles J. CohenConference Committee, Exhibitor Liaisonccohen@cybernet.comINDIVIDUAL FORUM AND GROUP CALLS FOR PAPERSGenerally, papers and presentations are considered in three main categories:User Community Forums, which examine and promote topics of interest related to the use and adequacy of available simulation capabilities and new capabilities needed by M&S users.Specialty Area Forums, which examine and promote current and emerging simulation processes and technology.Special Sessions, which deal with topics that merit timely solicitation of feedback from the SISO community.For a detailed list of the Forums, Study Groups, and Product Development Groups meeting at this workshop, and their specific interest areas, see the "Tracks and Forums," "Study Groups," and "Product Development Groups" links at http://www.sisostds.org.CO-AUTHORING PAPERS WITH SPONSORSMany of us work closely on a daily basis with our customers as members of integrated teams. Even so, we sometimes overlook the significant contributions of our government customers to our successes, including those that we proudly describe in our SIW papers. As you make plans to submit your abstracts and papers to SIW, please ask yourself whether you might have overlooked your customer's contributions and whether they would appreciate participating in writing and presenting the paper.TECHNICAL EXHIBITS AND DEMONSTRATIONSThroughout the week, several organizations will provide exhibits and demonstrations of materials, software, and equipment relevant to distributed simulation applications. The exhibit/demonstration area will be open during the lunch breaks each day and from late afternoon to early evening.SPONSORSHIP OPPORTUNITIESSISO Sponsorship provides a means for organizations to gain representation and benefits in partnership with the activities and operation of SISO. Sponsors enjoy the following privileges:Printing of Sponsor's corporate logos on SISO flyers and printed materialDisplay of logos and links from the SISO web site to the Sponsor's web site10% Discount on all SISO fees (workshop registration fees, booth rental, etc.)Invitation to Speaker's lunch at SIWs (with EXCOM and VIPs).ORGANIZATIONAL MEMBERSHIP IN SISOSISO has recently established an Organizational Membership Program, which is open to any organization (US and non-US agencies, National Laboratories, etc., as well as to corporations. Organizational membership includes all the benefits of SISO Sponsorship, PLUS blocks of individual memberships (new or renewal) AND the option to purchase blocks of pre-paid registrations at substantial discounts. For details about this program, contact ( HYPERLINK "mailto:dmiller@sisostds.org" dmiller@sisostds.org).DOD PARTICIPATIONThe Office of the Secretary of Defense has reviewed the plans for this Workshop and issued the following determination: "The Department of Defense finds this event meets the minimum regulatory standards for attendance by DoD employees. This finding does not constitute a blanket approval or endorsement for attendance. Individual DoD Component commands or organizations are responsible for approving attendance of its DoD employees based on mission requirements and DoD regulations."SITE AND ACCOMMODATIONSThe Workshop will be held at the Florida Mall Conference Center, Orlando, FL. The special conference rate is $115/night. A government per diem rate is also available for government personnel and contractors. Proof of status will be required to obtain this rate. Make your reservations at the SISO web site at http://www.sisostds.org/siw.htm or by contacting ICMS at 1-800-810-4333 (in the U.S. or Canada), +732-981-3414 (outside the U.S. or Canada), by faxing your request to 732-465-6447, or by emailing it to ( HYPERLINK "mailto:d.krynski@ieee.org" d.krynski@ieee.org).GOVERNMENT PER DIEM AND CONFERENCE LODGING ALLOWANCESRefer to http://www.gsa.gov/HP_01_Requested_perdiem for guidance regarding per diem and conference lodging allowances for government personnel and government contractors. Also note that an exception to normal government per diem rates is permitted for conferences in accordance with Part 301-74.9 of Federal Travel Regulations. SISO's ability to provide conference meeting space depends upon our guarantee of an agreed-upon number of lodging room-nights. Please plan to stay at the conference hotel!REGISTRATIONThe Workshop registration form is available on-line at http://www.sisostds.org via the "2009 Fall SIW" link. Please note that the early registration deadline (and the deadline for room reservations) is 24 August 2009. Fees range from $625 for early registration through $700 for onsite registration, with 10% discounts available for SISO sponsors and Organizational Members. The cost for the Special Workshop on Thursday and Friday is $100. A special rate including both the SIW and the Special Workshop is available for $50 more than the SIW registration fee. Student registrations are available at a 50% discount, with proof of valid, current status as a university undergraduate or graduate student.SISO CONFERENCE COMMITTEESarah Trbovich (Chair)Chris Rouget (Vice Chair)Jim Coolahan (Secretary)Jim Kogler (SAC Vice Chair)Emmet BeekerWink Bennett, Jr.Charles CohenPriscilla ElfreyBret GivensGrover LollarEd PowellAustin StoudenmireSteve SwensonTo login:http://discussions.sisostds.org/default.asp?boardid=2&action=9&read=45640&fid=11#59651To (un)subscribe: Send a message to SISOADMIN.listrequest@discussions.sisostds.org withthe word unsubscribe in the message body. Important: the unsubscribe email needs to be in plaintext format, and needs to have no subject line.SISO: http://www.sisostds.org/