Terms of ReferenceforStandards for Game Technology Applied to Modeling and SimulationProponents:Priscilla ElfreyIT/C1Kennedy Space CenterFL 32899321-867-9153 HYPERLINK "mailto:Priscilla.R.elfrey@nasa.gov" Priscilla.R.elfrey@nasa.govKevin MabieValador, Inc.560 Herndon Parkway, Suite 300Herndon, VA571-437-4032 HYPERLINK "mailto:Kevin.mabie@valador.inc" Kevin.mabie@valador.incWilliam L. Little IT/C1Kennedy Space CenterFL 32899Phone HYPERLINK "mailto:William.L.Little@nasa.gov" William.L.Little@nasa.govLuis BaresASRCKennedy Space CenterFL 32899321-867-2844Luis.M.Bares@nasa.gov.Additional Proponents:Zach Crues: Edwin.Z.Crues@nasa.govDell Lunceford:  dell@totomm.comJose Lagares: Gabriel.lagares@gmail.com:  Mike Conroy: Michael.P.Conroy@nasa.govAgostino Bruzzone:  HYPERLINK "mailto:Agostino@unige.it" Agostino@unige.itAlberto Tremori: alberto.tremori@mastsrl.euRandy Brown: Randy@virtual heroes.comAlex Lorinczi:  HYPERLINK "mailto:Alex@simsquared.com" Alex@simsquared.comBill Little:  HYPERLINK "mailto:William.A.Little@nasa.gov" William.A.Little@nasa.govBec Mazzone:  HYPERLINK "mailto:Rebecca.A.Mazzone@nasa.gov" Rebecca.A.Mazzone@nasa.govDave Mann:  HYPERLINK "mailto:David.K.Mass@nasa.gov" David.K.Mass@nasa.govMona Fahmi:  HYPERLINK "mailto:Mona.H.Fahmi@nasa.gov" Mona.H.Fahmi@nasa.govDavid Miranda: David  HYPERLINK "mailto:J.Miranda@nasa.gov" J.Miranda@nasa.govPhilip Michael: Philip.Michael-1@ksc.nasa.govRationale:Today and for the past several years, advances in game technology, prove their value in simulation. Indeed, we can credit many recent improvements, to game technology. These add to simulation’s utility and use.  Game technologies can economically and reliably distribute massive amounts of data--simulation, video, photos, text, voice and other media--among large, highly dispersed teams. This supports the entire life cycle of a multi-decadal, massively complex enterprise including planning, design, development, testing, operations and evaluation as well as training. Game technology creates the advances we need in modeling and simulation hardware and software. The swift emergence of these serious uses of game technology holds risk. It lacks analytic and academic rigor. We experience a clear need for theories, methods and strategies to make such game technology applications more credible as well as more effective and useful. The proposed study recognizes that the use of such modeling and simulation for multi-decadal, massively complex and risky activities requires innovative investigation into issues and methods related to robust and reliable simulation that may include applications of game technology. Complexity mandates capability for easy and reliable communication and interaction among dispersed teams in many organizations. These include engineers across the NASA centers and others worldwide involved in exploration of the Moon, Mars and beyond. Others engaged in large, risky and complex labor-intensive enterprises undoubtedly share this need. So, also, do those facing costly and uncertain outcomes. Ability to innovate is at stake.Standards prove crucial for safety, security, performance and innovation when the work involves costly and unique equipment, pioneering missions and actions as well as fragile lives. Interoperability of data, simulation, hardware and humans is critical for large complex systems such as space exploration. Neither standards nor interoperability are issues for the game entertainment industry where products do stand alone, where intellectual property has proprietary value and the market determines the shelf life and value of a product. Standards and interoperability do become issues when we apply game technology to national resources and to large, long-term risky enterprises that face uncertain outcomes where we expect robust, reliable and safe performance (often involving complex integration with international partners) as well as sustained interactivity among geographically dispersed teams.Modern games drive the state of the art for both hardware and software development for modeling and simulation. The huge game industry has the potential to expand the modeling and simulation world and enhance its opportunities. We do not want to miss this opening that brings technology and SISO together. A strong modeling and simulation industry demands no less.This proposed study is especially important as we apply game technology to distributed team activity both in real time and asynchronously. Teams must be able to share good data, have their time used well, track and store work accessibly and safely. Games provide rich communication, rivaling video conferencing at lower bandwidth, providing opportunity to share data such as simulation, video, photos, other images, computations, drawings, text, voice and other sensory input. This, in our experience, is especially true with game technology applications for space exploration when it relates to avatars, GPS and telemetry. This is only a start. The study is not intended to be limited and may reveal other candidates for further attention, including international interfaces.. This points to the need for international standards for such use and a focus on interoperability that will include but may not be limited to avatars, GPS and telemetry.  The challenges for game technology application to simulation affect information and data representation, visualization and presentation. Such modeling and simulation require extreme flexibility and high security. We need to consider and protect proprietary as well as government interests. This suggests the need to consider how best game technology can, with its database, graphics and delivery capabilities safely, robustly and flexibly support the full-life span of complex simulation products. Standards matter if we are to develop and maintain broad, flexible, and ubiquitous distributed collaboration capability. They matter if we are to, both efficiently and sustain ably, support complex projects such as space exploration. Other complex entities share these needs.This study will explore serious questions concerning the possibilities and requirements for applying game technology to simulation. It will investigate current and potential use of game technology among complex domains and such on-going work in standards development and deployment as are relevant and suggest opportunities for partnering. Studies of standards and interoperability related to game technology applications appears to be a new area of research that could lead in a number of directions and hopefully to standards promoting interoperability and accelerated international use of game technology in modeling and simulation Tasks:Provide an overview of current use of game technology in serious applications including the distributed simulation space community. Develop an overview of other organizations whose work in game standards, including international interfaces, suggests opportunity for collaboration. Perform analysis to address game technology issues (including but not limited to avatars, GPS and telemetry) related to simulations. Identify and evaluate prospective significance of the topic to SISO and the interests of its members, addressing particularly the implications of developing general or specific game technology standards applied to serious modeling and simulation. Prepare and submit a Final reportProducts:The product of the study group will be a final report that addresses:Inputs provided by the SISO study group addressing game technology applications and current usages related to modeling and simulation.Report on other organizations whose work in modeling and simulation standards, especially game technology and international interfaces, suggests opportunity for collaboration.Analysis will identify organizations and potential domains that might share interest in standards for game technology applied to modeling and simulation for planning, design, development, testing, training, operations and evaluation of multi-decadal, massively complex simulations.Description and analysis of issues related to standards and interoperability of serious modeling and simulation Proposed solutionsRecommendation on feasibility of a SISO guidance product based on the model and simulation development best practice(s).Membership:Co-chair: Kevin MabieCo- Chair: Bill LittleSecretary: TBDThe group will invite the participation of all members of the SISO community with experience and interest in the application of game technology and the development of models and simulations.Performance Period:The proposed period for this study group is sixteen months and is scheduled to begin immediately upon approval of the TOR.  Face-to-face meetings will be held at the SIWs occurring during this period.Terms of Reference (TOR) for a Study Group onStandards for Game Technology Applied to Modeling and Simulation(Game Tech/Sim)Rev .812/23/08		Page  PAGE 4