Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) EMBED MSDraw.Drawing.8.2  2004 - Executive Committee (EXCOM) MembersKatz, Warren (2005) 	Chair	wkatz@mak.comO’Connor, Michael (2006)	Vice Chair	michael.oconnor@itt.com	Harkrider, Susan (2004) 	Secretary	sharkrider@virtc.comAlbert, Stephane (X)		Stephane.Albert@cae.com	Bosher, Paul (2004)		pbosher.dgrt@gtnet.gov.ukKnight, Sam (2004) 		snknight@link.comMattson, Anders (2004) 		am@c4i.seMcLean, Charles (A)	mclean@cme.nist.govRouget, Chris (X)	SAC Chair	cjrouget@preforce.demon.co.ukSeveringhaus, Rick (2005) 		rick.severinghaus@d-a-s.comShanks, Graham (2005) 		graham.shanks@amsjv.com Sharp, Richard (X)	CC Chair	Richard.Sharp@wpafb.af.milTolk, Andreas (2006)		atolk@odu.eduWaite, Bill (2006) 		 HYPERLINK "mailto:bwaite@aegistg.com" bwaite@aegistg.com2004 - Conference Committee (CC) Members Sharp, Richard (2005)	Chair	Richard.Sharp@wpafb.af.milBachman, Jane (2005) 	Vice Chair	bachmanJT@nswc.navy.milSwan, Peter (2005)	Secretary	pswan@mak.comAdin Burroughs (X)	SAC Vice Chair	adinb@usa.netFairchild, Bruce (2005) 		Fairchild@knology.netHamilton, Drew (A)		hamilton@eng.auburn.eduHofer, Ron (2004)		rhofer@ist.ucf.eduJones, Pat (2005)		pjones@arl.army.milLeach, Robert (2004)			robert.k.leach@boeing.comLutz, Robert (2004)		robert.lutz@jhuapl.eduMullins, Tom (A)		thomas.mullins@wpafb.af.milVacancySISO Executive DirectorConference/Workshop Activities	Duncan Miller		dmiller@sisostds.org(A) = Appointed Committee member(X) = Ex-officio member of committee (term expires each fall)Note: The term expiration dates are in parenthesis following each member’s name. The terms of appointed members and ex-officio members expire each Fall. 2004 - Standards Activity Committee (SAC) Members  Rouget, Chris (2005)		Chair	cjrouget@preforce.demon.co.ukBurroughs, Adin (2005)		Vice Chair	adinb@usa.netMcCall, James (Mark) (2005)		Secretary	james.mccall@mesa.afmc.af.milBachman, Jane (X)		CC Vice Chair	bachmanJT@nswc.navy.milBouwens, Chris (2004)		christina.bouwens@saic.comGravitz, Peggy (2004)		pgravitz@aegistg.comGriffin, Allison (2004)		Allison.Griffin@rc.patrick.af.milIgarza, Jean-Louis (2004)		jean-louis.igarza@dga.defense.gouv.frLittle, Reed (2004)		 HYPERLINK "mailto:little@sei.cmu.edu" little@sei.cmu.eduMcKeeby, Dave (A)		dmckeeby@msiac.dmso.milMorse, Katherine L. (A)		katherine.l.morse@saic.com	Wertman, Chris (2005)		cwertman@aol.comWiehagen, Gene (2005)		Gene_Wiehagen@stricom.army.milSISO Inc. - Board of DirectorsMichelle T. Bevan	Chairman	 HYPERLINK "mailto:mbeavan@msiac.dmso.mil" mbevan@msiac.dmso.milSam Knight	President	 HYPERLINK "mailto:snknight@link.com" snknight@link.comMike Lightner	Vice President	 HYPERLINK "mailto:mlightner@aegistg.com" mlightner@aegistg.comAllison Griffin	Treasurer	 HYPERLINK "mailto:agriffin@simulation.com" agriffin@simulation.comDave McKeeby	Secretary	dmckeeby@msiac.dmso.mil	Mailing Address:SISO, Inc.P.O. Box 781238Orlando, Florida USA 32878-1238(A) = Appointed Committee member(X) = Ex-officio member of committee (term expires each fall)Note: The term expiration dates are in parenthesis following each member’s name. The terms of appointed members and ex-officio members expire each Fall. 2004 Fall Simulation Interoperability WorkshopUSER COMMUNITY FORUMSANL	Analysis ForumRD&E	Research, Development & Engineering ForumSAPD	System Acquisition and Product DevelopmentT&E	Test & Evaluation ForumTRAIN	TrainingSPECIALTY AREA FORUMS		APPLICATIONS TRACKLOG	Logistics ForumVWS	Vehicle Weapon System Modeling Forum		C4ISR TRACKC4I	Command, Control, Communications, and Computers, and Intelligence ForumIO-ISR	Information Operations - Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance ForumSENS	Sensor Modeling Forum (Co-Administrated by Environment Track)						 SPECIALTY AREA FORUMS (Cont’d)		DISTRIBUTED SIMULATION DEVELOPMENT TRACKDSPT	Distributed Simulation Process and Tools Forum (formerly EMF & PROC forums)VV&A	Verification, Validation & Accreditation ForumSMS-COMPOSE	Synthetic Mission Space Composability Forum				ENVIRONMENT TRACKSENS	Sensor Modeling Forum (Co-Administrated by C4ISR Track)		SNE	Simulated Natural Environment Forum						INFRASTRUCTURE TRACKCFI	Communication, Frameworks, and Infrastructure 			MEDICAL TRACKMED	Medical Forum STUDY GROUPS (SGs)ANPDRS SG		Assessment of the Need for Product Data Representation Standards Study Group		CIGI SG			Common Image Generator Interface Study Group	DEVS SG			Discrete-Event Systems Specification Study Group			DIS SG			Distributed Interactive Simulation Extension Study Group			ITSI SG	Intelligent Tutoring System Interoperability Study GroupMM&S 	Medical Modeling and Simulation Interoperability Study GroupInteroperability SG		ORTI SG			Open Run Time Infrastructure Protocol Study Group			SCM SG			Simulation Conceptual Modeling Study Group			SRML SG 			Simulation Reference Markup Language Study GroupTC SG			Transfer of Control Study Group			XMSF SG			Extensible Modeling and Simulation Framework Profile Study Group			PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT GROUPS (PDGs)BOM PDG		Base Object Model Specification Product Development Group C4ISR/SIMTRM PDG		C4ISR/Simulation Interoperability Technical Reference Model Product 			Development Group				EDCS PDG		Environment Data Coding Specification Product Development Group	HLA API PDG	Dynamic Link Compatible High Level Architecture Application Programming Interface Product Development GroupHLA-EVOLVED PDG	High Level Architecture-Evolved Product Development GroupLINK-16 PDG	Link-16 Simulation Standard Product Development Group			RPR FOM PDG	Real-Time Platform Reference FOM Product Development Group			VV&A PDG		Verification, Validation & Accreditation Overlay to FEDEP Product 				Development GroupSPECIAL SESSIONINT			International Session 	TRACK MANAGER ASSIGNMENTSRick Sharp		CC Chair, C4ISR Track Manager & Medical Track Manager Jane Bachman	CC Vice Chair, Speaker Committee ChairPeter Swan	CC Secretary, International CoordinatorAdin Burroughs	SAC Vice Chair (SAC liaison)Robert Leach	User Community Track ManagerTom Mullins	SISO Web QAKatherine Morse	Infrastructure Track ManagerPeter Swan	Environment Track ManagerBruce Fairchild	Medical Track Co-Manager & Theme ManagerRon Hofer 	International Reports, SAPD Forum, & DEVS SGPat Jones	Applications Track ManagerBob Lutz		Distributed Simulation Development Track	 Duncan Miller	Executive DirectorSIMULATION INTEROPERABILITY WORKSHOP (SIW) FORUMSUSER COMMUNITY FORUMSTrack Manager - Robert Leach - robert.k.leach@boeing.comAnalysis (ANL) Forum2004 Spring/Fall - ANL Planning & Review PanelChair:  Wayne Lindo	MTS Technologies, Inc.	lindow@mtstech.comVice Chair:  Emmet Beeker	The Mitre Corp.	ebeeker@mitre.orgSecretary:  Cam Tran	SPAWARSYSCEN	trancv@spawar.navy.milJohn Fay	Sverdrup Technology	 HYPERLINK "mailto:john.fay@eglin.af.mil" john.fay@eglin.af.milMajor John Willis	TRADOC Analysis Center	 HYPERLINK "mailto:willisj@trac.nps.navy.mil" willisj@trac.nps.navy.milVacancyVacancyThe Analysis (ANL) forum focuses on interoperability issues and uses of distributed models and simulations by the analysis community, including issues of experiment design and data analysis, analysis issues in Advanced Distributed Simulation (ADS) and Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA), requirements definition.  Special focus:  use cases that include both success and failure.Test and Evaluation (T&E) Forum2004 Spring/Fall - T&E Planning & Review PanelChair:  Reta Reynolds	US Army Aberdeen Test Center	reynoldsr@atc.army.milVice Chair:  David Browning	RTTC	dbrowning@rttc.army.milSecretary:  Kurt Lessmann	Amtec Corp.	 HYPERLINK "mailto:klessmann@amtec" klessmann@amtec-corp.comDarrell Bench	US Army DTC	Darrell.Bench@dtc.army.milSharon Hardy	Gray Research Inc.	shardy@gray-research.comThe Test & Evaluation (T&E) forum addresses uses of distributed simulation in test and evaluation (T&E), including the integration of live entities with virtual and constructive simulations; the integration of hardware-in-the-loop (HWIL), Integrated Systems Test Facilities (ISTFs), and other T&E facilities with distributed simulations; the use of simulation to test and evaluate C4ISR, Systems of Systems (SoS), Family of Systems (FoS), and interoperability; and performance issues in using distributed simulation in T&E applications.USER COMMUNITY FORUMS (cont’d)Track Manager - Robert Leach - robert.k.leach@boeing.comResearch, Development & Engineering (RD&E) Forum2004 Spring/Fall - RD&E Planning & Review PanelChair:  Ralph Weber	Computer Sciences Corp.	rweber@csc.comVice Chair:  Cynthia Ballard	JSF PO (ASC-YJ)	Cynthia.Ballard@jsf.milSecretary:  James (Mark) McCall	Simulation Technologies Inc.	james.mccall@mesa.afmc.af.milArchie Dillard	Federal Aviation Admin.	archie.dillard@faa.gov.Steven R. Drake	The Boeing Company	steven.r.drake@boeing.comJohn Fay	Sverdrup Technology	 HYPERLINK "mailto:john.fay@eglin.af.mil" john.fay@eglin.af.milPhil Landweer	Philip R. Landweer, Professional Services	Phil.Landweer@pti-usa.comJohn Woodyard	AFRL/IFSC	john.woodyard@wpafb.af.milDouglas Wood	MÄK Technologies	dwood@mak.comThe Research, Development & Engineering (RD&E) forum addresses issues and applications of distributed M&S within the RDE domain, including requirements for backward compatibility between simulations and distributed simulation infrastructures.  RDE focuses on community requirements and experiences with new applications using distributed computing technologies.  RDE specifically solicits papers that advance the "state of the art" and/or take a position, however controversial.  Authors targeting papers to the RDE Forum must include, as the final slide in their presentations, a summary of the paper's key findings or concepts and identifying issues for the RDE Community.System Acquisition and Product Development (SAPD) Forum2004 Spring/Fall - SAPD Planning & Review PanelChair:  James Coolahan	John Hopkins University/APL	james.coolahan@jhuapl.eduVice Chair:  Jean Graffagnini	S3 Inc.	jean.graffagnini@s3inc.netSecretary:  Crash Konwin	Booz Allen Hamilton	konwin_kenneth@bah.comMichelle Bevan		MSIAC	mbevan@msiac.dmso.milJudith Dahmann 		The Mitre Corp.	jdahmann@mitre.orgJim Hollenbach	Simulation Strategies, Inc.	jimh@simstrat.comTommy Nordqvist	Front End AB	tommy.nordqvist@frontend.seDavid Thomen 	US Army, ODCS, G-3	David.Thomen@hqda.army.milThe System Acquisition and Product Development (SAPD) forum focuses on M&S and related enablers of integrated, collaborative enterprises for system/product development, particularly from a life-cycle wide, mission capability/system-of-systems perspective. Subjects include policy, processes, tool suite strategies, information management, standards, resource sharing/reuse, business case, intellectual property protection, collaboration/optimization means and work force implications. Priority is on actual, broadly-applicable experiences in these areas.USER COMMUNITY FORUMS (cont’d)Track Manager - Robert Leach - robert.k.leach@boeing.comTraining (TRAIN) Forum 2004 Spring/Fall - TRAIN Planning & Review PanelChair:  Scott Johnston	CACI	sjohnston@caci.comVice Chair:  Mike Niven 	QinetiQ	mniven@taz.QinetiQ.comSecretary:  Michael Woodman	PMTRASYS, MARCORSYSCOM	Michael.Woodman@navy.milLarry Clark	Alenia Marconi Systems Ltd	larry.clark@amsjv.comAnthony Hughes	US Air Force	 HYPERLINK "mailto:Fanthony.hughes@pentagon.af.mil" anthony.hughes@pentagon.af.mil Garry Morissette	MÄK Technologies	gm@mak.comSteve Thalmann	US Air Force	steve.thalmann@mesa.afmc.af.milMark Williams	ACC/DOY DMT	Mark.Williams3@langley.af.milLeslie Winters	HQ DA G3 AMSO	leslie.winters@hqda.army.milThe Training (TRAIN) forum focuses on issues associated with using simulations to support the acquisition of knowledge, skills, behaviors, and attitudes through education, training, and performance support.  We solicit papers addressing simulation-based learning in industry, academia, and government (including the DOD), particularly those identifying interoperability or standards shortfalls or requirements.  Special interest topics: (1) simulation support of all aspects of Advanced Distributed Learning (ADL), Distributed Mission Operations  (DMO) and Distributed Mission Training (DMT) Programs: education, training, and performance support (e.g. embedded training, automated performance assessment, mission rehearsal, Course of Action analysis, etc.); (2) simulation support to training events associated with Small Scale Contingencies (SSCs), Military Operations in Urban Terrain (MOUT), Support and Stability Operations (SASO), and other related combat and non-combat activities and (3) Multi-Resolution Modeling as it applies to M&S.SPECIALTY AREA FORUMSAPPLICATION TRACKTrack Manager - Pat Jones - pjones@arl.army.milVehicle/Weapons System Modeling (VWS) Forum2004 - Spring/Fall - VWS Planning & Review PanelChair:  Tim Jahren	Raytheon Company	Timothy_N_Jahren@raytheon.comVice Chair:  John Fay	Sverdrup Technology	john.fay@eglin.af.milSecretary:  VacancyJim Caylor	CAE	jim.caylor@cae.comMichael Gilroy	ITT Industries, AES	Michael.Gilroy@itt.comThe Vehicle/Weapons System Modeling (VWS) forum focuses on lessons learned in development of vehicle or weapon system simulations (including Computer Generated Forces (CGF) and Semi-Automated Forces (SAF) simulations) and Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) of actual vehicle and weapon systems (DD 21, Joint Strike Fighter, Future Combat System, etc.).Logistics and Enterprise Models (LOG) Forum2004 Spring/Fall - LOG Planning & Review PanelChair:  David Payne	The Mitre Corp.	dpayne@mitre.orgVice Chair:  David Prochnow	The Mitre Corp.	prochnow@mitre.orgSecretary:  Pat Jones	US Army Research Lab	pjones@arl.army.milCarroll Keyfauver	AT&T	keyfauver@att.comVacancyThe Logistics (LOG) forum focuses on simulations and simulation challenges associated with modeling supply chains, logistics management processes, logistics policies and business practices, as well as the portrayal of logistics in military simulations at all levels.  Topics of interest include innovative approaches to supporting network centric operations, rapid deployment forces, Operations Other Than War (OOTW), global commercial operations, and enterprise process simulations.  The latter include but are not limited to executable models of work flow, manufacturing, distribution, transportation and customer, patient, crowd, or traffic flow.SPECIALTY AREA FORUMS (Cont’d)COMMAND, CONTROL, COMMUNICATIONS, COMPUTERS, INTELLIGENCE, SURVEILLANCE, AND RECONNAISSANCE (C4ISR) TRACKRick Sharp - Track Manager - Richard.Sharp@wpafb.af.milCommand, Control, Communications, Computers and Intelligence (C4I) Forum2004 Spring/Fall - C4I Planning & Review PanelChair:  John Daly	Booz Allen Hamilton	daly_john@bah.comVice Chair:  Donald Timian	Northrop Grumman Mission Systems     	 HYPERLINK "mailto:don.timian@ngc.com" don.timian@ngc.comSecretary:  Tom Mullins	NAIC/TAND	thm33@tecnet1.jcte.jcs.milAdin Burroughs	Northrop Grumman Info. Tech.	adinb@usa.netWim Huiskamp	TNO-FEL	huiskamp@fel.tno.nlGene Layman	Naval Research Laboratory	layman@nrl.navy.milAndreas Tolk	VMASC/Old Dominion University	atolk@odu.eduChris Wertman	Bridge Technologies Corp.	cwertman@aol.comRandal Zimmerman	TRADOC Analysis Center - FLVN	zimmermr@trac.army.milThe Command, Control, Communications, Computers and Intelligence (C4I) forum addresses standards to ensure interoperability when coupling simulation systems and C4I systems, standards to ensure composability when integrating simulation components and C4I components into a common framework, and standards to represent C4I systems and the underlying infrastructure within simulation applications.  C4I is looking for papers dealing with architecture and data/object model alignment, common frameworks, applicability of C4I standards and open standards, and lessons learned from applying these standards.  In particular, C4I is interested in the development of enhanced operational functionality based on M&S, and especially on increasing the efficiency and abilities of the Warfighter by introducing simulation capabilities within operational systems.SPECIALTY AREA FORUMS (Cont’d)COMMAND, CONTROL, COMMUNICATIONS, COMPUTERS, INTELLIGENCE, SURVEILLANCE, AND RECONNAISSANCE (C4ISR) TRACKRick Sharp - Track Manager - Richard.Sharp@wpafb.af.milInformation Operations Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (IO-ISR) Forum 2004 Spring/Fall - IO-ISR Planning & Review PanelChair:  Donald Stoner	TITAN Corp.	dstoner@titan.comVice Chair:  Louis Ford	TITAN Corp.	lford@titan.comSecretary:  David Acevedo	USAF	david.acevedo@wpafb.af.milRichard Dunbar	US Army	richard.dunbar@hqda.army.milPatrick Getchell	ARINC	pgetchel@arinc.comHarold Jones	ALPHATECH, Inc.	hjones@dc.aplhatech.comPhillip May	General Dynamics	 HYPERLINK "mailto:phil.may@gdds.com" phil.may@gdds.comThe Information Operations Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (IO-ISR) forum seeks papers that deal with all aspects of Information Operations (IO), including computer network attack and defense, modeling of IO in exercise and training, and threats to the Internet and other communications infrastructures.  IO-ISR seeks papers addressing Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR) issues including representation of the different intelligence disciplines (e.g., SIGINT, IMINT, HUMINT, etc.) and the associated Tasking, Processing, Exploitation, and Dissemination (TPED) systems and processes associated with the delivery of intelligence products to the warfighter.  In addition, we are interested in activities related to modeling IO-ISR, including Effects-Based Operations, Network Centric Warfare, Predictive Battlespace Awareness and crisis response.SPECIALTY AREA FORUMS (Cont’d)DISTRIBUTED SIMULATION DEVELOPMENT TRACKTrack Manager - Robert Lutz - Robert.lutz@jhuapl.eduDistributed Simulation Process and Tools (DSPT) Forum2004 Spring/Fall - DSPT Planning & Review PanelChair:  Jake Borah	AEgis Technologies Group	jborah@aegistg.comCo-Vice Chair:  Jane Bachman	NSWCDD TEAMS	bachmanJT@nswc.navy.mil Co-Vice Chair:  Jeff Bergenthal	Lockheed Martin Simulation, Training	jeff.bergenthal@lmco.com	  & Support (LM STS)Secretary:  Philip Moul 	Raytheon Company	pwmoul@raytheon.comGary Hall	General Dynamics	gary.hall@gdds.comPaul Gustavson	SimVentions, Inc.	pgustavson@simventions.comJean Graffagnini	S3 Inc.	jean.graffagnini@s3inc.netRic Jones	DTRA	rjones@cnttr.dtra.milKaj Lehtovaara	Front End AB	kaj.lehtovaara@frontend.seMike Lightner	AEgis Technologies Group	mlightner@aegistg.comRobert Lutz	Johns Hopkins University/APL	robert.lutz@jhuapl.eduThe Distributed Simulation Process and Tools (DSPT) forum focuses on evolving a generalized system engineering process for developing and executing distributed simulations, and on the tools used for automating various aspects of distributed simulations.  This includes "lessons learned" solutions from creating real-world, useful M&S applications, such as problems of integration, scalability, reuse, and robustness.  Automation of various aspects of distributed simulations includes scenario development, initialization, monitoring, runtime controls, collection and repositories, visualization, and after-action review.Synthetic Mission Space Composability (SMS) Forum2004 Spring/Fall - SMS Planning & Review PanelChair:  Randy Saunders	JHU/APL	R.Saunders@ieee.orgVice Chair:  Rick Severinghaus	Dynamic Animation Systems	rick.severinghaus@d-a-s.comSecretary:  VacancyThe Synthetic Mission Space Composability (SMS) forum focuses on efforts underway within the Services and across the Joint and International community.  The Forum includes a panel session, conducted each workshop, addressing a particular issue or topic of interest.  Panelists will include representatives from Service, Joint, and OSD efforts in Synthetic Mission Spaces.  One critical focus of the Panel session will be to identify areas of collaboration (as well as noncollaboration) among the various participants. It will expose as well needs and potential solutions.  The objective is to explore ways to integrate various environments on-demand, so that the best tools and products available are brought to bear on a particular problem.SPECIALTY AREA FORUMS (Cont’d)DISTRIBUTED SIMULATION DEVELOPMENT TRACKTrack Manager - Robert Lutz  - Robert.lutz@jhuapl.eduVerification, Validation & Accreditation (VV&A) Forum2004 Spring/Fall - VV&A Planning & Review PanelChair:  Simone Youngblood	DMSO	syoungblood@dmso.milVice Chair:  Susan Solick	TRADOC Analysis Center	 HYPERLINK "mailto:susan.solick@us.army.mil" susan.solick@us.army.milSecretary:  Donna Blake	VisiTech Ltd.	blake@visitech.comDirk Brade	FOI	dirk.brade@foi.seJean Graffagnini	S3 Inc.	jean.graffagnini@s3inc.netScott Harmon	Zetetix	harmon@zetetix.comMichael Metz	Innovative Mgmt. Concepts, Inc.	mmetz@imcva.comThe Verification, Validation and Accreditation (VV&A) forum focuses on methodologies, procedures, and associated techniques used to establish credibility of models, simulations, and federations.  VV&A goals emphasize quality (e.g., building in authoritative representations and behaviors) and risk management, and support development and evolution of VV&A guidance to enhance the federation lifecycle process.  Current objectives include evolving a model for validation process maturity, formalizing the conceptual model via the Conceptual Model Study Group, and establishing recommended practices for federation VV&A via the VV&A PDG.  Special focus areas include validation process maturity model, conceptual model validation, and substantive interoperability.SPECIALTY AREA FORUMS (Cont’d)ENVIRONMENT TRACKTrack Manager –Peter Swan – pswan@mak.comSimulated Natural Environment (SNE) Forum2004 Spring/Fall - SNE Planning & Review PanelChair:  David Jodeit	ITT Industries AES	david.jodeit@itt.comVice Chair:  Michael Mandelberg	Johns Hopkins University/APL	Mike.Mandelberg@jhuapl.eduSecretary:  Ronald Moore	SAIC	ronald.g.moore@saic.comSteve Adelson	Lockheed-Martin Simulation, Training 	steve.adelson@lmco.com	  & Support (LM STS)Michael Butterworth	Northrop Grumman Info Tech.	mbutterworth@ngc.comRob Cox	SAIC	robert.m.cox@saic.comLouis Hembree	Naval Research Laboratory	hembree@nrlmry.navy.milRobert Meyer	NAWCWD	 HYPERLINK "mailto:Bob.Meyer@wpafb.af.mil" Bob.Meyer@wpafb.af.milUlrich Raape	Fraunhofer IFF	raape@iff.fhg.deThe Simulated Natural Environment (SNE) forum addresses multi-domain use and reuse of digital representations and models of the natural environment, including land, oceanic, atmospheric, and space data.  SNE also focuses on standards for, and application of, SNE data, effects and data models for M&S; interoperability issues and lessons learned in large-scale integrated simulations that include multiple real-time and non-real-time SNE representations; and issues and use cases relating to SEDRIS, environmental data classification systems, and coordinate transformation systems.Sensor Modeling (SENS) Forum2004 Spring/Fall - SENS Planning & Review PanelChair:  Annette Janett	Lockheed Martin Simulation, Training	 HYPERLINK "mailto:ajanett@lads.is.lmco.com" ajanett@lads.is.lmco.com	  & Support (LM STS)Vice Chair:  Fred Newman	Johns Hopkins University/APL	fred.newman@jhuapl.eduSecretary:  VacancyMike Bachmann	NAIC/TAND	mrb53@naic.wpafb.af.milAlbert Biondo	Johns Hopkins University/APL	al_biondo@jhuapl.eduMichael Gilroy	ITT Industries, AES	Michael.Gilroy@itt.comJames (Jim) Kester	CACI	jkester@caci.comVacancyThe Sensor Modeling (SENS) forum is an interdisciplinary forum that bridges the environmental and mission/system-related areas, including simulation of sensor effects, issues pertaining to the stimulation and simulation of sensor systems, incorporation of sensor system simulations into other simulations, and environmental effects on sensor systems.  Authors are encouraged to address SENS focus areas: accreditation discriminators for sensor simulation applications; sensor domain specific sources of noise, error, and bias; and sensor data fusion.SPECIALTY AREA FORUMS (Cont’d)INFRASTRUCTURE TRACKTrack Manager - Tom Mullins  - Thomas.Mullins@wpafb.af.mil2004 Spring/Fall - CFI Planning & Review PanelChair:  Steven	Boswell	BBN Technologies	sboswell@bbn.comVice Chair:  Steve Monson	The Boeing Company	steve.monson@boeing.comSecretary:  VacancyWayne Civinskas	Lockheed Martin Simulation, Training	wayne.j.civinskas@lmco.com	   & Support (LM STS)John Fay	Sverdrup Technology	john.fay@eglin.af.milReed Little	Software Engineering Institute/	little@sei.cmu.edu	   Carnegie Mellon UniversityKatherine L. Morse	SAIC	katherine.l.morse@saic.comMichael O’Connor	ITT Industries	 HYPERLINK "mailto:michael.oconnor@itt.com" michael.oconnor@itt.comThe Communication, Frameworks, and Infrastructure (CFI) forum focuses on technologies that support interoperation and run-time execution of distributed simulations.  Historical examples include the HLA Run-Time Infrastructure (RTI), DIS, ALSP, and SPEEDES.  The Forum will also consider new and alternate infrastructure concepts, such as web-based technologies.  Topics include performance data, implementation and design details, usage strategies, networking techniques, fault tolerance, security considerations, and middleware or other frameworks for constructing, utilizing, or extending simulation infrastructure.MEDICAL TRACKTrack Manager – Rick Sharp – Richard.Sharp@wpafb.af.milMedical (MED) Forum2004 Spring/Fall - MED Planning & Review Panel Co-Chair:  William Beavin	The Boeing Company	william.c.beavin@boeing.com Co-Chair:  Gerry Moses	USAMRMC TATRC	 HYPERLINK "mailto:moses@tatrc.org" moses@tatrc.orgVice Chair: VacancySecretary:  VacancyThe Medical (MED) forum focuses on interoperability standards that build upon already extensive medical interface standards for operational systems for robot-assisted surgery; command and control systems for medical situational awareness; medical models of varying resolutions for research and development; training systems for instruction and rehearsal; imaging systems for treatment planning and assessment; and logistic planning systems for security and disaster response.STUDY GROUPS (SG)Study Groups (SGs) are chartered when SISO wants to obtain recommendations on well-defined issues from groups of volunteer experts selected from appropriate Forums.  Study Group sessions at this Workshop includeAssessment of the Need for Product Data Representation Standards (ANPDRS SG) Chair:  James Coolahan 	Johns Hopkins University	james.coolahan@jhuapl.eduVice Chair:  Mike Haas	Northrop Grumman	mike.haas@ngc.comSecretary:  Kim Larsen	JNIC-SPC Schriever AFB	Kim.Larsen@jntf.osd.milThe data required to represent systems and products in M&S is broad and diverse, including requirements, conceptual and physical design, manufacturing means, cost, system performance, and the product's operational and support environment.  The ANPDRS SG is reviewing existing methods of representing product data, identifying significant gaps in product data representation standards and ongoing activities to address these gaps, and, as warranted, recommending SISO Product Development Group(s) to begin formulation of needed standards.Common Image Generator Interface (CIGI SG) Chair:  Ronald G. Moore	SAIC	ronald.g.moore@saic.comVice Chair:  Willard B. Phelps	Boeing	willard.b.phelps@boeing.com Secretary:  Michael Butterworth	Northrop Grumman 	michael.butterworth@ngc.com		Information TechnologyThe goal of the Common Image Generator Interface (CIGI) SG is to evaluate industry and government interest in developing a standard image generator interface.  Typically, today's Image Generator (IG) vendors have their own closed, proprietary run-time interfaces.  At I/ITSEC'02, Boeing proposed their Open Source Common Image Generator Interface (CIGI) as a run-time interface that could be adopted by the simulation community.  Boeing indicated that they would like to see a standards organization adopt CIGI and develop it into a robust and broadly accepted simulation industry image generator run-time interface standard.  The SG is discussing this proposal, evaluating alternatives, and generating recommendations and a proposed action plan.Discrete-Event Systems Specification (DEVS SG)Chair:  Gabriel A. Wainer           	Carleton University	 HYPERLINK "mailto:gwainer@sce.carleton.ca" gwainer@sce.carleton.ca Vice Chair:   Bernard Zeigler   	University of Arizona	zeigler@ece.arizona.edu Secretary:   Hessam Sarjoughian	Arizona State University	hessam.sarjoughian@asu.edu DEVS has a theoretical foundation which makes it in principle independent of various programming languages and hardware platforms. There is a wide variety of groups working on extensions to the DEVS formalism, with several modeling tools based on these extensions. The goal of the study group will be to find a core of the DEVS formalism that is suitable for standardization of activities at the level of modeling. It will bridge the gap between existing simulation frameworks and modeling activities using a standard notation.  The DEVS SG will study the possibility of developing standards for a computer processable representation of DEVS that supports common understanding, sharing and interoperability of DEVS implementations. Computer processable forms include all forms of simulation and real-time execution as well as various forms of syntactic and semantic analysis. STUDY GROUPS (Cont’d)Distributed Interoperability Simulation Extension (DIS SG) Chair: Frank Hill		SDS International Inc.	frank.hill@forscom.army.milCo-Vice Chair: Graham Shanks	AMS	graham.shanks@amsjv.comCo-Vice Chair:  Ralph Weber	CSC	rweber@csc.comSecretary:  Grayden Figart	Gray Hawk Systems, Inc.	figart.grayden@grayhawksystems.comThe DIS SG is investigating the present use of Protocol Data Units (PDUs), which are the basis for communicating information among simulations under the DIS (IEEE 1278) standards. Many times, the use of PDUs requires users to select values for certain fields to identify the specific use of the PDUs in that event. Many users have also created "experimental PDUs" to serve their application needs.  The DIS SG will review new DIS PDUs for applicability and usefulness to the M&S community. Also, DIS users have expressed a need to clarify and interpret the existing DIS Standard(s). This includes HLA users of DIS PDUs. Users are invited to participate, both on the DIS SG Reflector and at upcoming SIWs. Please contribute a description of any experimental PDUs that you have developed and value assignments that you have made to existing DIS PDUs.Extensible Modeling and Simulation Framework Profile (XMSF Profile SG)   Chair:  Katherine L. Morse	SAIC	katherine.l.morse@saic.comVice Chair:  Andreas Tolk	VMASC/Old Dominion Univ.	atolk@odu.eduSecretary:  Johnny Garcia	General Dynamics	john.garcia@gd-ais.comThe XMSF Profile SG has several high-level requirements derived from years of experience with M&S frameworks and the challenges of their effective deployment across diverse networks and systems.  XMSF must enable simulations to interact directly and scalably over a highly distributed network, achieved through compatibility between a web framework and networking technologies.  The specification of XMSF will be in the form of a collection of profiles detailing how to interoperate with XMSF-compliant systems.  These profiles will enable inter-and intra- domain interoperability.  The initial profile content and structure must be agreed on.  As the underlying technologies and standards evolve, the profiles and will need to be upgraded to maintain interoperability.  The purpose of this SG is to determine the required scope for XMSF profiles and to define their structure.Intelligent Tutoring System Interoperability (ITSI SG) Chair:  Susann Luperfoy	Stottler Henke	luperfoy@stottlerhenke.comVice Chair:  John Tyler	The Mitre Corp.	jtyler@mitre.org			Secretary:  Beth Biddle	Sonalysts	ebiddle@sonalysts.comJames (Mark) McCall	Simulation Technologies, Inc.	james.mccall@mesa.afmc.af.milThe ITSI SG is working on interoperability between components of simulation-based training environments that include Socratic and didactic tutoring and coaching, personalized After-Action Review (AAR) and performance assessment, management of individual or team curriculum progress, student modeling, natural language dialog interaction with intelligent agents, authoring tools for creating or modifying courseware objects and ITS behavior, and quantitative measures of training effectiveness. The SG will draw on results from previous and concurrent efforts such as the Shareable Courseware Object Reference Model (SCORM), the Joint Modeling and Simulation (JMASS) Modeling and Simulation Reuse Library (MSRL), and the JSIMS Learning Methodology Working Group (LMWG), as well as standards developed by the Worldwide Web Consortium (W3C).STUDY GROUPS (Cont’d)Medical Modeling and Simulation Interoperability (MM&S Interoperability SG)Chair:  William Beavin	Boeing	william.c.beavin@boeing.comCo-Vice Chair:  Richard Severinghaus	Dynamic Animation Systems	rick.severinghaus@d-a-s.comCo-Vice Chair:  Kenneth C. Curley	U.S. Army TATRC (MRMC-AT)	curley@tatrc.orgSecretary:  Sean Murphy	Johns Hopkins University APL	Sean.Murphy@jhuapl.eduMedical simulation systems have unique technical, operational, and regulatory requirements and serve a broad array of users and customers. Medical simulation increasingly needs interoperability standards that build upon already extensive medical interface standards. The MM&S SG is identifying categories of M&S applications needed by the health care community and defining relevant information exchange requirements.Open Run Time Infrastructure Protocol (ORTI SG) Chair:  Kevin Mullally		General Dynamics	 HYPERLINK "mailto:kevin.mullally@gd-" kevin.mullally@gd-				decisionsystems.comVice Chair:  VacancySecretary:  Vacancy	The ORTI SG is a proposed communication and implementation standard for the High Level Architecture (HLA) RTI. Message formats and data handling algorithms for RTI services are encapsulated in an open, message-based protocol.  The handling algorithms for RTI services are encapsulated in an open, message-based protocol.  The study group is investigating the applicability of the Open RTI Protocol, facilitating interoperability between RTI implementations and promoting Research and Development (R&D).Simulation Conceptual Modeling (SCM SG) Chair:  Jake Borah	AEgis Technologies Group	jborah@aegistg.comVice Chair:  Vacancy	Secretary:  VacancyThe SCM SG is conducting a preliminary investigation on the use of conceptual modeling in M&S and related information technology domains.  The study group will perform exploratory work into the establishment of best practices for simulation conceptual modeling, and establish recommendations for persistent management of the topic within SISO.Simulation Reference Markup Language (SRML SG) Chair:  Steve Reichenthal	Boeing	steven.w.reichenthal@boeing.comVice Chair:  Larry Root	SimVentions, Inc.	lroot@simventions.comSecretary:  VacancyThe SRML SG is focusing on standardizing a simulation markup language and corresponding simulation engine specification based on the Simulation Reference Markup Language (SRML). We will be capturing the goals needs, business case, and potential benefits to the simulation community, and summarizing the SRML survey. Additional discussions will relate SRML, to HLA, BOMs, XMSF, MDA, and other emerging trends, as well as various forms of standardization. Participants will have an opportunity to see Web-Based Simulation demonstrations, and discuss technical details.STUDY GROUPS (Cont’d)Transfer of Control (TC SG) Chair:  Frank Hill	SDS International Inc.	frank.hill@forscom.army.milVice Chair:  Patrick Merlet		Sparta		Patrick_Merlet@sparta.com	Secretary:  VacancyThe TC SG is identifying design deficiencies and areas that need clarification related to the transfer control function. It will determine the changes needed to the DIS IEEE 1278.1a 1998 standard and to the HLA RPR FOM to ensure that transfer control implementations will be compatible between simulators. Goals for this SIW include reaching agreement on a basic set of enumerations to be used for transfer control which will be submitted to the DIS Enumeration group; reviewing draft changes and clarifications to the issuance and receipt rules for the Transfer Control PDU and HLA interactions; discussing restoring entity ownership information to DIS PDUs and the HLA RPR FOM; and agreeing on a timetable for formalizing the changes and presenting them at the 2004 Spring SIW.PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT GROUPS (PDG)Product Development Groups (PDGs) are approved to generate specific SISO Products (Standards, Guides, and Reference Products) after approval of a formal Product Nomination.  Current Product Development Groups include:Base Object Model Specification (BOM PDG) Chair:  Larry Root	SimVentions, Inc.	lroot@simventions.comVice Chair:  Bob Lutz	Johns Hopkins Univ/APL	robert.lutz@jhuapl.eduSecretary:  Jane Bachman	NSWCDD TEAMS	bachmanJT@nswc.navy.milThe BOM PDG is developing a specification for Base Object Models.  The open standardization of BOMs is essential for establishing component technology to facilitate interoperability, reusability and composability.  As part of this standardization effort, the PDG will define an XML schema to identify the base elements and ontology of a BOM and provide guidance describing how BOMs can be used to generate FOMs and SOMs from BOM compositions.C4ISR/Simulation Interoperability Technical Reference Model (C4ISR/SIMTRM PDG) Co-Chair:  Frank Carr	The Mitre Corp.	carr@mitre.orgCo-Chair:  Jim Caylor	CAE USA	jim.caylor@cae.comVice Chair:  VacancySecretary: VacancyDr. Andreas Tolk	VMASC/Old Dominion Univ.	atolk@odu.eduThe proposed C4ISR TRM PDG evolved from a series of three Study Groups.  The Study Groups examined the issues associated with C4ISR/Simulation systems interoperability and established the need for a technical reference model.  The model will facilitate the analysis of requirements, architecture, design, implementation, and testing of heterogeneous systems.  In addition, the TRM will support improved dialog among users, developers, and technicians in the C4ISR and M&S communities.  The primary task of the PDG is to develop a guidance document titled Guidance for Use of the C4ISR/Simulation Interoperability Technical Reference Model.  The document will describe how to apply the TRM to interoperability applications and provide a summary of past and present work.  It will also define levels of simulation, fidelity and interoperability, and relate the TRM to other existing and evolving standards.Dynamic Link Compatible High Level Architecture Application Programming Interface (HLA API PDG)Acting Chair:  Len Granowetter	MÄK Technology	lengrano@mak.comVice Chair:  VacancySecretary:  Katia Sullivan	Aegis Technologies	ksullivan@aegis.comThe HLA API PDG is developing a standard to define the requirements for Dynamic Link Compatible HLA APIs and methods for testing compliance.  This standard will be very useful to the distributed simulation community that uses the HLA and particularly useful to simulation developers that have to participate in multiple Federations sing different RTIs.  Use of the Dynamic Link Compatible HLA APIs will also support Federation managers in assembling Federates.  The PDG plans to define standard C++ and Java APIs for HLA 1.3 which will be based on the current APIs.  Additionally, alternative C++ and Java APIs will be created for the IEEE 1516.1 APIs will be a SISO extension to the IEEE standard.PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT GROUPS (Cont’d)Environment Data Coding Specification (EDCS PDG) Chair:  Bob Richbourg	IDA 	rricbou@ida.orgVice Chair:  Dale Miller	Lockheed Martin Simulation, Training	 HYPERLINK "mailto:ddmiller@lads.is.lmco.com" ddmiller@lads.is.lmco.com		  & Support (LM STS)Secretary:  VacancyThe EDCS PDG is a component of the Synthetic Environment Data Representation Interchange Specification (SEDRIS) that provides a data dictionary and coding standard for environmental data used in simulations of terrain, atmosphere, ocean, and space.High Level Architecture-Evolved (HLA-Evolved PDG)Chair:  Roy Scrudder	Univ. of Texas/ARL	scrudder@arlut.utexas.eduVice Chair:  VacancySecretary:  VacancyThe IEEE 1516 series of HLA specifications was originally approved by the IEEE Standards Activity (SA) Board in Fall 2000. Since that time, a DoD Interpretations Document for IEEE 1516 and a Dynamic Link Compatible HLA API for IEEE 1516.1 have been in active development. In addition, many new potential HLA requirements have been identified based on feedback from the various domains and application areas that comprise the HLA user community.   This PDG seeks to address these requirements via a formal open review of the IEEE 1516 series of specifications. As part of this process, the PDG will incorporate those aspects of the Interpretations Document and Dynamic Link Compatible HLA API that need to become part of the core standard.Link-16 Simulation Standard (Link-16 PDG) Chair:  Joe Sorroche	TACCSF/ASRCC	joe.sorroche@kirtland.af.milVice Chair:  Adin Burroughs	Northrop Grumman Info. Tech.	adinb@usa.netSecretary:  Robert Byers	Northrop Grumman Info. Tech.	rbyers@northropgrumman.comLink 16 is one of the critical components of interoperability in the Allied forces.  There are immediate and overdue operational requirements for existing and future military simulations to exchange Link-16 data using a single interoperable standard. This group is developing a SISO standard to define the methods to simulate a Link-16 Network within Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) and High Level Architecture (HLA) frameworks.Real-time Platform Reference FOM (RPR FOM PDG)Chair:  Jim Kogler	MÄK Technologies	jkogler@mak.comVice Chair:  VacancySecretary:  Doug Wood	MÄK Technologies	dwood@mak.comVersion 1.0 of this Reference Federation Object Model was the first SISO standard, capturing the functionality of IEEE 1278.1-1995.  RPR FOM 2.0, currently under development, will add the functionality of IEEE 1278.1a-1998.  The PDG will continue work towards readying the FOM and GRIM for community balloting.  PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT GROUPS (Cont’d)Verification, Validation & Accreditation Overlay to FEDEP (VV&A PDG)Chair:  Simone Youngblood	DMSO	syoungblood@dmso.milVice Chair:  Susan Solick	TRADOC Analysis Center	 HYPERLINK "mailto:susan.solick@us.army.mil" susan.solick@us.army.milSecretary:  Virginia Dobey	SAIC	vdobey@dmso.milThe VV&A PDG is developing a recommended practices guide outlining implementation methodologies for the VV&A of a federation.  IEEE 1516.3, Recommended Practices for HLA Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) recognized VV&A as a key component of federation development and implementation to the extent that placeholders, or "hooks," were included in the FEDEP to support the development of a VV&A overlay.  The proposed VV&A guidance document will mirror the FEDEP, addressing overall VV&A methodology, roles and responsibilities, tasks, and resulting products.  It will be based on lessons learned and established approaches derived from the M&S community.  This guidance document will serve as the foundation for the assessment of credibility of a federation by addressing issues relating to establishing substantive interoperability, promoting reusability, and assuring composability.PAGE  28PAGE  44