CALL FOR PAPERS AND PRESENTATIONS2010 Spring Simulation Multi-conferencesponsored by Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO)Co-located with The Society for Modeling and Simulation International (SCS)The Florida HotelOrlando, FL12-16 April 2010Click the "2010 Spring Joint SCS/SISO Conference" link on the SISO web page, http://www.sisostds.org for more detailed (and more colorful) information.  SISO's Simulation Interoperability Workshops (SIWs) are semiannual events encompassing a broad range of model and simulation issues, applications, and communities, with the overall goal of identifying and supporting the development of products to facilitate simulation interoperability standards and reuse. Each SIW includes working sessions addressing interoperability and reuse requirements and issues; tutorials on state-of-the-art methodologies, tools, and techniques; and exhibits presenting the latest technological advances.KEY DATES09 Nov 09	Abstracts due in electronic form25 Nov 09 	Abstract accept/reject notifications13 Jan 10  	Papers due in electronic form29 Jan 10  	Paper accept/reject notifications11 Feb 10 	Final paper revisions due11 Mar 10 	Hotel/early registration deadline02 Apr 10 	PowerPoint presentations due12 Apr 10 	Spring SIW opensABSTRACT SUBMISSION INFORMATIONThe Workshop invites papers and presentations relating to distributed simulation standards, applications, and technologies, interoperability issues, and other topics identified below and on the SISO web site.   Abstracts are reviewed and selected by Planning and Review Panels (PRPs) and leaders of the individual Forums and Groups.  Abstract and paper format requirements are described in the Author's Guide posted on the SISO web site.Individuals who wish to participate should complete and submit an abstract, using the submission form provided on the SISO web site. If you have any problems or are unable to submit to the web site, please contact Pat Burgess (pburgess@ist.ucf.edu), phone: 407-882-1372, fax: 407-658-5059.EXPERIENCE WITH SISO STANDARDSSISO invites papers and presentations that report on experiences with SISO-developed standards and guidelines. We are looking for feedback (positive or negative) on the utility of our products.INDIVIDUAL FORUM AND GROUP CALLS FOR PAPERS AND PRESENTATIONSGenerally, papers and presentations are considered in three main categories:User Community Forums, which examine and promote topics of interest related to the use and adequacy of available simulation capabilities and new capabilities needed by M&S users. Specialty Area Forums, which examine and promote current and emerging simulation processes and technology. Special Sessions, which deal with topics that merit timely solicitation of feedback from the SISO community.Some Forums and Special Sessions may include invited presentations and/or panel discussions that do not involve the submission of a formal paper.For a detailed list of the Tracks and Forums, Study Groups, and Product Development Groups meeting at this workshop, and their specific interest areas and plans, see the corresponding links at http://www.sisostds.org under the "Tracks and Forums" link.TECHNICAL EXHIBITS AND DEMONSTRATIONSFrom Monday through Wednesday, several organizations will provide exhibits and demonstrations of materials, software, and equipment relevant to distributed simulation applications. The exhibit/demonstration area will be open during breaks and during the Monday evening reception.SPONSORSHIP AND ORGANIZATIONAL MEMBERSHIPSISO Sponsorship provides a means for organizations to gain representation and benefits in partnership with the activities and operation of SISO. Sponsors enjoy the following privileges:• Printing of Sponsor's corporate logos on SISO flyers and printed material• Display of logos and links from the SISO web site to the Sponsor's web site• 10% Discount on all SISO fees (workshop registration fees, booth rental, etc.• Invitations to lunch with SISO leadership and plenary speakers SISO Organizational Membership includes all benefits of sponsorship, as well as:• Specified numbers of individual memberships (new or renewal), depending on the level of Organizational Membership• Options to purchase pre-paid blocks of registrations at substantial discounts 25% (rather than 10%) discounts on exhibit booths for Sustaining, Principal, and Strategic Organizational Members• Meetings with SISO leadership to discuss the Organization's experiences in interacting with SISO and any recommendations they may have regarding SISO activities or standardsOrganizations may also help sponsor the reception held at the end of the opening day of the workshop, or a day of coffee breaks. The reception enables sponsors to meet and talk with the other attendees in a casual atmosphere of food and drink.  For information on becoming a SISO Sponsor or Organizational Member, contact Duncan Miller at dmiller@sisostds.orgDOD PARTICIPATIONThe Office of the Secretary of Defense has reviewed the plans for this Workshop and issued the following determination: "The Department of Defense finds this event meets the minimum regulatory standards for attendance by DoD employees. This finding does not constitute a blanket approval or endorsement for attendance. Individual DoD Component commands or organizations are responsible for approving attendance of its DoD employees based on mission requirements and DoD regulations."DRESS CODE ADVISORYThe workshop atmosphere is intentionally informal. Jackets/ties/heels are discouraged, especially after the Monday Plenary session. At the Monday afternoon Plenary, military speakers wear the Uniform of the Day. The Uniform of the Day or civilian attire are appropriate on subsequent days.SITE AND ACCOMMODATIONSThe Workshop will be held at The Florida Hotel, Orlando, FL. The special conference rate is $139/night. A government per diem rate is also available for a limited number of rooms. Proof of status will be required to obtain the government rate. Make your reservations at the 2010 Spring SIW page or by contacting IEEE MCM at 1-800-810- 4333 (in the U.S. or Canada), +732-981-3414 (outside the U.S. or Canada), by faxing your request to 732-465-6447, or by emailing it to (d.krynski@ieee.org).GOVERNMENT PER DIEM AND CONFERENCE LODGING ALLOWANCESPlease note that an exception to normal government per diem rates is permitted for conferences in accordance with Part 301-74.9 of Federal Travel Regulations. This exception may be cited on US government travel request forms. SISO's access to meeting space at the conference depends on our guarantee of an agreed-upon number of lodging room-nights. Please plan to stay at the conference hotel!REGISTRATIONThe Workshop registration form is available on-line at the 2010 Spring SIW page. Please note that the early registration deadline (and the deadline for the special room rate) is 11 March 2010. Fees range from $562.50 for early registration with a sponsor discount through $700 for on-site full-rate registration. Student registrations are available at a 50% discount, with proof of valid, current status as a full-time university undergraduate or graduate student.CONTINUING EDUCATION UNITS AND CERTIFIED MODELING AND SIMULATION PROFESSIONAL RECERTIFICATION UNITSIf elected via the registration form, this workshop will provide certification of 2.0 Continuing Education Units (CEUs). These CEUs also qualify as Recertification Units (RUs) for Certified Modeling and Simulation Professionals (CMSP) as administered by the Modeling and Simulation Professional Certification Commission (MSPCC, http://www.SimProfessional.org).2010 SISO CONFERENCE COMMITTEESteve Swenson (Chair)Sarah T. Epps (Vice Chair)Jim Coolahan (Secretary)Wink Bennett Jr.Dannie Cutts (SAC Vice Chair)Priscilla ElfreyJason EsteveDavid GrahamGrover LollarRichard ReadingAustin Stoudenmire