Lessons from STOW 97 for Analysis Gary Q. CoeInstitute for Defense Analysis1801 N. Beauregard StreetAlexandria, Virginia 22311(703) 845-6628gcoe@ida.orgAbstract	STOW 97 was an Advanced Concepts Technology Demonstration for demonstrating the effectiveness, efficiency , and potential of the Advanced Distributed Simulation (ADS) in facilitating the training and mission rehearsal objectives of the commanders and staffs of the Joint Task Force and its components.  However, the STOW technologies have implications in areas beyond training that include analysis, engineering, manufacturing, and acquisition.  Also, the requirements for analysis are changing as the result of a new global environment and technological capabilities.  Therefore, it is appropriate to think about how ADS technologies can improve future analyses.  This paper uses lessons from STOW 97 to examine how ADS can and should support analysis in the future. The general relationship between simulation and analysis is discussed, followed by discussions of how ADS can effect this relationship and the emerging analytical challenges that cannot be addressed adequately using existing tools and traditional analytical methods.  Some particular analyses where ADS can have a substantial impact are identified.  This discussion is balanced with a consideration of the challenges of ADS.   The article then considers the incorporation of ADS within a broader research plan highlighting some of the special properties of ADS that make it useful for analysis and some new analysis techniques that should be considered.  Also some  challenges to using ADS in experimental design are addressed and some technological challenges are identified to improve ADS for analysis.  The article advocates the development of new approaches to data analysis and a greater dependence on visualization vice statistical analysis.KeywordsAnalysis, Advanced Distributed Simulation, Synthetic Theater of War, Visualization, Statistical AnalysisIntroductionSTOW 97 was an Advanced Concepts Technology Demonstration for demonstrating the effectiveness, efficiency , and potential of the Advanced Distributed Simulation (ADS) in facilitating the training and mission rehearsal objectives of the commanders and staffs of the Joint Task Force and its components. However, the STOW technologies have implications in areas beyond training that include analysis, engineering, manufacturing, and acquisition.  Also, as the result of a new global environment and technological capabilities, the requirements for analysis are changing.  Therefore, it is appropriate to think about how ADS technologies can improve future analyses.  This paper uses lessons from STOW 97 to examine how ADS can and should support analysis in the future. The general relationship between simulation and analysis is discussed, followed by discussions of how ADS can effect this relationship and the emerging analytical challenges that cannot be addressed adequately using existing tools and traditional analytical methods.  Some particular analyses where ADS can have a substantial impact are identified.Synthetic Theater of War 97STOW 97 can be described as the set of the ADS technologies shown below.Synthetic Forces, where behaviors are defined in high fidelity at the platform level; integrated with environment for dynamic effects, including command entities, realistic sensor performance; and adhere to an object based architecture for modular design.Synthetic Environments including multiple resolution terrain and bathymetric battlefield effects (illumination, obscurants, ocean and surf zone), dynamic terrain (anti-tank ditches, minefields and breaching, surf zone obstacles, cultural features, high-fidelity munitions effects), multi-state objects (bridges, buildings, roads), and real time weather (clouds and precipitation).  Advanced Simulation Networks that enable the interoperation of multiple simulations on a network.Simulation Infrastructure that permits the integration of live, virtual, and constructive simulations, interfacing of simulation with go-to-war systems, access to and from warfighter locations, collection of data, and after action review. Rather than think about STOW in terms of special properties such as distributed simulation, it is more important to understand how each of these technologies and their combinations may contribute to analysis.Simulation and AnalysisIn order to better grasp using ADS for analysis, we should first understand how simulation in general can be used for analysis.  Some analysts may see simulation as an instrument for measurement that can be used in a scientific experiment about combat where hypotheses are posed and tested.   This is an improper view since simulations seldom can meet the specifications required of scientific instruments, nor do they measure real world data.   [Ackoff] describes simulation as experimentation on a model of phenomena rather than with the phenomena themselves, that is vicarious experimentation.   This rationale leads us to the validation issue, revealing an interesting observation.  It may be possible to validate physics based simulations of weapons systems because there are theories, laws, and a body of knowledge available that will support validation.  In contrast, similar foundations do not exist for understanding the more challenging aspects of combat such as command and control of the battlefield, intelligence, logistics and other information based phenomena.   Moreover, the information based phenomena generally do not really lend themselves to traditional analysis ‘principles’ such as repeatability and isolation of variables, since such phenomena are frequently stochastic and nonlinear.  In short, the old ways and tools are obsolete for many problems.The challenges of modeling and simulation in the 21st Century are created by the new world order and the emerging information technologies that promise solutions to how we will conduct military operations in the future.  Existing analysis tools are recognized as inadequate for these challenges, evidenced by the on-going Defense Science Board Task Force to address specifically this issue.    Joint Vision 2010 defines the vision for future military capability and includes four operational concepts: dominant maneuver, precision engagement, full dimensional protection, and focused logistics.  These concepts are based on radically new capabilities expected from information technology.  Perhaps therefore it is important to postulate how simulation may support information based concept analysis.  To this end, it is suggested that simulation may perform the following functions.  Stimulating a combat scenario for analysis, Responding to decisions and actions in the scenario, Providing feedback to analysts about the scenario, and Providing repetition for sensitivity analysis.    Although STOW 97 was not evaluated as a concepts analysis tool, its evaluation for training and training analysis illustrates how STOW 97 could support each of the functions above.STOW 97 generated a robust scenario and force lists were constructed in detail and implemented through realistically complex behaviors that interacted with the battlefield environment with good fidelity to the real world model.  This scenario included human-in-the-loop (HITL) interfaces through existing C4I systems and an architecture for all sensor to shooter information flow which stimulated the intelligence process credibly and with a reduced resource level.  It was demonstrated that the number of intelligence planners, scripters, and actors could be reduced dramatically through the use of STOW.  A complete friendly and enemy force structure was played during STOW 97  that emphasized many different missions including air, land, and sea operations and further including counter mine operations, an amphibious landing, special operations, and theater missile defense.STOW 97 responded in innumerable ways to decisions and actions of the training audience illustrated by multi-state damage of platforms and cultural features on the battlefield, obscurants, and vehicular ground dust and ocean spray.  In addition to physical effects, many processes involving command, control, intelligence, and logistics were played realistically in the simulation.  The integration of the JSTARS Ground Station Module (GSM) with the simulation allowed the Joint Task Force Commander and his intelligence staff to have a realistic picture of  tactical movement on the synthetic battlefield consistent with other sources of informationAs a part of a comprehensive interplay between the training audience and the simulation,  automated strike aircraft using artificial intelligence techniques automatically sent realistic reports on their missions that were transformed into standard message text formats.  Other C4I systems that were integrated with the battlefield included Maneuver Control System - Phoenix, Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data System, Contingency Theater Automated Planning System, Engineer Operations and Planning System, Expeditionary Decision Support System, Joint Deployable Intelligence Support System, Joint Maritime Command Information System, and the Global Command and Control System.  STOW 97 included a robust data collection system and common data infrastructure that captured and stored information corresponding to the state of the exercise during its execution.  All data required to support after-action review and exercise playback was captured automatically, indexed, and stored into a centralized data repository and retrieved both during and after the exercise via data queries.  Data was retrieved for statistical analysis and for real time visualization of selected events for review.STOW 97 provided multiple instances of events that required repetition of processes such as battle damage assessment.	The Utility of Simulation in AnalysisThe above functions provide a framework  for implementing simulation in analysis through experimental design, if we first define uses for simulation in the design of an experiment.  [Ackoff] suggests four principal uses:To determine the optimizing values of controlled variables.  For example in queuing theory, the effect of the number of servicing points on the outcome can be determine analytically only for certain distributions of arrival and servicing times (e.g. Poisson and exponential).  For some distributions, the necessary integration cannot be performed.  But by simulation in these cases, outcomes can be estimated and hence solutions involving queuing processes of this type can be approximated.To study transitional processes.  In many cases where a model can be solved analytically, the solution specifies only the terminal or steady state that results from changing the values of variables, not the intermediate states - the states of transition.  Simulation exposes the transition to as careful a study as the researcher may care to make.  To estimate values of model parameters or the model’s functional form.  In some cases, we may be able to construct a model but not to evaluate all its parameters because of lack of data.  We may, however, have good and plentiful data on past outcomes and values of the controlled variables.  In such cases, we can use simulation to try out a large number of possible values of the parameters, together with known past values of controllable variables until we obtain one or more sets of values which yield outcomes that correspond well with the known past outcomes.  The same kind of procedures can be used to explore alternative functional forms of the model.To treat courses of action which cannot be formulated into the model.  Potential Uses for ADS in AnalysisLet us just consider one of the proposed uses - the second one, above. We should believe that ADS would be useful in studying the state changes of warfighting processes.  A potential instance of this use is as providing a realistic treatment of human performance.  In addition, the following areas also appear to have potential.Information processes.  STOW enables high fidelity tracking of sensor to shooter information.  Some examples demonstrated in  STOW 97 include the realistic execution by synthetic forces of an operations plan and air tasking order developed by a real world staff, the reporting of mission results by synthetic forces and sensors, and the tasking of new missions and sensors for battle damage assessment.  These are important new capabilities which will enhance future analysis of improved intelligence, and command and control expected in the information age.Equipment in the loop.  The JSTARS event mentioned earlier above demonstrates the capability for analyzing equipment in the loop.  This application extends the ability to treat  human performance modified by their equipment.  An experiment using virtual simulation for analyzing both human- and equipment-in-the-loop was prototyped for the 1996 Defense Science Board on Tactics and Techniques for 21st Century Military Superiority.  This proof of principle effort revealed insight on using ADS for analysis that included the usability of new equipment and in the analysis of human factors.Military Terrain Analysis.  Richbourg and Olson describe a software suite that combine ideas and methodologies including synthetic environments, to function as an expert system for terrain analysis for supporting tactical planning for small unit operations.  Using this suite, for example, computer recommendations on the selection of U.S. Marine Corps defensive positions correlated closely to those selected by experienced military officers.Visualization.  Many people think better visually that they do verbally, or at least respond more clearly to visual stimuli.  Some scientists say their greatest achievements grew from the spatial relations and transformations they saw in their imagination.  Two well known cases are Friedrich Kekule’s famous dream of the benzene molecule as a coiled-up snake eating its tail and James Watt’s visualization of the separate-condenser steam engine.  The RAND paper cites the value of visualization in communicating analysis results to the decision maker.  Why is it not equally important to analyze visually processes such as battle damage assessment that are difficult to assess statistically?In addition to these method oriented uses we should note that the domain for analysis is expanding with the evolution of ADS.  Recently evolving examples include virtual prototyping, biomechanics or manufacturing.Some Challenges for Using ADS for AnalysisOn the other side of the coin, we should consider some of the challenges to ADS and STOW 97.The restriction of STOW to real time is a challenge that might be overcome by future technology.  Notwithstanding, it should be observed also that some analyses may best be limited to real time.  There is evidence that combat often behaves as a complex adaptive system.  Faster-than-real-time simulation requires that processes be analytically reducible although it is known that complex adaptive systems are not reducible.  We need to better sort out what problems can be solved using traditional tools and what problems need improved tools.There is a common notion that logistical load and expense of distributed efforts is a liability of ADS. This notion needs to be re-thought.  It is true that the STOW 97 ACTD was an expensive endeavor.  Over 500 computer processing units were used to demonstrate how the distribution of simulations could support large scale training for reducing the cost of fielding large numbers of soldiers, sailors, and airmen in supporting a training event for high level staffs.  However, this was a function of the application, not the technology. The new technology should be seen differently.  Consider the contexts for analysis illustrated below.1.  ModSAF can be used as a stand-alone   entity level constructive simulation for analysis.2.  Distributed simulation can be cost effective. For example, one might postulate:a.   The networking of a logistics simulation from Fort Lee with a simulation suite at Fort Leavenworth for some combat development study that meets a requirement for studying certain logistics issues that precludes the movement of logistics simulation people and equipment from Fort Lee to Fort Leavenworth.b    An experimental design that uses a LAN for linking together different federates each having different experimental design functions such as data collection, and exercise, environment or scenario control.c.    A variant of this last case where human- and equipment-in-the-loop are incorporated into the network design as federates.Before placing too much emphasis on ADS cost, we should understand that one important reason in the feasibility of ADS is the dramatic improvements in the  performance of computers and networks that are doubling every 18 months at a proportionally declining cost. ADS Within a Broader Research PlanAlthough a RAND idea of using human-in-the-loop experiments to calibrate constructive simulations may have merit, it is believed that this view is too narrow as a scheme for improved use of ADS in analysis.  RAND seems to assume that constructive models and ADS have uniquely different attributes that need to be normalized in some way.  In reality, ADS includes a constructive simulation capability which is, in ways, richer than legacy simulations.  Capabilities and properties embedded in ModSAF which separate it from JANUS, for example, include the following:Command and Control Simulation Interoperability Language (CCSIL) enables ModSAF entities (weapons and units) to talk to each other (e.g. synthetic AWACS controls strike missions of several aircraft) and allows communication between the simulation and humans and equipment in the loop.SOAR is an artificial intelligence methodology which enables synthetic air craft to conduct high fidelity missions in credible ways such as in the submission of voice and text mission reports.Command Forces (CFOR) is an artificial intelligence methodology that enables synthetic forces to conduct credibly standard military operations.  STOW 97 demonstrated limited CFOR capability to the Battalion Commander level where a battalion operations order was transformed into CCSIL, disseminated to subordinate synthetic units, and executed using tactically correct procedures.Environmental reasoning is a ModSAF property that requires entities to behave logically with respect to their environment.  For example, a tank will not be able to locate itself on the top of a mountain from the valley below without obeying certain mobility constraints.Command talk is an interface language that has been incorporated in ModSAF to enhance user control over the simulation.  For example, it has been used to initialize the positioning of synthetic forces on the battlefield and computer screen navigation functions such as “zoom in or out”.A common architecture for simulation from all three services that can be implemented at various levels of fidelity in ADS.  STOW 97 demonstrated the interaction of multi-service platforms and joint processes.  It was evaluated at a training level but it could have been evaluated at an analytic level.Validation at the platform level was conducted partially by all Services.  The modularity provided by entity based simulation promises improved efficiency for validating warfighting processes or missions.Modularity of ADS facilitates the customization of simulations for  specific analysis requirements.  For example, performance characteristics of future weapons and sensor systems may be implemented with relative ease simply by changing attributes of existing ModSAF entities.These properties and others provide improved capability for setting up experiments, understanding cause and effect, and understanding battlefield complexity.  In order to make ADS a more effective analysis tool the following future capabilities are required.Faster-than-real-time run-time is needed for supporting statistical analysis.High level behaviors are required for battalion and above and/or a better way to specify behaviors for more efficient scenario design. Joint validation of analysis fidelity where “joint validation” implies the validation of interactions between service entities, joint missions (e.g. Theater Missile Defense), and behavior of networked behavior.Improved tools for leverage  the new properties of ADS.This author agrees with the idea that analytically oriented ADS projects logically require a balanced mix of more traditional methods and ADS as sources for analytic information and that a natural synergy does exist between these two sets of simulation tools.  However, there is some disagreement on how that synergy can best be achieved.  It is believed that beyond traditional analysis, ADS benefits a larger domain than only the human dimension  - specifically the information domain.  Further, ADS can be effectively used in analysis in ways other than in the calibration of constructive models.  For example, visualization provides a mechanism for understanding issues without statistical analysis of data and there are some behavioral issues such as equipment usability and cognition that cannot be calibrated into constructive models.John Little has expressed the notion that classical work in operations research can be characterized by analysts who build systems in terms of their own understanding and then deliver “black” box solutions to an end user.  A different and more powerful problem solving system empowers the user to look inside the solutions and make changes to craft his or her own solution.  Further, as Hugh Misner states, “ clients are not interested in models; they are interested in information that will help them with the problems they face.”Most succinctly, Samuel Holzman makes the observation that, “effective decision systems must concentrate on assisting the decision-maker gain an insight into the decision problem at hand rather than merely supplying a somehow ‘right’ answer.”  ADS offers an increasingly large body of existing work designed to construct these kinds of systems.  Analysis can only benefit from embracing these tools and accepting the challenges posed by the broader, less well-defined problems important to higher levels of management. SummaryThe author does not believe we are yet in a position to grasp fully the benefits of ADS for analysis, but does believe that they can be profound.  Experimentation seems appropriate for exploring the capabilities of ADS for analysis.  A DoD program that validates platform behaviors and the synthetic environment for analysis is appropriate.  Aside from technology advances for simulation, we need to think about the challenging new problems to be solved that are information- vice physics-based and that are nonlinear vice linear.   A generalization that the analysis community should learn from business about implementing new technology is that it is insufficient to automate old processes. We also need to develop new processes that leverage the new technology.  These new processes might result in new approaches to experimental design including set-up, scenario design, exercise control, or data collection.  They also might result in new approaches to data analysis such as in greater dependence on visualization vice statistical analysis.ABOUT THE AUTHORGary Q. Coe is a retired Army officer who currently serves on the research staff of the Institute for Defense Analyses. He has written extensively about Defense policy and operations research.  In the eight years following his retirement from the Army he has served in different projects involving the design or implementation of modeling & simulations and other information technology systems.  He currently directs the evaluation of Synthetic Theater of War 97. Extracted from DARPA STOW 97 briefing slides, October 1997.  In this article, STOW and ADS are used interchangeably. Ackoff, Russell L. Scientific Method:  Optimizing Applied Research Decisions, John Wiley & Sons, New York 1962, p 346. Anchor, C.J., “A Proposed Foundation for a Theory of Combat”, Warfare Modeling, edited by Bracken, Kress, and Rosenthal, John Wiley & Cons, Danvers, MA 1995, pp 165-197. Terms of Reference for 1997 Defense Science Board Task Force on Tools for Concepts Analysis, co-chaired by General Larry Welch, USAF (ret) and Dr. Ted Gold, undated. The Joint Chiefs of Staff (signed by General Shalikashvili) Joint Vision 2010, 1997. JCS Op Cit. Coe, Gary Q.: Mengel, Larry; Madden, James; and Wright, Rick; Virtual Simulation Support to the 1996 Defense Science Board Summer Study, “Tactics and Technology for 21st Century Military Superiority”  IDA Document D-1988 , Alexandria, VA, Feb 1997.   Richbourg, Robert and Olson, Warren K.  “A Hybrid Expert System that Combines Technologies to Address the Problem of Military Terrain Analysis”, Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 11, No. 2, p 207-225, Great Britain, 1996 Cooper, Lynn and Shepard, Roger N., “Turning Something Over in the Mind,” Scientific American, December 1984, p. 106. Holland, John,  Hidden Order, Helix Books (An Addison Wesley Publication), Reading MA, 1996.  [This book discusses the properties of complex adaptive systems from which one can derive complex adaptive behaviors in combat.] Casti, John L., Alternate Realities, John Wiley & Sons, New York 1989.  [This book describes a mathematical modeling theory, addressing the irreducibility of complex systems.  It can be shown that some combat systems cannot be decomposed into components for solution, although some analysts try to do that anyway.] Schaller, Robert R.,  “Moore’s Law: past present, and future”, IEEE Spectrum, Vol. 34 No. 6, June 1997, pp 53-59. Lucas, Tom; Kerchner, Bob; Bennett, Bart; and Friel, John;  “ADS for Analysis: The Reality and the Hype!”; Phalanx, Vol. 30, No  3, Alexandria, VA., Sep 1997.. Richbourg, Robert F. and Ragsdale, Daniel J., “Operations Research and Artificial Intelligence: The Common Ground”, Publication unknown. Holtzman, Samuel, Intelligent Decision Systems, Addison Wesley Publishing, Reading, MA, 1988, p.7.