SBA Concepts and ExperiencesTimothy N. JahrenRaytheon Systems Company12351 Research ParkwayOrlando, FL  32826407-382-3713Email:   HYPERLINK mailto:tnjahren@west.raytheon.com tnjahren@west.raytheon.comAllan R. GetmanRaytheon Systems CompanyBinghamton, NY607-721-4976Email:   HYPERLINK mailto:argetman@west.raytheon.com argetman@west.raytheon.comMichael S. KamrowskiRaytheon Missile Systems CompanyTucson, AZ520-794-2955Email:   HYPERLINK mailto:mskamrowski@west.raytheon.com mskamrowski@west.raytheon.comAndrew VandivortRaytheon Missile Systems CompanyTucson, AZ520-794-9656Email:   HYPERLINK mailto:amvandivort@west.raytheon.com amvandivort@west.raytheon.comKeywords:  SBA, Simulation, Model, Virtual PrototypeABSTRACT: Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) is a new initiative that is rapidly gaining attention in the DoD acquisition community.  The goal of SBA is to promote a broader, planned use of simulation throughout the acquisition process.  There are numerous opportunities throughout the system acquisition process to better utilize simulation to reduce program life cycle risk.  A key enabler for this broader use is the development of a supporting SBA environment; an existing SBA environment can reduce the risks for individual programs to pursue SBA development.  This paper will discuss some opportunities for the better use of simulation in the system development process, and identify some SBA environment concepts that can facilitate the use of simulation.  This paper will also discuss some lessons learned and current experience with the use of simulation to support the system development process on several programs; this will include the B2 aircrew simulation and several missile programs, including the SM-3 System Testbed and ITADS.1.0	IntroductionThe Department of Defense (DoD) has been pursuing a goal of increased use of simulation throughout the system acquisition process.  DoDD 5000.1 requires that “models and simulations shall be used to reduce the time, resources, and risks of the acquisition process and to increase the quality of the systems being acquired” [1].  DoD 5000.2-R states that “Accredited modeling and simulation shall be applied as appropriate, throughout the system life-cycle in support of the various acquisition activities: requirements definition; program management; design and engineering; efficient test planning; results prediction; and to supplement actual test and evaluation; manufacturing; and logistics support” [2].  Here, the term “acquisition” refers to the complete lifecycle of a system, from initial concept development, through full-scale development and production, up to and including system operations and support.  This initiative is called “Simulation Based Acquisition”, or SBA.The SBA vision calls for “An acquisition process in which the DoD and industry are enabled by robust, collaborative, use of simulation technology that is integrated across acquisition phases and programs [3,4].  The goals of SBA are to:Substantially reduce time, resources, and risk associated with the entire acquisition process;Increase the quality, military worth, and supportability of fielded systems while reducing total ownership costs throughout the total life cycle;Enable Integrated Product and Process Development (IPPD) across the entire acquisition life cycle.” [3,4]The DoD has established goals to reduce system acquisition schedule to IOC by 50% and total ownership cost by 30% while improving system quality [3,4]; in other words, the DoD wants things quicker, cheaper, and better. SBA is one of the key enablers for this improvement in acquisition cost, schedule, and quality.This paper will discuss some concepts for implementing SBA.   It will also review some of the Modeling and Simulation (M&S) work that has been done at Raytheon at different points in the acquisition process and discuss their relevance to the emerging SBA process.2.0	SBA Concepts  There are numerous opportunities for the use of M&S throughout the program acquisition cycle. USAF Acquisition Policy 97A-004 contains a list of M&S opportunities throughout the program life-cycle [6].  They are summarized in Table 2.0-1 and discussed (excerpted from 97A-004) in the following paragraphs.Pre-Milestone 0 and Concept Exploration (CE).  In these phases, a suite of models and simulations, along with supporting data including threat, environment, tactics, etc., are used to conduct mission area assessments, identify program cost drivers, and perform requirements analysis and risk assessments. In CE, the requirement process also identifies deficiencies in M&S products to support acquisition programs. [6]  In CE, the Digital System Model (DSM) is initiated; this is similar to the Navy’s Smart Product Model (SPM).  A DSM is a software representation of a system, used to characterize dynamically the expanded effects of changes in assumptions, design, tactics, or doctrine.  DSMs embody system requirements and characteristics such that they can be actively evaluated in a common digital environment starting with concept exploration and progressing throughout the system lifecycle. [6]Program Definition and Risk Reduction (PDRR). M&S in the PDRR phase continues to support and extend activities that were initially conducted in CE.  As the focus of development starts shifting toward design of subsystems and components, the models and simulations take on better definition.  The types of models and simulations used include hardware/software in-the-loop simulations, logistics support models, computer-aided design (CAD) and computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) models, cost models, virtual simulations, etc. [6]Engineering and Manufacturing Development (EMD).  A major focus of M&S in EMD is on engineering-level models, which are used for design, engineering tradeoffs, test planning and support, verification of subsystem and system performance, and verification of compliance with specifications.  Models and simulations also support Analysis of Alternatives (AoA) and ORD updates, DT&E/OT&E, and preparations for production and deployment of the system.  Programs should:•	Continue to review and update the M&S acquisition strategy and products•	Continue VV&A activities•	Cooperate with Modeling and Simulation Resource Repositories (MSRRs) to ensure the M&S applications created are available for reuse by others•	Identify opportunities for M&S in production line setup [6]Table 2.0-1.  M&S activities throughout acquisitionProduction and Fielding/Deployment and Operational Support.  In this phase, models and simulations can be used to support continued testing, support evaluation and verification of engineering design changes, evaluate effects of design and manufacturing process changes on production, support depot planning for weapons system maintenance, and support decisions to initiate major modifications of the system.  Programs should:•	Continue to review and update the M&S acquisition strategy and products•	Encourage the use of the same models, simulations, and databases for design and manufacturing, combined with the transfer of digital design data directly to the manufacturing floor to reduce errors, rework, and production risk•	Encourage the use of the same models and databases developed in EMD to simulate manufacturing processes•	Encourage the use of factory simulations for production planning•	Continue refinement and update of models, simulations, and databases for use in operational training situations, testing applications, and accomplishing operational and support effectiveness evaluations. [6]As one can see, there are many opportunities for the use of M&S throughout the acquisition (program lifecycle) process. As we discuss SBA further, it is important to recall the definition of “model” and “simulation” from DoDD 5000.59 [5]:•	Model:  A physical, mathematical, or logical representation of a system entity, phenomenon, or process.•	Simulation:  A method for implementing a model over time.  A technique for testing, analysis, or training where real-world systems or concepts are used and represented by a model.The SBA concept calls for more than simply the use of M&S throughout different phases of a program.  There are many good examples of the use of M&S in different phases of the program today -- including the New Attack Submarine (NSSN), B2, Bradley, Crusader, and F-22.  Some of these have also integrated M&S between activities.However, the SBA concept calls for “use of simulation technology that is integrated across acquisition phases and programs” [3,4].  The basic idea is shown in figure 2.0-1 [7].  The figure depicts an environment where all the program disciplines share a common information repository.  This common repository stores data once in a common format rather than many times in different formats; this repository would include a DSM or SPM.  Also, a common simulation framework is shown which permits the distributed execution of simulations from different domains.  This also provides for the reuse of models implemented in different domains in a single simulation that is unified by the common simulation framework.  Figure 2.0-1.  SBA Operational ConceptThe High Level Architecture (HLA) has taken us a step toward the reuse of models for different applications.  HLA provides a mechanism where different simulations (and thus their embedded models) can “federate” to share the capabilities of their embedded models.  However, the future SBA vision of reusable models goes further.  The goal of SBA would produce models that are reusable from one simulation to another.  To achieve that goal, more standards on model development will be required.The integrated SBA environment also provides an excellent enabling environment for collaborative Integrated Product Development.  One of the key goals of SBA is to “Enable Integrated Product and Process Development (IPPD) across the entire acquisition life cycle.”  SBA is more than just using simulation to develop systems; in many ways it is an attempt to define the next generation engineering environment which will use simulation as one of its key ways of doing engineering development. 3.0	SBA ExperiencesThe SBA initiative has stimulated much thought and discussion within the Raytheon engineering community; the focus has been on how to increase the quality of products and maintain competitive advantage as we transition from our existing technology base.  Emphasis has been on approaches that exploit the value of our legacy simulators, increase the reuse of models across development phases, and reduce the cost and time expense traditionally needed to develop M&S tools.The remainder of this paper will describe some M&S activities at Raytheon at different points in the acquisition (program life-cycle) process and their relationship and value to the emerging SBA concepts.  Simulation programs will be discussed from two distinct domains -- training and mission analysis.3.1	B2 SimulationThe first program to be presented is the B2 simulation.  The B2 simulation is a high fidelity virtual simulation.  The B2 simulation operates in an execution environment that supports large-scale virtual simulation/prototyping.  For the B2, this environment was used primarily to support  training, however the underlying capabilities could be extended to encompass more of the system acquisition process. This simulation is used primarily for training B2 aircrews and consists of two simulators - the B2 Weapon System Trainer (WST) and Mission Trainer (MT); it is pictured in figures 3.1-1 and 3.1-2.  The WST and MT are high fidelity virtual simulators used for mission training of B2 aircrew members.  The B2 simulators are presently used to prepare the aircrews for training flight operations and "go to war" mission scenarios.  The B2 WST is a full function weapons system trainer while the MT has the capability necessary to train the mission commander but not the pilot. The B2 Training System is a deployed system and has been highly successful in its training mission for several years. The training system has five (5) major components. The Air Vehicle component simulates the aerodynamics, propulsion system and all B2 onboard aircraft systems. The Avionics component simulates all communication, navigation, defensive and weapon systems of the B2 aircraft. Also, an extensive electronic threat environment is simulated. Modified aircraft onboard computers are used in the simulator to allow the direct use of the operational flight programs from the B2 aircraft. A mission planning and generation capability is also part of the B2 simulator system. The Radar component is made up of a simulation of the onboard B2 radar system and a simulated terrain gaming area. The Instructional component provides controls and displays to support the effective use of the system by crewmembers and instructor pilots. The fifth component is Computer Systems. This component supports the underlying computer hardware and software necessary to operate in a synchronous frame bound execution environment with scheduling, data consistency control and database management. The B2 simulators are presently used six days/week, sixteen hours/day and meets the Air Forces' requirement for 95% availability. The training devices are presently being modified to support DoD's High Level Architecture (HLA). This new capability will allow the B2 simulator to engage in team training exercises through the Air Forces Distributed Mission Training (DMT) program.Figure 3.1-1.  B2 Weapon System TrainerFigure 3.1-2.  View from CockpitUse of B2 Simulator for design integration.  One of the B2 simulator's duties is to train the crewmembers in new versions of the aircraft prior to the aircraft's arrival at the airbase. The simulator is required to be updated and in operation 60 days prior to the scheduled arrival of the same version of the aircraft. This requires a tight coupling of the simulator developer and the aircraft developer. With this lead-time built in, opportunities exist to check the functionality of the aircraft modifications prior to their incorporation in the airplane. In several cases this integration of the systems in the simulator has brought to light situations that were corrected before the aircraft was deployed to the airbase. Also, the B2 simulator and its mission generation system were used to analyze mission data from various sources. Missions were generated and flown on the simulator, while the real world uses of the same sources was under development, showing problems early in the development cycle. Being able to manipulate this data and try the mission on the simulator has saved time and costs on the program as a whole.  These examples illustrate just a few examples of the potential of SBA to benefit system acquisition.Summary.  While the primary purpose of the B2 simulator is to train aircrews, a simulator of this fidelity has the potential for performing many different design support tasks for the aircraft. It was used to some extent in this manner and may again be in the future.  If developed earlier in the system development process, a simulator of this type has the potential to support the actual design process as well as design verification.  Also, the basic technology used to develop the B2 execution environment would apply to other large-scale simulators - whether they are used to support just training or the complete acquisition process.3.2	Missile SimulationsThe next set of Raytheon M&S activities to be presented focuses on the use of simulation to support missile system acquisition.  Here, the discussions center on the use of simulation early in the acquisition process (mission/operations analysis, top-level requirements analysis) and the merging of that capability with live test data to improve system test and evaluation.The Raytheon Missile Systems Company (RMSC) Wargaming Laboratory (WGL) in Tucson, Arizona performs activities including top level weapon system requirements definition and analysis, mission/operations requirements & analysis, CONOPS/Mission Planning, COEA’s/AoA, Survivability/vulnerability, Munition effectiveness/lethality, and Human factors engineering.The RMSC WGL supports the wide range of mission areas shown in Table 3.2-1.Air to AirArmy Air DefenseLand CombatBallistic Missile DefenseShip Self DefensePrecision StrikeTable 3.2-1.  WGL Mission AreasIn support of these roles, the laboratory has integrated an extensive set of M&S tools (shown in Table 3.2-2) which include analytic/physics based models; wargaming simulations; comprehensive “official” threat library; scenarios, terrain, and weather databases; User-developed operational tactics & training; Distributed Interactive Simulation and High Level Architecture.  The increasing use of M&S throughout the acquisition process, the evolution of HLA, and the SBA initiative have all been topics of primary interest to the RMSC engineering community.  To further understand these trends, RMSC defined some experiments with the following objectives:Gain an understanding of the difficulty and effectiveness of using an HLA based model to support a “real life” business requirement;Establish the tools and an experienced staff as necessary to support current and projected HLA related customer requirements.Raytheon Developed Simulations ACEMITADSNAADSSSDESIMHELIPACFAADSIMMITLHAREMAir Combat Engagement Model Interactive Theater Air Defense SystemNaval Area Air Defense Simulation Ship Self Defense Extended SAM Interaction Model Helicopter Model Forward Area Air Defense Simulation  Man in the Loop Land Combat Land Combat Government Models BrawlerEADSIMESAMSTRACESCASTFOREMAir to Air engagements Extended Air Defense SimulationSuppressorStrike/ air Defense  Helicopter air-to-air Land combatTable 3.2-2.  WGL M&S ToolsSpecific elements of these objectives are:Analyze the application of the emerging HLA technology to an existing Raytheon legacy model;Gain an understanding of the detailed technical impact and operational effectiveness;Identify and install tools necessary to support development and HLA based infrastructures;Establish an approach for developing object based designs and integrating them with legacy M&S resources;Evaluate current state and performance parameters of existing HLA tools and design components;Establish environment for collaboration of HLA technology and expertise between Raytheon business segments.RMSC sponsored the wargaming laboratory to study the projected impact of these M&S trends, and to ensure we have the tools and training needed to adapt and support advanced analysis, engineering trade studies, and T&E applications.  This study led to the current risk reduction activity to use HLA as the basis of the Standard Missile, Block III (SM-3) System Test Bed (STB); the SM-3 STB is intended to help provide high confidence in design trades much earlier in the design cycle.  The remainder of this section will describe the current state of the SM-3 STB design.The SM-3 system development has current need to support mission effectiveness studies, systems engineering trade studies, and flight test risk abatement activities.  While typically these activities are performed using separate tools, the WGL has evolved tools that supported parts of all three activities.  An SBA focus yielded an approach which evolved to form the nucleus of the SM-3 System Testbed risk reduction task.The SM-3 STB is an ongoing effort to provide system level analysis, engineering evaluation, and real-time interoperability between data from live fire missile test exercises and various SM-3 modeling and simulation engines.  To date, the STB has been successfully used to collect, distribute and display sensor track data from two live fire missile test launches.  The STB utilizes the DoD mandated High Level Architecture (HLA), an object-oriented (OO) architecture for distributed computing, running on a dedicated secure network. A summary of the SM-3 STB is presented detailing current system design and network topology, followed by a discussion of near-term STB development activities with extrapolation of long term project goals.STB Project Overview.  The SM-3 STB began as a SM-3 risk reduction effort, with the purpose of data collection and real-time participation in live fire exercises (a functional block diagram of the STB is shown in Figure 3.2-1). Initial STB system design goals were twofold: 1) Collect and record live fire sensor data from external sources; 2) Provide a secure, generalized real-time interface for live fire participants (M&S participants, visualization tools, CILs, HILs, etc.) within Raytheon Systems Company.  The latter goal was the more challenging and drove the need for a distributed computing architecture.  Given this operational need, the STB design team believed this to be a good opportunity to evaluate and familiarize RMSC Engineering with the DoD High Level Architecture (HLA).  The shaded components of Figure 3.2-1 have been successfully implemented using the HLA protocol.  Solid outline components are currently being developed, and dotted outline components are under consideration.  To date, the STB has successfully received, archived and distributed real-time sensor track data to the SM-3 Computer-in-the-Loop (CIL); and has simultaneously displayed missile trajectories, from live fire exercises, to both local (Tucson) and remote (Washington, DC) viewing facilities.  Current development activities include:Real-time integration of SM-3 and KW CILs into STB to provide a virtual intercept and parallel intercept VV&A capability.Integration of Interactive Theater Air Defense Simulation (ITADS) into STB to provide realistic virtual threat generation.Performance benchmarking of DMSO RTI and STB system architecture.Federation upgrade to DMSO RTI version 1.3 and RPR-FOM version 0.1.7Functional Design.  The SM-3 STB high-level functional architecture is illustrated in Figure 3.2-1.  In its present configuration, STB elements can be separated into four distinct categories: Live Data Synthesis Unit (LDSU) - center Sensors and telemetry – shown at topVisualization elements – shown at rightExperiment participants – shown at leftThe LDSU is the central data concentration and distribution element within the STB.  The LDSU receives sensor track and weapon telemetry from a wide variety of external sources.  These sources include:Radar range observations (routed through Pacific Missile Test Range);In-flight missile telemetry (via satellite link);SPY satellite relay;Cooperative Engagement Capability (CEC) laboratory;Space Based Infrared Sensor (SBIRS).Each sensor (or sensor group) is treated as an HLA federate (i.e., participant) within the LDSU.  Data distribution is performed within the LDSU via an HLA RTI.  Experiment participants (e.g., CILs, HILs, 6-DOFs) and visualization tools each provide their own HLA compliant interface, and function as independent HLA federates.Physical Design.  Figure 3.2-2 illustrates the physical composition of the STB.  The STB utilizes computing resources on two secure networks within RMSC.  Computing resources shown in the gray areas are connected to a STB dedicated network.  Areas shown in white use a secure, multi-program (System-Hi) network.  Firewall separation between the two nets is provided by a Sun Ultra-30, located in the Wargaming Classified Laboratory.  Router and encryption gear in the Wargaming Lab extends the STB dedicated network via an IP/ISDN connection to RMSC’s Roslyn office in the Washington, DC area.  The SM-3 STB integrates legacy models and simulations as needed into a cohesive testbed supporting multiple engineering tasks.EMBED ShapewareVISIO20Figure 3.2-1. SM-3 STB Functional ArchitectureProject Objectives.  Near-term objectives are to provide risk abatement of SM-3 live flight tests, simulate Block I/II performance using STB federation of simulations capabilities, display of real-time range events and simulation data.  An additional objective is to evaluate the effectiveness of current HLA technology, procure/develop tools for HLA employment and  establish the infrastructure needed to support SBA initiatives as they evolve.  The routing and integration of live fire RF and IR sensor data with the SM-3 and KW CILs will provide an early opportunity to collect valuable system performance metrics.  Utilizing the STB, it will be possible to evaluate SM-3 system performance against real and simulated threats.  Upcoming live fire activities include attempting to perform a real-time virtual intercept against a live test target and attempting to fly a virtual intercept in parallel with a live test missile.  AWS uplink data will be extracted from test missile telemetry and fed into the SM-3 CIL.  Longer-term goals of the STB are to develop a unified multi-program facility capable of joining a broad spectrum of Raytheon Systems Company users.  STB services might include: M&S object model libraries (not limited to just FOM/SOM definitions), scenario generation tools, and live test data repository.  This facility is projected to provide a Raytheon “model” for simulation based design and acquisition activities.Summary.  The SM-3 STB provides a valuable piece to the overall SBA puzzle.  The SM-3 STB is an HLA based testbed which lays the foundation for the integration of LIVE data into the simulation world.  It provides the ability to integrate “front end” system analysis simulations with LIVE data; it is an excellent framework for the future SBA T&E environment where virtual testing will become a reality.EMBED ShapewareVISIO20Figure 3.2-2. SM-3 STB Physical Architecture4.0	ConclusionsM&S has much potential to improve system acquisition.  There are many opportunities throughout the acquisition process that can benefit from enhanced use of M&S.  There are also many M&S technologies that have been used successfully for individual domains (training, analysis, test, etc.) that are directly applicable to solving the larger SBA problem:•	The simulation execution environment of the B2 aircrew simulator provides many of the same capabilities today that the future SBA environment will need to do large scale virtual prototyping;•	The HLA based SM-3 testbed technology which intermixes live flight test data in a virtual environment provides some basic underpinnings of the future SBA T&E environment.The complete SBA vision calls for unprecedented sharing of data and models that are developed in standalone fashion today.  New standards for data and model reuse will be needed to make this vision a reality.5.0	References[1]	DoDD 5000.1, “Defense Acquisition”, 15 Mar 96[2]	DoD 5000.2-R, “Mandatory Procedures for Major Defense Acquisition Programs (MDAPs) and Major Automated Information Systems (MAIS) Acquisition Programs”, 15 Mar 96[3]	“SBA Functional Description Document”, Draft, version 1.3, 1 Mar 98, http://www.msosa.mil.inter.net/sia-sba/default.asp[4]	Dr. Patricia Sanders, “Modeling and Simulation for Acquisition”, 3 Jun 98, briefing at DMSO industry days 98, 	http://www.msosa.mil.inter.net/sia-sba/default.asp[5]	DoDD 5000.59-P, “DoD Modeling and Simulation Master Plan”, Oct 95[6]	USAF Acquisition Policy 97A-004, “Modeling and Simulation in Support of the Air Force Acquisition Process”, 28 Nov 97[7]	Nicholas E. Karangelen, “The Simulation Based Acquisition Vision: A Brief Tutorial”, briefing at the NDIA SBA Conference, Mar 98, http://www.msosa.mil.inter.net/sia-sba/default.aspAuthor BibliographiesTimothy N. Jahren is a senior systems engineer at Raytheon Systems Company, Orlando, FL.  He received his BS degree in Electrical Engineering from Northwestern University, and an MS degree in Electrical Engineering from the University of Southern California.  He has over 18 years experience in the defense industry.  He has been involved in the development of major weapon systems, and most recently has been involved in several programs in the simulation industry.  He is currently the Vice Chair for the Vehicle Forum Planning and Review Panel (PRP) of the Simulation Interoperability and Standards Organization (SISO).Allan R. Getman is a senior engineer at Raytheon Systems Company in Binghamton, NY.  He received a BA degree in Geologic Science from Harpur College and an MS degree in Computer Science from the State University of New York.  He currently is Secretary of the Implementers Forum PRP of the Simulation Interoperability and Standards Organization (SISO).  He has worked extensively on the B2 simulation program and currently is engaged in the conversion of the B2 WST/MT to HLA compliance.Michael S. Kamrowski is a senior systems engineer at Raytheon Missile Systems Company in Tucson, AZ.  He received his BS degrees in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at the University of Utah, an MS in Business Management at the University of Northern Colorado, and an MS in Computer Engineering at the Air Force Institute of Technology. He has worked most aspects of the acquisition process including: F-22 EMD software simulation;  ALCM Test Team;  Peacekeeper and Minuteman integrated test facilities;  Cheyenne Mountain Space Track Operations; and flight simulator and network research at Armstrong Laboratory.   The last four years he spent as part of the RMSC staff,  focusing on integration of modeling and simulation technology across the Raytheon business units.Andrew Vandivort is a systems engineer at RMSC, Tucson, AZ.  He received BS degrees in biomedical and electrical engineering from the University of Southern California, and an MS degree in electrical engineering from The University of Arizona.  He is the systems engineering team lead for the SM-3 STB.