Report on a Live Range Exercise:The Synthetic Environment Tactical Integration98F-SIW-237Larry W. Rothstein,Gerald M. Santos, Wilfred M. Canto Jr.Naval Undersea Warfare CenterDivision Newport1176 Howell AveNewport, RI 02841-1708401-832-5300, 401-832-5800, 401-832-5631 HYPERLINK mailto:Rothsteinlw@npri70.npt.nuwc.navy.mil Rothsteinlw@npri70.npt.nuwc.navy.mil,  HYPERLINK mailto:gsantos@npri70.npt.nuwc.navy.mil gsantos@npri70.npt.nuwc.navy.mil,  HYPERLINK mailto:cantowm@npri70.npt.nuwc.navy.mil cantowm@npri70.npt.nuwc.navy.milKeywords:Test and Evaluation, T&E, Live, HITLABSTRACT: At the Spring 97 SISO conference, NUWC reported on the Development Test Cell (DTC) that they were using to guide in the creation and bench testing of live, open air range tests.   On 18-19 June, the first of the exercises designed and evaluated in the DTC will be conducted.  During the Synthetic Environment Tactical Integration (SETI) test, a submarine virtual torpedo capability will be deployed at the Atlantic Undersea Test and Evaluation Center (AUTEC) in the Bahamas.   A live submarine, operating on the AUTEC range, will launch a torpedo at a live target.  The torpedo targeting data will be sent to the high fidelity hardware in the loop torpedo simulation facility at NUWC in Newport, RI.  The weapon position and TELCOM data will be sent back to the live submarine on range, giving the crew the opportunity to interact with the torpedo guidance system.The June test will be conducted in two phases.  During the first phase, the DIS protocols will be used.  During the second phase, the High Level Architecture (HLA) and Test & Training Enabling Architecture (TENA) will be used for communication between the range and the simulation facility.This paper will discuss the details of the test, the usefulness of a DTC in transferring the technology from the laboratory to the range, and the lessons learned during the development and execution of the test.Background: Synthetic Environment Tactical IntegrationThe Synthetic Environment Tactical Integration (SETI) program was initiated by the Naval Undersea Warfare Center, Division Newport (NUWCDIVNPT), to establish the systems, capabilities, and processes to provide Fleet access to and utilization of NUWC’s modeling and simulation technology.  This initiative will introduce technology to facilitate training, reduce the cost of training, and/or increase the value of training. This initiative will also allow for the Test & Evaluation of new onboard systems and new weapons systems early in the acquisition cycle by providing a more realistic and representative threat environment. Subsurface, surface, and in-air platform-weapon pairing instantiations of SETI are being developed, tested and presented to the Fleet for evaluation.What is the Virtual Torpedo Project?The Submarine Virtual Torpedo Project (SubVTP) is the initial implementation of the SETI program.  The SETI/SubVTP project promotes the use of Advanced Distributed Simulation (ADS) capabilities by creating high fidelity Antisubmarine Warfare (ASW) training opportunities using live targets, synthetic torpedoes, and onboard submarine tactical and training systems in realistic external environments. The goal of the SubVTP is to enable the real-time interaction of live submarines with high fidelity simulated torpedoes. The follow-on implementation of the SETI Program will be the Air Virtual Torpedo Project (AirVTP). AirVTP will provide similar capabilities as the SubVTP but will focus on air platforms as the weapon launchers. The initial goal of the AirVTP will be to enable the real-time interaction of live helicopters with high fidelity simulated torpedoes and targets.SubVTP Exercise ObjectivesThe objective of this exercise was to demonstrate, using a simulated tactical ASW scenario, that a virtual torpedo can be used effectively to develop and maintain proficiency in ASW procedures.  The test was designed to demonstrate the following capabilities:Data can be exchanged between a submerged submarine operating on an instrumented range and remote modeling and simulation facilities.The submarine can control the launch of simulated torpedoes from the remote modeling and simulation facilities and can receive tactical weapon data from the launched weapon.Two alternate communication methods, the Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) protocols and the High Level Architecture (HLA) Run Time Infrastructure (RTI), can be used to transfer the data between the submarine and the remote modeling and simulation facilities.As a result of the demonstration of these capabilities, the following analysis are being conducted:Feedback from range and submarine personnel is being analyzed to determine the applicability and design of the overall VTP system.The effectiveness of the two alternate communication methods is being compared.Areas of concern for range/laboratory interoperability are being identified.Exercise Scenario OverviewFigure 1 depicts the facilities that were used during the SubVTP Exercise.  During the exercise, a Los Angeles Class SSN localized and launched a simulated torpedo at a live surface target on the Atlantic Undersea Test & Evaluation Center (AUTEC) range located off Andros Island, Bahama Islands.  The weapon presets data and all launch sequence event information was captured from the submarine’s combat control system in real-time and sent to the torpedo simulation at the Weapons Analysis Facility (WAF) at NUWCDIVNPT. Telemetry data from the torpedo, including positional and weapon state data, was returned to the launch platform for input back into the combat control system. A thin copper wire tethers the torpedo to the submarine during a live weapon run. For as long as this wire remains intact, the combat control operator can redirect or refocus the torpedo through the use of wire guide commands. SubVTP allowed for these wire guide commands to be issued to the simulated weapon. EMBED Word.Picture.8  SubVTP System ConfigurationThe top-level system configuration for the VTP system is as illustrated in Figure 2. As explained in the previous section, the SubVTP system is distributed between laboratories in Newport, Rhode Island, the AUTEC range, located in the Bahama Islands, and onboard a submarine.Laboratory FacilitiesThere are two laboratory facilities located in NUWCDIVNPT supporting this exercise.The Weapons Analysis Facility (WAF) provides the Weapon Simulator services for SETI/VTP. Specifically for SubVTP, WAF provides the high fidelity Advanced Capability (ADCAP) Mk 48 heavyweight torpedo for this exercise.The Exercise Communications Center (ECC) serves as the Coordination Center for network and data monitoring and for coordination of the synthetic environment. ECC provided data logging services and served as the Newport Viewport for this exercise.AUTEC Range ResourcesThe components and services needed at AUTEC to support this SubVTP exercise were as follows:AUTEC instrumented range capable of tracking and displaying live subsurface and surface test platforms in real-time.Acoustic Telemetry System (ATS) installed on shore. The ATS is a low bandwidth data link used to transmit data acoustically between the shore facility and the submarine operating at speed and depth.A live target platform of opportunity. SubVTP used a range support craft for this requirement.Exercise coordination for all live participants.Standard set of range data products illustrating the integration of live and simulated exercise data.Submarine Test PlatformThe submarine test platform requires the following systems be installed and operational:An ATS installed onboard to communicate acoustically with the ATS installed on shore at AUTEC.A modified MK75 Digital Missile Simulator (DMS) to provide the interface to the submarine’s Combat Control System (CCS). The MK75 DMS is routinely used to support onboard training of the combat control personnel. It provides a low fidelity torpedo simulation, which allows the crew to perform some level of training while underway. In support of SubVTP, modifications were made to bypass the built-in simulation and to pass all combat control commands through an unused serial port to the SubVTP onboard controller. All torpedo status information received from the WAF simulation is returned to CCS using this same interface.A ping generator and tracking transducer to allow the range to track the position of the submarine. This is standard range equipment provided to every submarine arriving on range and is crucial information required by the simulations.Two portable TAC4 (HP 9000/720 series) computers provided the Simulation Controller function onboard the submarine while a PC notebook provided the remote situational display. Communications NetworkThe communications network for SubVTP consisted of several individual LAN’s connected through a secure WAN.Both WAF and ECC contain secure LAN’s to handle their respective processing missions. These LAN’s, as well as others within NUWCDIVNPT, are then interconnected using the Center’s secure Test & Evaluation Analysis Laboratory network backbone (TEALnet). Both DIS and HLA protocols were used to pass data over TEALnet.The ECC then extends this network to AUTEC through the use of a secure T1 landline to NUWC Detachment West Palm Beach (NUWCDETWPB) and a satellite connection from WPB to AUTEC. Both DIS and HLA protocols were used to transfer data between NUWC and AUTEC.At AUTEC, a series of LAN segments support the real-time data acquisition, post-exercise and display processing required to support a T&E range. AUTEC range protocols were used within this LAN. Either DIS or HLA protocols were used for all data transfer between AUTEC and NUWC.The ATS provided the exercise data connectivity between shore and the test platform. ATS-unique protocols were used to transfer data through this medium.All shipboard computers were interconnected on a dedicated LAN using primarily X-Windows based protocols.What is a Development Test Cell?A Development Test Cell (DTC) is a laboratory-based computer workstation approximation of a distributed test or training exercise involving both a Test / Training Range operating environment and shore-based simulations.  As shown in Figure 3, the distributed range contains both live and synthetic elements.  The DTC allows each element of the range to be represented in a laboratory configuration.The Purpose of the DTCThe DTC has several purposes:The DTC is a training ground and an experimental test bed for applying High Level Architecture (HLA) to live applications and to the interface between live and synthetic applications.The DTC allows experiential definition of the interfaces required between live ranges and between live ranges and the simulation infrastructure that services the virtual, human-in-the-loop (HITL), hardware-in-the-loop (HWIL), and constructive simulations.The DTC allows the surrogates for the live range participants to be fully integrated into the modeling and simulation (M&S) infrastructure in parallel with the implementation of hardware interfaces to the live range.Definition, pre-exercise testing, and familiarization workups of live test and evaluation (T&E) and training exercises can be conducted in the DTC to increase the probability of success for the costly and often non-repeatable live events.The DTCs are used to develop a core knowledge base within the range support community to assist in the introduction and integration of HLA to live ranges.DTC Support for SubVTPThe DTC supported the SubVTP development team in several key areas.First and foremost, it provided the training environment for personnel to get familiar with the HLA paradigm and the Federation Execution Process (FEDEP). This allowed the Team to more effectively define and implement the SubVTP federation. Secondly, the DTC supported a specific set of work-up exercises that were designed to test the federates individually and collectively within the federation. The initial series of tests were executed over Local Area Networks (LAN) and were intended to validate the set of objects and interactions contained within the SubVTP Federation Object Model (FOM). The final series of tests were executed using a system configuration distributed across a secure Wide Area Network (WAN). The WAN configuration for the DTC was essential to more effectively test the range interface modules and to better plan and generally prepare for the live exercise.Last, but not least, Team personnel became proficient in the understanding and application of HLA and the FEDEP and could effectively present these concepts to the live range community. This was demonstrated during the recent Common Test & Training Range Architecture (CTTRA VIII) conference during which DTC/Team personnel walked conference attendees  through the FEDEP. A companion paper, “Creating a Simulation Laboratory to Live Range Exercise – The Process” (98F-SIW-230), also being presented at SIW, can provide more information on this workshop experience.SubVTP Federation and FederatesWith a few exceptions, SubVTP followed the Federation Execution Process (FEDEP) as defined by the Defense Simulation and Modeling Office (DMSO). It should be noted that the FEDEP appears to follow the standard, “common sense” sequence of steps required for any systems engineering effort. However, it does not replace the process used by ranges to implement a live exercise; it augments the range process in the technical areas most ranges don’t normally deal with. The results of the FEDEP are described in this section. For more specific information on how this process was applied to the SubVTP and the lessens learned, refer to paper 98F-SIW-230, referenced above. The Players.The SubVTP players, or objects, for this exercise consisted of a Shooter, a Target and a Weapon. In addition, an Observer was identified as a distinct player. The definition of the Observer is any station, system, or person who needs to monitor the exercise, view the information, and/or communicate with the other players for coordination purposes. The Observer subscribes to all exercise information, but will only publish exercise coordination-related information.SubVTP Data Sequence.To better understand the federation design, this section will briefly highlight the sequence of events that must take place for a virtual torpedo launch. The range publishes object data for Launcher and Target. This information goes to WAF, all display systems and to the submarine through the ATS.The submarine sends “Power Tube” interaction to Weapon Simulator. The Weapon Simulator registers a torpedo with the federation and sends the torpedo ID back to the submarine. This information passes through the ATS data link.The submarine sends “Weapon Presets” and “Tube Fired” interactions to the torpedo. The torpedo acknowledges the fire order and begins publishing object data. All of this information goes through the ATS and to the range display systems.The submarine’s crew can issue “Wire Guide” interactions to the torpedo to change the weapon’s state.The torpedo runs to completion and either detonates or is shut down. This weapon termination information is required by all systems in the federation.Federation Design.As a result of working through the FEDEP, SubVTP implemented a federation consisting of four federates distributed between AUTEC and NUWCDIVNPT. The Range Interface Federate (RngIntFed) and the Combat Control Federate (ComCtrlFed) were located at AUTEC. The Weapon Simulator Federate (WpnSimFed) was located in the WAF facility at NUWCDIVNPT and the Display Federate (DispFed) was located in the ECC facility at NUWCDIVNPT. It should be noted that multiple DispFed’s could be brought on-line at any of the above facilities during this federation execution. Figure 4 provides and illustration of the relationship between the players/objects and federates.The function of each federate is described below. All federates can publish and subscribe to the exercise coordination message interaction. In the absence of an open phone line, this is used to specifically keep all sites, federates and systems synchronized with the test plan and with current status of the exercise.Range Interface Federate. This federate publishes the object attributes for the launcher and target. It also subscribes to the torpedo attributes and all interactions in support of producing post exercise debrief products. This federate is intended as a leave behind and can support normal everyday range operations for passing object data through an RTI.Combat Control Federate. This federate subscribes to all object data (launcher, target, and weapon). It publishes all interactions or commands generated by the submarine’s CCS and subscribes to all interactions generated by the torpedo simulator. This federate control the data flow into and out of the ATS and serves as the on-shore surrogate for the submarine’s CCS.Weapon Simulation Federate. This federate subscribes to all object data for the launcher and target and publishes all object data for the torpedo. It subscribes to all interactions generated by the Combat Control Federate and publishes all interactions generated by the torpedo simulation.Display Federate. This federate subscribes to all object data and all interactions generated by the federation. This information is presented using a suite of graphical and textual display applications and can be archived for post exercise analysis and playback. This is the only federate within this federation that can be replicated multiple times at any site.Exercise ResultsThe submarine’s crew successfully initiated the launch of eight (8) torpedoes with four (4) definite hits, two (2) definite misses, and two (2) questionable misses. The questionable results may have been due to software errors on shore during the launch sequence. TELCOM data from the torpedo (simulator) was successfully passed back to the submarine’s combat control system. With the exception of the two questionable misses, all simulated torpedoes ran to completion (i.e. detonation or command shutdown). Wire Guide commands were successfully passed from the submarine’s CCS to the simulated torpedo. The acoustic downlink (submarine to shore) communications worked well throughout the test. The acoustic uplink (shore to submarine) did experience periods of inoperability during the test windows. The DIS protocols were used over WAN for the first three weapon shots. The HLA protocols were used for the last five weapon shots. While both protocols provided adequate support for this exercise, there were far more support tools available using DIS. See the SETI/SubVTP Observations section for more detail on this.SETI/SubVTP ObservationsThe observations and lessons learned from this exercise were collected from all participants using a GroupWare system and sorted into the categories shown below.Data LoggersDIS loggers exploited “broadcast” – not used by HLA. Only available HLA logger was from JADS and did not support playback of federation data.Existing range data loggers only captured subscribed data – not all federation data.Playback/Debrief awkward in that same federate software can not easily support both real-time and playback.Commercial data loggers are under development and will reportedly address this shortfall.Range SoftwareMost simulator/models expect to receive data from other simulator/models. This modeled data is free of the anomalies that can occur with measured data. Live range data must be “smoothed” before getting published to simulation systems. Real world sensor data can often impact the processing within models.HLA required more prior work-up than did DIS. Additional work-ups will be required each time the Federation changes. More Configuration and Execution tools are needed.DTC Emulation SupportDTC is a valuable emulation testbed for Range implementation. Allows for experimentation with federation and networking configurations, and for contingency planning. The DTC needs to model the live range more closely.Difficult tradeoff between DTC emulation and DTC complexity/cost. Certain SubVTP systems not well emulated while other were represented accurately. Receiving “bad track data” from the range is something that was not modeled well.DTC must be a programmed cost of HLA/TENA testing for any distributed simulation program. Exercise ControlExercise control functions for live testing were not easily mapped into HLA interactions. The federation objects defined in the FOM are generally not the originating or receiving objects for the interactions. Each federate can represent multiple objects and/or systems to the federation.RTI does not monitor LAN/WAN “health”. This does not refer to monitoring network traffic; there are several commercial products to provide this service. During the DTC work-up exercises, the WAN had shut down. The RTI process had been started on a separate LAN segment from the federate processes. The federates continued to publish and subscribe information through the fedex process completely oblivious to the RTI process no longer being available. Had the federates tried to execute an RTI specific service, the federation would have stopped and would have to be completely restarted. This can be a critical shortfall in any federation execution that must be resolved before HLA can be implemented at live ranges.MetricsHLA provided for a reliable transfer of data between federates. All object attributes had to be designated for RELIABLE transport vice BEST_EFFORT in order for them to be passed over WAN.Still too early to effectively compare the HLA RTI and DIS. DIS is far more mature with more support tools available for data capture and analysis.Timing metrics for HLA verses DIS information transfer was not collected. SubVTP used RTI 1.02, which has known latency problems and has been superceded several times. Lack of data logging tools for federation/federate information exchanges will continue to impact this testing.Lack of data logging tools for federation/federate information exchanges will continue to impact metric collection and analysis.Contingency PlanningThe integration of live ranges and simulation systems leads to the need for multiple contingency plans. While SubVTP identified several contingencies, based on certain systems or subsystems failing, more planning was required to more efficiently use test assets.The DTC offers a developmental test-bed for generating exercise scenarios to test the adequacy of contingency plans. Allows for experimentation and “what if” scenarios without tying up expensive facilities.Range OperationExercise was very labor intensive to set up and execute. Need more flexible architecture and tools to make this evolution more efficient.SummaryThis exercise was successful in that we were able to use the FEDEP to build an HLA federation and transfer all required information through the RTI over a secure WAN. SubVTP demonstrated that HLA can provide reliable data transfer for small scale exercises that do not have severe timing constraints on delivery of information. The DTC provided an excellent test-bed for prototyping and experimenting with the federation design and efficiently planning for the live exercise. The lack of HLA support tools, such as data loggers, viewers, and federation health monitors, is a critical shortfall that must be overcome for HLA to be seriously considered for everyday use at live facilities.Author BiographiesLARRY W. ROTHSTEIN is the Project Manager for the implementation of the Development Test Cell at NUWCDIVNPT. He also serves as the Systems Engineer for the SETI/VTP and has been involved with implementing distributed simulation applications for the past five years.  He is part of the Navy Tracking and Display Software (NTADS) architecture team and has implemented NTADS applications at several undersea test and training ranges.GERALD M. SANTOS is presently Manager of the NUWCDIVNPT Undersea Battlespace (USB) initiative, Navy Deputy Executive Agent of the OPNAV T&E Modeling and Simulation Management Office (TEMS MO) and a Navy Lead for the CTEIP Foundation Initiative 2010.  The USB comprises the networks, communication standards / protocols and interoperability infrastructure needed to support distributed simulation of undersea warfare.  He has led Undersea Warfare participation in major distributed simulation exercises such as STOW-Europe and the Joint Precision Strike Demonstration ACTD.  He is co-author of the Navy T&E M&S Master Plan, served on the team that wrote the PEO-USW Master Plan, and is currently assisting with the Navy HLA Transition Plan.Wilfred M. Canto Jr. is the Program Manager for the NUWCDIVNPT SETI initiative.  He has over eight years of experience in test, evaluation, and training for undersea ranges and networked systems and has been specifically focused on advanced distributed simulation for the last three years.PAGE  1 EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 4.  HLA Federation ConfigurationFigure 3. The Distributed Range.Figure 1.  VTP ScenarioFigure 2.  Top-level System Configuration.