Improvements to the HLA Application Decision FrameworkS. Y. HarmonZetetix6547 Bayberry StreetOak Park, CA  91377818-991-0480harmon@zetetix.comKeywords:HLA, execution composition, decision frameworkABSTRACT:  Several enhancements have matured the HLA Application Decision Framework to improve its utility to execution developers and to closely track the revised Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) Model (Version 1.2).  This framework describes the decisions that developers must make to successfully create HLA executions, identifies the information needed to make those decisions, and characterizes the information dependencies between the execution creation decisions.  Its improvements more clearly represent the contributions of several key elements of the HLA infrastructure to the execution creation decisions, including the Conceptual Models of the Mission Space, Modeling and Simulation Repository, Object Model Data Dictionary, Object Model Library, Object Model Templates, Runtime Infrastructure and its data,  and Object Model Development Tools.  These changes have produced a detailed and closely registered decision-centered view into the current FEDEP Model.  Other changes significantly enhance the resolution and internal consistency of the framework decisions, delineate the roles of different decision makers and their interactions, incorporate security-related decisions, increase assistance for contingency planning and use, and explore the dependencies of risk upon such factors as latency, interoperability, resolution and causality.  These framework improvements provide better support to execution developers over a wider range of applications than the first version served.1. IntroductionThe Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) High Level Architecture (HLA) [1] continues to revolutionize distributed simulation by providing immense flexibility in the ways to combine disparate simulation components into a unified execution.  The standardization described by the HLA has extended the feasibility of distributed simulation far beyond DoD applications into such areas as transportation, health care and entertainment.  However, the flexibility provided by the HLA still depends strongly upon the quality of the decisions made in creating simulation executions.  A growing base of experiences from the HLA protofederations and other developers of HLA applications enhances our insight into the creation of distributed simulation executions.  The collective wisdom from this experience base has stimulated refinement of the HLA Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP), which describes the five essential steps for developing successful HLA executions and organizes these steps into a sequence of the activities necessary to construct successful HLA federations [2].The FEDEP refinements [2] have lead to improvement of the HLA Application Decision Framework [3], first proposed in Fall 1997, to•	Track the FEDEP more closely•	Integrate technical advancements of the HLA infrastructure, and•	Enhance the resolution and consistency of the framework decisions.However, the greatest improvements to this decision framework have come from changes in the underlying methodology.  The new framework now describes the dependencies between execution creation decisions in terms of the information they exchange rather than the sequence in which they should be performed.  This change makes the framework independent of the execution development model and, thus, improves its utility to many more applications and their developers.  This independence enables decisions to be executed in any reasonable order, depending upon the particulars of the information available at the time, and identifies what information is required to refine intermediate decision results into their final form.  Further, explicitly identifying information dependencies between decisions better defines the interactions and relationships between the makers of those decisions.  This, in turn, clarifies the relationships between the different roles and responsibilities of those people participating in the FEDEP.This document summarizes the current state of the HLA decision framework and highlights the important revisions.  This paper presents decision and information flow diagrams for all of the major decision groups for creating an execution.  However, these diagrams do not show all of the decisions or the different information types in each decision group to make the diagrams legible.2. Framework DescriptionThe current HLA Application Decision Framework still has two major purposes:•	Guiding execution developers in the creation of their HLA executions, and•	Collecting and organizing the corporate knowledge about HLA execution creation into an accessible and useful form.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1.	Comparison between the FEDEP Activities and the HLA Decision FrameworkThe FEDEP and its documentation [2] represent the core knowledge around which the framework grows by elucidating the decisions associated with the FEDEP activities.  Figure 1 illustrates the correspondence between the decision framework and the FEDEP activities.  The decision framework was integrated with the FEDEP by first identifying all of the decisions and information flows described explicitly or implied in Reference [2].  The abstraction of these decisions was then adjusted to correspond with those represented in the decision framework.  This adjustment enabled the merging of the two decision representations.  In many cases, direct correspondence existed between the detailed decisions in the FEDEP and the framework.  In some cases, the FEDEP added decisions overlooked in the framework.  This merging process increased the number of decisions in the framework which improved its resolution.  This greater resolution increased the ability to check the framework’s internal consistency.  Thus, the revised framework more closely corresponds with the FEDEP activities and has greater internal consistency than the original decision framework.2.1 Primary DecisionsThe decisions of this framework are still organized into a two level hierarchy of primary and detailed decisions.  The primary decisions now represent logical groupings of the detailed decisions for mainly presentation convenience.  Figure 2 depicts the primary decision groups and the information flowing between them.The original framework organized the execution decisions into the five primary groups: requirements identification, federation development, implementation construction, scenario development and execution preparation.  The revisions to this framework have added two primary decision groups: sponsor needs identification and execution results production.  The new primary decisions were added to accommodate the increase in scope of the revised FEDEP [2].2.2 Detailed DecisionsThe framework’s detailed decisions define the next level of decision abstraction.  The description below only summarizes the detailed decisions and the information flows between them.  Additional detail is available from References [4] and [5].2.2.1 Sponsor needs identificationFigure 3 illustrates the decisions for identifying sponsor needs and the information flows required between these decisions.  The sponsor identifies the execution’s goals, constraints and priorities.  This information enables identifying the critical systems of interest, specifying data requirements, estimating required fidelity, developing an execution plan, selecting validation data and its sources, and allocating resources for the execution.  All of this information is then assembled into a sponsor needs package from which the execution developer can derive detailed execution requirements.  In this instance, fidelity is used in its most general sense to describe all of the attributes of resultant data quality that might be important to the sponsor.  Figure 3 clearly shows the dependencies of the other decisions upon the definition of the execution’s goals.  These dependencies emphasize the importance of ensuring that accurate registration exists between these goals and the sponsor’s actual goals.  This decision group also shows the information feedback from the other decision groups which signals the need to refine elements of the sponsor’s needs to accommodate constraints discovered in the downstream execution development decisions.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2.	Decisions and Information for Creating an Execution2.2.2 Requirements identificationThe decisions associated with identifying execution requirements combine the activities of developing execution objectives and performing conceptual analysis as described by the revised FEDEP [2].  The framework revisions have increased the resolution of the process of identifying an execution’s requirements.  However, these requirements must still not be confused with user requirements.  An execution’s requirements now define all of the information needed to guide execution creation so that it meets the sponsor’s needs.  This includes the conceptual model (representing simulated objects, attributes and interactions), verification, validation and accreditation (VV&A) requirements and security requirements.  As in the original framework, the elements of the conceptual model are derived from analysis of the events (essential and undesired) required to meet the execution’s objectives [3, 4].  The Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS) and the HLA Object Model Data Dictionary play key roles in conceptual model development.  The conceptual analysis decisions lead to the definition of the Federation Conceptual Model described in the revised FEDEP [2].  The revised framework identifies the need to return to the sponsor with the execution requirements package for approval.  Figure 4 illustrates the major decisions and information flows associated with identifying execution requirements.  The decision refining the execution objectives provides the means to return with partially specified federation, implementation and scenario information as well as corrections required to the objectives due to problems encountered in the other decision groups.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3.	Decisions and Information for Identifying Sponsor Needs2.2.3 Federation developmentFigure 5 illustrates the key decisions for developing a federation.  This decision group combines the design and development of a federation separated in the FEDEP [2].  A new decision to this group recognizes the necessity of tools to support federation development.  These tools include the HLA Object Model Development Tools.  Federation development still builds around the definition of an ideal federation object model (FOM) [4].  This FOM provides a reference for selecting an existing FOM and candidate federates.  The HLA Modeling and Simulation Repository, the Object Model Library and the Object Model Templates (OMT) supply resources crucial to FOM and federation development.The revised FEDEP [2] identifies the need to check an execution’s FOM for consistency and syntactic correctness.  A decision addressing this need supplements the checking of interoperability between candidate federates.  Together these decisions reduce the need for expensive exhaustive testing.  Finally, a description of the federation is assembled and the federation data (e.g., Federation Execution Data) is generated from this assemblage.  Refining federation requirements permits return to the federation development decisions with partially specified execution requirements, implementation and scenario as well as with federation problems and corrections derived within the other decision groups.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 4.	Decisions and Information for Identifying Execution Requirements2.2.4 Implementation constructionThe relationships between the decisions associated with implementation construction resemble those found in federation development.  As in developing a federation, constructing an implementation requires identifying a set of parts, assembling those parts, and checking the correctness of that assembly.  Figure 6 illustrates the decisions and information flows integral to implementation construction.  A decision has been added to select the tools to support constructing an execution’s implementation.  Figure 6 shows how important this decision is since its products influence many of the other decisions in this group.  Further, a decision for selecting infrastructure components now precedes selection of the computation and communications resources.  This infrastructure includes the HLA Runtime Infrastructure (RTI).  Another decision has been added for creating the information with which to configure and initialize the implementation resources for the execution.  This information includes the RTI Initialization Data (RID) associated with specific RTI implementations [2].  As with the other decision groups, a gateway decision, refining the implementation requirements, provides the interface between this decision group and the other groups to support partial specification of the execution requirements, federation and scenario or return with implementation problems and corrections.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 5.	Decisions and Information for Developing an Execution Federation2.2.5 Scenario developmentFigure 7 depicts the decisions and information flows for developing a scenario for an execution.  While this decision group follows federation and implementation development in this paper, this order is not intended to suggest any sequence of decisions.  However, the scenario development process does provide the last opportunity to tune an execution to avoid any limitations imposed by problems discovered during federation development and implementation construction yet left unresolved.  As in the other decision groups, a decision has been added to represent the selection of tools to support scenario development.  The revised FEDEP [2] suggests another decision defining the conditions for initiating and terminating an execution.  The information resulting from this decision brackets the range of possibilities in defining an execution’s temporal constraints.  This decision group adopts the strategy of defining both spatial and temporal boundary conditions then building a schedule of the essential events within these conditions.  The resulting event schedule can then be tuned to avoid federation and implementation limitations, and plan control points for management of the execution.  A new set of decisions facilitates introducing information from previously developed scenarios to hasten scenario development.  When possible, the existing scenario is modified by the decisions shown in Figure 7.  The combination of these scenario development decisions result in the Federation Scenario Specification described in the revised FEDEP [2].Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 6.	Decisions and Information for Constructing an Execution Implementation2.2.6 Execution preparationThe decisions for preparing an execution remain much the same as those defined in the first framework [4].  Only one major decision for accrediting the execution design package (including specifications of the execution requirements, federation design, implementation design and scenario) has been added.  This addition decision represents an initial step toward integrating the concerns of VV&A into the framework.  Figure 8 illustrates the major decisions and information flows associated with execution preparation.2.2.7 Results productionThe final decision group represents the federation’s execution, analysis of the results from that execution, and the archival of the federation’s information package.  This group combines the FEDEP activities of executing the federation and producing its results and feedback.  This new decision group extends the framework described in Reference [4] beyond the production of a running execution to the end of its existence.  This decision group includes a decision for evaluating the execution’s results to produce suggested corrections to the federation and implementation for successive executions.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 7.	Decisions and Information for Developing an Execution Scenario3. ConclusionsThe revised HLA decision framework integrates the FEDEP revisions described in Reference [2] and provides significantly better resolution of the decision process.  This new framework consists of 141 individual decisions and 375 separate information types.  This greater resolution, together with the new emphasis upon information sharing between decisions, permits representing more accurately the influence of such factors as security and VV&A upon the execution creation process.  The framework revisions take the initial steps toward defining and integrating the decisions associated with these factors.Additional work on this decision framework will•	Define several use cases of HLA execution development, apply the framework to these, and modify the framework to more accurately represent these real world decisions;•	Improve the representation of security and VV&A issues; and•	Transform the current framework description into a more accessible and useful form, e.g., linked web pages.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 8.	Decisions and Information for Preparing a Federation for ExecutionThese steps will improve the framework’s applicability to real world problems and make its information more available.  Reader comments and suggestions for improvement continue to be encouraged to hasten the maturation of this tool for HLA execution creation.4. References[1]	Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, High Level Architecture Rules, Version 1.3, DMSO, Alexandria, VA, 5 Feb. 1998.[2]	Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, High Level Architecture Federation Development and Execution Process, Version 1.2, DMSO, Alexandria, VA, 26 May 1998.[3]	S. Y. Harmon, A Decision Framework for Developing HLA Applications, Paper 97F-SIW-117, Proc. Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando, FL, Sept. 1997.[4]	S. Y. Harmon, A Decision Framework for Constructing HLA Applications, DMSO, Alexandria, VA, May 1997.[5]	S. Y. Harmon, A Decision Framework for Constructing HLA Executions, Version 1.1, unpublished.5. AcknowledgmentsThis work was funded by the Advanced Simulation Technology Thrust Program of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and guided by the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office.  The author thanks Mr. W. D. Lunceford for his continued support of this effort and Drs. Judith Dahmann, Robert Lutz and Simone Youngblood for their pivotal observations, suggestions and encouragement.Author’s BiographyFigure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 9.	Decisions and Information for Producing an Execution’s ResultsSCOTT HARMON is chief scientist for Zetetix.  He specializes in complex system architectures, intelligent systems and organization analysis.  He has developed a quantitative technique for evaluating information system architectures and has applied this technique to the development of the HLA Application Decision Framework. 