The Army’s Approach to Modeling and Simulation Standards For C4I InterfacesMichael R. Hieb, Ph.D.AB Technologies, Inc.1901 N. Beauregard St.Alexandria, VA   22311-1705(703) 575-2800mhieb@abtechnologies.comMajor Michael J. StaverTactical DirectorateNational Simulation Center422 Kearny AveFort Leavenworth, KS 66027-1306(913) 684-8231staverm@leav-emh1.army.milKeywords:C4I Interface, Visualization, HLA, JTA-Army, DIF, CCSIL, SEDRIS, Exercise Control,Data, Terrain, Logistics, Communications, ABCSABSTRACT: As Modeling and Simulation (M&S) systems are used more widely in the Army, they are being interfaced more frequently to external systems – primarily C4ISR systems. The development of interface standards is only now beginning, partly due to the continued parallel evolution of the M&S Architectures and the Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) Architectures. Most C4ISR interfaces have been developed as “add-ons” to link specific legacy simulations with specific C4ISR hardware components and typically handle a small subset of the messages or data necessary for interoperability. Standards in this area have the potential to dramatically increase the functionality of future interfaces.The Army Modeling and Simulation Office (AMSO) manages 18 Standards Categories to promote M&S reuse and interoperability. The Visualization/C4I Integration Standards Category deals with the processes that develop hardware, software and procedural standards to provide a seamless vision of the battlespace, incorporating and integrating the environment, entities and their systems across virtual, constructive and live simulations. The complexity of interfacing to live equipment mitigates against the development of a single interface standard. This paper proposes standards development in 11 separate areas according to an Interface Technical Reference Model. Initial interface standards under consideration include Data Interchange Formats (DIFs), Reference Federation Object Models (FOMs), Tactical Message Formats and C4ISR Data Models.  Any new and all existing standards must derive from the standards mandated in the Joint Technical Architecture – Army (JTA-Army), as discussed in this paper..1. IntroductionA major objective of the Army Modeling and Simulation Office Visualization/C4I Integration Standards Category is to develop a technical infrastructure, architecture and standards to allow simulations to interoperate with live systems to support training, analysis, and acquisition needs. To achieve information dominance it is essential that we build standard Modeling and Simulation (M&S) interfaces to C4ISR systems, weapons systems, sensors and communications equipment.To date, the development of C4ISR to M&S interfaces has not been considered one of the primary design requirements for either system. Most existing C4ISR interfaces to M&S have been developed as a separate component added on after initial M&S development and typically handle a small subset of the messages or data necessary for interoperability. Significant human intervention is needed to achieve realism for the training audience in an exercise. M&S systems rarely handle free text messages or consider how a message is carried (communication effects). C4ISR systems are subject to different design constraints than M&S systems, such as having to support legacy message formats and protocols. Since any interface between the systems must align these differences, the interface can become quite complex.Current C4ISR interfaces for M&S are hindered due to the lack of standards. M&S systems have standardized on certain protocols and architectures for interoperability, such as the High Level Architecture (HLA) and Distributed Interactive Simulations (DIS). The C4ISR community is also moving to standardize on the Joint Technical Architecture (JTA) and the Defense Information Infrastructure Common Operating Environment (DII COE). These efforts can facilitate interfacing to C4ISR systems, if interface standards that align these two domains are developed.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the AMSO M&S standards process, Section 3 describes the C4ISR and M&S Architectures mandated in the JTA-Army. Section 4 proposes an Interface Technical Reference Model. Section 5 describes how standards relate to interface design options. Section 6 describes how the other AMSO standards categories relate to the specific standards defined . Section 7 concludes with a discussion of the goals that the Army has for future interfaces.2. AMSO Standards ProcessStandards development is consensus based by choice. M&S technologies evolve at blinding speeds. Some technological niches turn over in a matter of months. Technological, procedural and applications advances take place within a myriad of organizations within the Army, and throughout the commercial and academic sectors. By keeping the process consensus based, those decisions are in the hands of the real Army M&S experts. Subject matter experts from various organizations throughout Army are appointed to serve as Standards Category Coordinators (SCCs) by the Army Model and Simulation Executive Council. They serve as the proponents for developing M&S standards within their standards category. Team composition is interdisciplinary and represents organizations across the Army. Each standard category team must work together to prioritize the list of Standards Development requirements.Standards Development [15] occurs within a continuous and iterative seven-step process. Build Teams. Category coordinators must first establish and maintain teaming relationships with other experts across the Army and DOD M&S communities as well as academia, and private industry. Define Requirements. Defining and maintaining a comprehensive statement of the M&S standards within each category is the second step. Several processes may be involved in one standards category, depending on the area's complexity. The current definitions and Standards Development objectives for each category can be found on the AMSO homepage [1].Develop Standards. This is the crux of the standards development process - identifying or developing standard procedures, policies, practices, processes, etc. The wider the involvement of experts across the M&S community, the more likely each category will capture nuggets worthy of becoming standards. Standards are not limited to those specifically developed by the team. They may include "best and current practices" or products that the team feels warrant being considered as standards for Army M&S.Achieve Consensus. Through the teaming arrangements, the community develops a consensus around the items offered as standards. The process for reviewing a standard at each level and eventually proposing it for designation as an Approved or Mandatory Standard is established and monitored by AMSO.Obtain Approval. Once a standard has been reviewed and consensus has been achieved, it is submitted to the Deputy Under Secretary of the Army for Operations Research (DUSA (OR)) for approval or denial as an Army M&S Standard.Promulgate Standards. Common use models, algorithms, software, techniques, procedures and data that ensue from the four previous steps must be made available to the widest possible community. The Army Modeling and Simulation Resource Repository is one such repository.Educate. Educating and assisting modelers and users is accomplished concurrently with the other steps. The more active the SCC, the more educated the community. Once a standard has been established and promulgated at a certain level, the SCC and team begin educating the M&S community on the availability, applicability, and use of the standard. One important vehicle for educating users is the Annual Standards Category Report, prepared by each SCC. These reports provide the Standards Development status, progress and priorities for the next year and are compiled by AMSO in the annual Army M&S Standards ReportTeaming.  Teaming is an additional step that integrates category efforts where standard applicability overlap occurs.  There are currently 18 standards categories that all relate to  some degree to Visualization/C4I Integration. Some categories such as Architecture, Command Decision Making, C3, Data, Dynamic Environment, Object Management, and Terrain directly impact Visualization/C4I Integration.  Category teaming efforts insure that standards developed mutually support M&S and C4ISR interoperability and interface reuse.  Teaming is achieved similar to category team building procedures described previously.  Teaming occurs during all phases of the standards development process. Teaming venues include workshops, conferences, and communications.  External consensus building and standards approval requirements are tailored by the respective SCCs.3. JTA-Army Architectures for C4ISR and M&S3.1  The Importance of the JTA-ArmyThe JTA-Army [12] has three mutually supporting objectives.  The first is to provide the foundation for a seamless flow of information and interoperability among all tactical, strategic, and sustaining base systems that produce, use or exchange information electronically.  The second objective is to provide guidelines and standards for system development and acquisition that will dramatically reduce cost, development time, and fielding time for improved systems.  The third objective is to influence the direction of the information industry’s technology development and research & development investment so that it can be more readily leveraged in Army systems.Studies of software reuse in Army & DOD systems indicate that the largest potential for reusing mission application software and process models is within an application domain.  To better facilitate mission-application software reuse, four domains have been identified (the lead agency for the Army for each domain is shown in parenthesis):•	Modeling and Simulation  (AMSO);•	C3I  (PEO - Command Control and Communications Systems);•	Weapons  (Weapon Systems Technical Architecture Working Group); and•	Sustainment.  (PEO - Standard Army Management Information System)The domains of the JTA-Army are covered by appendixes to the main document that contain exceptions (replacing a core standard with a domain standard) or extensions (that add a domain standard to the main body set of standards).  If a system relates to a domain, then both the core and domain standards apply to that system.The JTA-Army addresses both message-based and direct database-to-database exchange of data.  However, future tactical systems within the scope of the JTA-Army (reference Section 4.2.2 -- Data Model) must be based upon the C2 Core Data Model (C2CDM).  In addition, the Variable Message Format (VMF); US Message Text Format (USMTF), and the Tactical Digital Information Link (J Series) Message Formats are mandated in Section 4.2.4 -- Data Exchange, but only until mechanisms that use standard data elements are approved.In addition, the JTA-Army has adopted the DII COE concept and mandated the DII COE Baseline Specification and the DII COE Integration and Runtime Specification (I&RTS).  The DII COE is developing segments that are highly relevant to interface developers, such as Message Processing Segments.  Portions of the DII COE are developed using requirements generated by joint service technical working groups (TWGs) (http://spider.osfl.disa.mil/dii/aog_twg/twg/twg_page. html).  The Army is the lead for several TWGs that are critical to interface developers, such as: Message Processing, Data Access Services and Alerts.  There are also TWGs for Communication Services, the Common Operational Picture, and Mapping, Charting, Geodesy, and Imagery. Future M&S interface requirements need to be addressed to these TWGs for incorporation into the DII COE. Army TWGs collect, scrub, and recommend Army needs and priorities.  The Army TWGs also review and assess Army & joint originated candidates against Army base-lined requirements. In Appendix G of the JTA-Army, the HLA is mandated.  Thus, future interface developers must develop interfaces that take into account the DII COE, the HLA, and the JTA-Army mandated message format, data model, and data exchange standards. The additional standards areas proposed in this paper would better define the interface between the M&S domain and the other JTA-Army domains. Hamilton & Deal further describe the relationships between the JTA-Army and the HLA architectures in [10].3.2  An Example of Future Tactical System Interoperability Figure 1:  ACII ComponentsIn order to accomplish full interoperability with C4ISR systems, it is not sufficient for M&S developers to build in better messaging capabilities to their systems. As has been noted previously, C4ISR systems must also change. The main Army Experiment 4 (evaluating simulation interfaces) recommendation was that the interface must be viewed as an end-to-end system comprising both the M&S system, the interface software and the C4ISR system [2]. There are two areas where C4ISR systems will change in ways that make interoperability easier. First, the C4ISR systems will increasingly utilize database updates as opposed to sending messages with a particular message protocol. Second, the C4ISR system developers will increasingly use common data models that will utilize standard data elements.As an example of the future C4ISR system architecture, we describe an Army initiative to make the ABCS systems interoperable – the ABCS Common Interoperability Infrastructure (ACII). This concept, developed by the Horizontal Integration Technology Office of the Program Executive Office Command Control and Communication Systems of the Army, is shown in Figure 1. It is based upon products compliant with the Joint Technical Architecture and provides a flexible capability to achieve the Army Joint and combined interoperability required. It is based on an information management model rather than a message transaction model, while still providing support for current formatted messages for data distribution. The ability to use current and evolving message, data distribution and data replication technologies permit the implementation to support interoperability across a wide spectrum of operations and interfacing systems.  The ACII architecture is database centric with the database being the focus of all information operations. It is based upon DII products (the Common Message Processor [19] and the DII COE Communications Server)  thus having a high degree of software reuse.  The ACII will be in each of the ABCS systems in the future.4. Interface Technical Reference ModelThis Section presents an Interface Reference Model for a complete C4ISR to simulation training interface and also functional requirements for such an interface. This discussion will set the stage for the subsequent Sections, and is intended to clarify the information that M&S developers need to consider when interfacing to external systems.Prior to discussing specific M&S and C4ISR systems and implemented interfaces, it is desirable to identify and classify the information that an ideal interface must handle. This will not be possible until there is a common understanding of what constitutes such interfaces and the identification of one or more technical reference frameworks. Second, in order for M&S developers to build internal interface features that will work across a C4ISR domain, the different types of information need to be standardized to some extent. Data Interchange Formats (DIFs) such as the Command and Control Simulation Interchange Language (CCSIL), [4], [17] & [18], need to be created for specific information classes. We identify three broad classes that are necessary to meet the requirements that would result in full interoperability:Figure 2:  M&S–C4ISR Interface Information Classes•	Persistent Data•	Non-Persistent Data•	Execution ControlPersistent Data refers to the class of information that is stored during the operation of the Simulation. Information belonging to this class is typically initialized prior to execution and changes less frequently than Non-Persistent Data during Simulation operation.Non-Persistent Data refers to the class of information that is transient, corresponding to interactions between entities or objects in the simulation or C4ISR database, or updates to an entity’s state.A third class of information necessary for a complete interface is Execution Control. Simulations typically has a set of protocols that allow an operator to control their execution and synchronize their operation with other Simulations. Current C4ISR systems do not have protocols that correspond to these, however future C4ISR systems must have such protocols to enable them to be fully interoperable with Simulations. One example is the requirement for After Action Review (AAR). While Simulations can typically replay a scenario that had previously occurred, it is desirable to synchronize C4ISR systems with this playback to show the information available for decision making for particular events. Unless these requirements are specified to C4ISR developers, future C4ISR systems will not have the capability to perform such operations. Layman [13] gives a model of an interface for multi-level team training. This model divides information into C2, Tactical Communications, Combat Systems and Sensors classes. These classes all fall into the Non-Persistent Data category in the proposed model. Farinacci, Roberts, and Winner describe an architecture for establishing interoperability between a C4ISR system and CGF Simulation using the HLA [7].  McKenzie and Risner describe how JSIMS is approaching interfaces to C4I systems, detailing how the JSIMS Architecture supports External Systems [16].Figure 2 shows a notional Computer Generated Forces (CGF) simulation with the types of information which a complete interface must accommodate. The interface design is not specified. The function of the interface is to 1) control the information flow between the C4ISR system and the Simulations and 2) to align the information among the systems so that the information is received in a system’s native format. Note that all of the information may flow bidirectionally. Thus M&S systems would need to have the capability built to accept initialization data from C4ISR systems, as well as being able to pass scenario data to initialize C4ISR systems.The notional CGF can be thought of an example of a current generation object-oriented simulation, having different modules for Exercise Control, Behaviors, Environment, and Physical Models tied together with a Run-time Framework. Persistent data is stored in a Scenario Database. Current Simulations, such as ModSAF [6], can be easily mapped to this notional CGF.  Each of the 11 separate information types is a candidate for a separate Reference FOM.Figure 2 depicts several other specific interface requirements:A) Exercise Control Interactions are a type of Execution Control that is passed during a training exercise to control the conduct of the exercise. The controls would allow, for example, “checkpointing” of both Simulations and C4ISR systems, as well as allowing pausing of the C4ISR system at appropriate points in the exercise. Initialization and AAR protocols would also fall in this category. Exercise Control Interactions would be interfaced to an Exercise Control Module of a Simulation.  Logging is explicitly identified as a separate category due to the importance of this functionB) Orders are a type of interaction that convey C2 information. Translation of this class of information has been extremely difficult to achieve with current interfaces [3]. C4ISR systems currently do not support the generation and maintenance of this C2 information in a uniform manner.C)  Reports are a type of C2 information about the state of an entity. The majority of current interfaces deal with this class of situational awareness information. Typical report information is location and status, and may be sent to the C4ISR system as either tactical messages or data updates. Both Orders and Reports would interface to Behavior Models of a Simulation, affecting the decision making of simulated units. If the Simulation offers a high degree of fidelity, it may associate these interactions with communication effects (E).D) Track Data is information regarding the physical state of entities (or objects). This class of information also includes physical interactions between objects (such as weapon effects). A Simulation may need to know the location of a live unit, even if it is not sending out report messages (Class C). Alternatively, air tracks of a simulated aircraft may need to be generated for a radar screen. If the data passed to the interface is ground truth, then the data should have effects applied to turn the data into perceived truth. These interactions would be processed by the Physical Models Module of a Simulation.E) Communication Effects (CE) emulate the characteristics of the communications channel by which the information in Classes B & C is passed [5], [20]. In most cases, a CE interaction would be paired with a C2 interaction. This interaction would be interfaced to a physical device model (such as a radio model) that transmits or receives the CE interaction, in the Physical Models of the Simulation.F)  Persistent Data covers a wide variety of information. This usually includes Order-of-Battle information as well as specification of the terrain to be used. Typically this information is not exchanged in current interfaces, but rather is manually aligned. As an example, a C4ISR system will have an Order-of-Battle (OB)  database, and a Simulation will have a completely different representation of these units. The Simulation should be able to be initialized from a C4ISR system, just as a C4ISR system should be able to be populated with exercise data from a Simulation. The Persistent Data would be initialized at runtime and kept current during execution. This class of information would interface to the Simulation Scenario Database, as well as the Environmental Models Module for dynamic updates during execution.Persistent Data includes: Weather Data – essential for training exercises; Communications Plan Data – needed for initializing communications networks so that communication effects can be modeled; Mission and Plan information – necessary for generation of orders; Unit Data – including the Order-of-Battle and associated information; and Terrain Standards.  Interchange of terrain formats has been problematic within the simulation domain as well as within the C4I domain.5. Interface Design OptionsFigure 3 shows a generalization of how most interfaces are currently implemented. Because the Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) standard does not align well with current tactical message formats, there must be a software translator to perform the interface functions. Only a limited amount of information passes over the interface, and there are many design options, so that each interface project will usually develop new software. Projects have also interfaced C4I equipment to the HLA successfully, such as the Modular Reconfigurable C4I Interface [11], [14]. Such projects have emphasized the need to minimize translation and it’s overhead through use of common data elements [14], [22].Figure 3:  Legacy C4I/Simulation Interface StandardsFigure 4:  Relationship of C4I/Simulation Interface StandardsFigure 4 proposes a framework for integrating JTA-Army simulation and C4I standards.  The simulation standards architecture is the HLA and it's standard for representation is the Federation Object Model.  The C4I standards architecture is the DII COE.  The standard for representation is either message formats (VMF, USMTF, etc.) or data models (using data exchange mechanisms). The HLA has a specific communications mechanism, the RTI, and the DII COE also has specific Communication segments. There may be interfaces into the Simulation outside the HLA, but this is yet to be determined.The missing piece is a data interchange format that aligns both of the different standards architectures.  A good example of this is SEDRIS [21].  SEDRIS could be a DIF between the simulation terrain formats (such as S1000 or SIF) and the C4I terrain formats (DTED, VPF).  Neither the  simulations nor the C4I use the SEDRIS format, but it allows conversion of data by providing a unifying representation.There is a large difference in viewpoint between the developers of Simulations and C4I systems, especially as regards the standards process.  C4I developers feel strongly that Simulations should use the data elements that real systems use. This leads to a standards framework as shown in Figure 5, with a DII COE segment in the simulation for direct database-to-database data element transfer.  The ABCS Common Data Base (ACDB) is shown as an example of a C2CDM-derived data base. However, this framework is unacceptable to simulations, and would probably not be in accordance with the HLA.Figure 6 shows a standards framework that is Simulation oriented. This assumes that the HLA will be hosted on C4I platforms, possibly as a DII COE segment. C4I developers have traditionally not accepted this a valid requirement for their system.Figure 5:  A C4I Developer’s View of C4I/Simulation Interface StandardsFigures 5 and 6 also show that making a DIF a standard does not constrain the architecture.  There will still be a need for a DIF even if one architecture predominates.  Until each architecture uses the same data elements, there will always be the need for translation.  A good standard will minimize the translation necessary, however.Figure 6:  A Simulation Developer’s View of C4I/Simulation Interface Standards7. ConclusionBetter interfaces are necessary but not sufficient to  accomplish full and seamless interoperability.  Both Simulations and C4I systems must also increase their functional capabilities [3].  Simulations must improve their reporting capabilities, and C4I systems must become aware of simulation constructs like exercise control. Clear and concise interface standards will serve to institutionalize these requirements so that systems in the acquisition process can put these capabilities into their software requirements process.The AMSO Visualization/C4I Integration Standards Category will work closely with the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) C4I Forum to ensure that the Army Interface Standards proposed are consistent with the larger M&S community, and that SISO Interface Standards proposed are consistent with the JTA-Army. Figure 7 shows a roadmap of interface development for the Army ABCS systems. The improvement in interface functionality in the figure can be seen as the interface software pieces (the diamonds) become fewer and smaller, as standards allow more information to be shared between M&S and live systems.  Note that for the ABCS systems, interfaces can take advantage of increasing direct database-to-database information exchange. Interface standards are necessary to achieve the mid and far term goals for interface functionality.Figure 7:  C4I Integration Transition Plan8. AcknowledgmentsThe authors thank Frank Carr for his assistance on developing the Interface Technical Reference Model. The authors also thank Frank Carr, David Loental and Dr. Rick McKenzie for their review of this paper. Dr. Hieb was supported by ODISC4 of the Army while writing this paper. 9. References[1]	Army Modeling and Simulation Office: “http://www.amso.army.mil”, 1998.[2]	Brennan, J.M.: “The Army Experiment 4 Simulation to Army Battle Command System Experiments”, Paper 98S-SIW-002, 1998 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1998.[3]	Carr, F.H. and Hieb, M.R.: “Issues and Requirements for Future C4ISR and M&S Interoperability”, 7th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation, 1998.[4]	Carr, F.H. and Hinton, L.G.: “Stimulating C4I Systems and Achieving Control of the Simulated Battlefield”, Paper 97F-SIW-136, 1997 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1997.[5]	Carr, F.H. and Roberts, J.D.: “Incorporating Command and Control Into the High Level Architecture: An Architecture for Realistic Communication Effects”, Paper 97F-SIW-076, 1997 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1997.[6]	Ceranowicz A.: “ModSAF Capabilities”, 4th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavior Representation, 1994.[7]	Farinacci, M.L., Roberts, J.D., & Winner, B.R.: “Incorporating Command and Control Into the High Level Architecture”, Paper 96-15-021, 15th Workshop on the Interoperability of Distributed Interactive Simulations, 1996.[8]	Goldschen, A.: “The Role of Speech Synthesis in a Distributed Simulation: The STOW-97 CommandTalk System”, 7th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavior Representation, 1998.[9]	Goldschen, A.: “The Role of the CCSIL Agent for Distributed Simulations”, Paper 97S-SIW-099, 1997 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1997.[10]	Hamilton, J.A., Jr., and Deal, J.C.: “Software Interoperability and Distributed Simulation” 1998 Advanced Simulation Technologies Conference (ASTC '98), Society for Computer Simulation International, Boston, Massachusetts, April 5-9, 1998. [11]	Hieb, M.R.; Cosby, M.; Griggs, L.; McKenzie, F.; Tiernan, T.; & Zeswitz, S.: “MRCI: Transcending Barriers between Live Systems and Simulations”, Paper 97S-SIW-197, 1997 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1997.[12]	Joint Technical Architecture – Army, Version 5.0, Office of the Director, Information Systems for Command Control , Communications and Computers, http:// www.hqda.army.mil/techarch/, September, 1997.[13]	Layman, G.E., Conover, J., Kunkel, P. & Robins, D.: “JMCIS/GCCS Interoperability with External Simulations,” Paper 97S-SIW-132, 1997 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1997.[14]	Lightner, M. Schanduaa, J., Cutts, D., & Zeswitz, S.: “The High Level Architecture Command and Control Experiment – Lessons Learned in Designing an Extended Federation”, Paper 98S-SIW-93, 1998 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1998.[15]	McGlynn, L. E. & Timian, D.: “Army Model and Simulation Standards – Tools in the SBA Kit Bag” Paper 98F-SIW-265, 1998 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1998.[16]	McKenzie, F & Risner S.: “Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) Approach to C4I System Interoperability” Paper 98F-SIW-117, 1998 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1998.[17]	McKenzie, F., Shumaker, G., & Campbell, P.: “An Architecture for Integrating Command and Control of Heterogeneous Simulations”, 6th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation, 1996.[18]	MITRE: 1997 DARPA CFOR/CCSIL WWW site at http://ms.ie.org/cfor/.[19]	PEO C3S: CMP WWW site at http://www. monmouth.army.mil/peoc3s/chs/cmp.html, 1998.[20]	Silva, W, Steigerwald, A., Cosby, M., Hieb, M.R. & Lacetera, J.: “Communications Emulation Design in the MRCI Program”, Paper 97F-SIW-160, 1997 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1997.[21]	Stanzione, T. & Chamberlain, F.: “Composable Synthetic Natural Environments for Computer Generated Forces”, 7th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation, 1998.[22]	Thumim K., Clay, B., Hieb, M.R., & Cosby, M.: “Modular Reconfigurable Message Translation: Translation of Messages Between C4I Systems and Simulations”, Paper 97F-SIW-120, 1997 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1997.Author BiographiesMICHAEL HIEB is a senior scientist at AB Technologies. Dr. Hieb was the architect of the MRCI interface project while at SAIC. He received his PhD in Information Technology at George Mason University in 1996, developing an instructable ModSAF agent. He performed his doctoral research at the Center for Excellence in Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence at GMU. He has published over 30 papers in the areas of learning agents, knowledge acquisition, interface technology and multistrategy learning. When working for IntelliTek, Dr. Hieb implemented a distributed problem-solving testbed at the Goddard Space Flight Center. Previously, he worked as a Nuclear Engineer for General Electric.MICHAEL STAVER is a Major with the U.S. Army and is the Standards Category Coordinator for Visualization and C4I Integration.  Major Staver is a Simulation Development Officer in the Tactical Directorate at the National Simulation Center.  During his three years at the NSC, he has worked on numerous joint and combined, distributed, real time training exercises and experiments to include Prairie Warrior, Ulchi Focus Lens, Advanced Warfighting Experiment, and most recently Dessert Thunder in Kuwait.  He works closely with TPIO-ABCS and TPIO-TD to integrate M&S and C4I requirements.  He is a graduate of the Command and General Staff College, ORSA-MAC, and USMA where he received a BS.  His basic branch is artillery and has served at numerous fire support echelons to include battery command in the 6 ID(L), AK; 199th SIB(M), Ft. Lewis, WA; and the 2nd ACR, Ft. Polk, LA. PAGE  1		1998 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop		Orlando, Florida, September 1998 Page  PAGE 5		1998 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop		Orlando, Florida, September 1998 