Army Model and Simulation Standards – Tools in the SBA Kit BagLana Eubanks McGlynnArmy Model and Simulation OfficeODCSOPS ATTN: DAMO-ZS, 400 Army, The PentagonWashington, DC 20310-0450 HYPERLINK mailto:mcglyla@hqda.army.mil mcglyla@hqda.army.milLTC Don TimianArmy Model and Simulation OfficeODCSOPS ATTN: DAMO-ZS, 400 Army, The PentagonWashington, DC 20310-0450 HYPERLINK mailto:timiadh@hqda.army.mil timiadh@hqda.army.milKEYWORDSSimulation Based Acquisition, Reuse, Verification, ValidationABSTRACTStandardizing of the Army’s Model and Simulation (M&S) processes is a vital step toward achieving the economies, efficiencies, and technological potential M&S represents.  Via its seven step M&S Standards Development Process, the Army seeks to:enable simulations to provide or accept services from one another, thus making them more interoperable;improve the credibility and ease of Verification and Validation;increase the commonality of what simulations depict; andleverage opportunities for reuse and sharing of algorithms and heuristics between government and industry throughout a system’s life-cycle (combat development; materiel development; testing; fielding; and disposal).This paper articulates how the use of M&S Standards support achievement of the goals of Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA).  By providing the M&S community easy access to approved standards and a capability to identify requirements, M&S can be built upon a solid foundation thus making the Validation and Verification (V&V) process faster and simpler. Additionally the paper describes the how the community can use the web based tools - the Standards Nomination and Approval Process (SNAP) ( HYPERLINK http://www.msrr.army.mil/snap http://www.msrr.army.mil/snap) and the Army Standards Repository System (ASTARS) ( HYPERLINK http://www.msrr.army.mil/astars http://www.msrr.army.mil/astars) to enhance their SBA activities.INTRODUCTIONIn 1994 the Army Model and Simulation Office (AMSO) published the Army’s first M&S Master Plan. This document described the Objective Army M&S Environment of interoperability, credibility, commonality, and reuse.  The Master Plan also articulated the concept of developing M&S technical standards through a bottom-up approach with decentralized authority.  It introduced and defined the standards development process and established the role of standards category coordinators.  This created a new way of thinking about standards development.  It provided a framework for M&S technical standards to be developed by those closest to the problem.  The Army’s 18 standards categories cover the realm of technologies and processes important to M&S development and use within the Army.  With the publication of Department of Defense (DOD) 5000.59-P, Modeling and Simulation Master Plan, the Army expanded its desired endstate to encompass DoD’s M&S Objectives.  In the 1997 Army M&S Master Plan, an objective was added that specified the Army’s goal of developing “a comprehensive set of standards that facilitates efficient development and use of M&S capabilities” and the standards development process was further refined to include a more formal procedure to nominate and approve M&S standards.SNAP is an on-line tool to facilitate the Standards Development Process and encourage community-wide involvement.  In order to make SNAP readily accessible to the M&S community – government, industry, and academia – SNAP has been developed as a web-based tool.  For this same reason, ASTARS – the Army’s repository for approved M&S standards – is also web-based.  But before describing both SNAP and ASTARS, in some detail, it is appropriate to define 1) what is an Army M&S standard; 2) why the Army should establish M&S standards; and 3) how the Army’s seven step process enables the development of M&S standards.WHAT IS AN ARMY M&S STANDARD?Webster’s II New Riverside University Dictionary defines a standard as “a rule, principle, or measurement established by authority, custom, or general consent as a representation or example.”  The term M&S standard is applied in the broadest context to include procedures, practices, processes, techniques, and algorithms.  Standards for M&S cover a variety of topics and the type and source of relevant standards will vary with each standards category.  The new Army M&S Master Plan describes three levels of standards.  Draft Standards are initial or proposed standards.  These standards have not completed the review and approval process.  Approved standards are the next higher-level.  These standards have been reviewed and demonstrated sufficient maturity and consensus to warrant their recommendation to the Deputy Under Secretary of the Army for Operations Research (DUSA (OR)) for approval.  Mandatory Standards are the highest-level of standards and are promulgated by regulation or policy statement.  Developers and users of Army M&S systems must follow these standards.  An example of a mandatory standard is the DOD High Level Architecture for simulations.  While some may raise short-term costs for individual programs, the value in adopting standards is their overall and long-term benefit to the Army.WHY ESTABLISH ARMY M&S STANDARDS?Simply put, the Army seeks to develop standards to improve M&S interoperability and credibility while also increasing its commonality and reuse.  By developing M&S standards the Army hopes to:enable simulations to provide or accept services from one another thus making them more interoperable;improve the credibility or acceptance on the correctness of M&S representations;increase the commonality of the way the synthetic environment is depicted; andestablish a baseline for reusing standard algorithms and heuristics in future simulations.In addition, having M&S standards makes the process of Verification and Validation (V&V) both simpler and faster and creates the opportunity for the Army’s analytical, acquisition, and training communities to leverage their simulation development off of each other’s efforts. THE ARMY’S SEVEN STEP STANDARDS DEVELOPMENT PROCESSThe Army’s M&S standards development is consensus-based by choice.  M&S technologies evolve at blinding speeds.  Some technological niches turn over in a matter of months.  Technological, procedural, and application advances take place within a myriad of organizations in the Army, and throughout the commercial and academic sectors.  Attempting to centralize the authority for establishing standards, without devoting major resources to the effort, would not enable the Army to remain a M&S community leader.  Rather, it could place the Army permanently behind the rest of the M&S community.  No single Army office or organization is capable of effectively investigating and making the necessary decisions to evolve Army models and simulations that keep pace with the rest of the industry.  By keeping the process consensus-based, those decisions are in the hands of the real Army M&S experts.Build Teams.  Subject matter experts from various organizations throughout the Army are appointed to serve as Standards Category Coordinators (SCCs).  They are not executive agents.  They serve as the leadership for developing M&S standards within their standards category.  They are empowered to develop their teams drawing on the mix of talents and expertise needed in their specific area.  Team composition is interdisciplinary and represents organizations across DOD, industry, and academia.  Membership is based on inclusion rather than exclusion.Define Requirements.  The second step is to define requirements.  With only limited resources to devote to the development of standards, it is essential to keep the work of the team focused on the most important issues.  Any individual may identify a new M&S standard requirement, may request that an existing algorithm or technique become a standard, or recommend an existing standard be modified.  The AMSO then coordinates validation of the proposed requirement with the appropriate SCC, the Army’s three M&S domain representatives (Advanced Concepts and Requirements; Research, Development, and Acquisition; and Training, Exercises, and Military Operations), and other key players as necessary to ensure that the proposal supports a community need. After validation of the requirement is completed, the initiator is provided feedback.  A proposed standard could be an excellent idea but may fail to fit a “market niche”.  If the proposal is approved, it then moves on to the Develop Standards step of the process.Develop Standards.  This is the crux of the standards development process.  The wider the involvement of experts across the M&S community, the more likely each category will capture those algorithms, heuristics, and techniques – as well as “best and current practices” – that warrant becoming Army M&S standards. Achieve Consensus.  After the standard has been developed, the next step is to achieve consensus.  Because the process is continuous and iterative, the community more readily adopts standards they feel can be modified and improved over time.  Each draft standard may go through several iterations before being embraced by the group and reaching consensus.  The primary tool that each Standards Category (SC) team uses to “hammer-out” or achieve consensus on a draft standard is an electronic mail reflector or list server.  By using reflectors as the primary method to conduct the discussion, all interested parties can get involved.  The beauty of this method is that an individual in government, industry, or academia can join various SC teams and actively participate without incurring costly travel expenses.Obtain Approval.  Once consensus has been achieved, the draft standard is then reviewed by a panel of Senior Army M&S subject matter experts who determine if the proposed standard should be forwarded to the DUSA (OR) for approval or if it should be returned to the SC team for additional work.Promulgate Standards.  Every approved Army M&S standard - as well as related documents and tools - will be registered in the Army portion of the Department of Defense (DOD) Modeling and Simulation Resource Repository (MSRR).  Each SCC has established an Internet Home Page to provide specific information pertaining to their category.  Information on all the aspects of M&S Standards can be assessed from both the AMSO Home Page and the Army Node of the Modeling and Simulation Resource Repository (MSRR). Educate.  Educating and assisting modelers and users is accomplished concurrently with the other steps.  The more active the standards category coordinator is, the more educated the community.  Once a standard has been approved, the team begins educating the M&S community on the availability, applicability, and use of the standard.SNAPThe Standards Nomination and Approval Process (SNAP) is the tool that facilitates executing four steps of the Army M&S Standards Development Process:  1) define requirements, 2) develop standards, 3) achieve consensus, and 4) obtain approval.  From the beginning of its development, in May 1997, it was decided that SNAP would be fully integrated into the Army’s seven step M&S Standards Development Process.  Not simply a stand-alone, add-on tool that would have brought little value to the process.At the heart of SNAP is the Standards Requirement Document (SRD).  The SRD, an on-line form, is the first step in developing a new Army M&S standard; refining an existing standard; or nominating an accepted M&S practice, procedure, or technique to become a standard.  The overall SRD format is consistent with the M&S Requirements Document so it can easily be integrated into the Army M&S Requirements Integration and Approval Process if necessary.To assist AMSO, SCCs, and interested parties in the tracking of a draft – or in process - standard, SNAP has both a browse and a search capability.  Browse allows a user to see a list of all in process and approved standards sorted in ascending SRD number.  Additionally, while in Browse, a user can elect to change how draft standards are displayed, specifically by sorting them by SRD Number, Current SRD Status (All, In Process, or Approved), or Standards Category.SNAP also has a built-in search engine which, when selected, brings up its Fast Find / Search page.  This page is divided horizontally into two sections.  The Fast Find section offers a user the ability to find an in process or approved standard by its’ SRD Number and the first 60 characters of its title.  The Search section contains a query dialog box containing AND / OR logic fields and input fields that enable the user to conduct a more thorough search.Also part of SNAP, is an electronic mail reflector that echoes all messages to all current subscribers.  Thus, by sending a message to a reflector, all subscribers receive a copy even though the message wasn’t addressed to each of them directly.Each Standards Category has a reflector and they are used extensively in the Army M&S Standards Approval Process as a forum to develop and achieve consensus on draft standards.  SNAP monitors this traffic and – as part of its database – maintains a copy of every reflector message sent.  For those who have just joined a Standards Category, or for old hands, this feature allows one to review the on going debate on one or more draft standards and eliminates the need for current subscribers to maintain a copy of every reflector message sent.  This unique feature permits individuals to enter the debate at any time during the define requirements, develop standards, or achieve consensus steps.  SNAP also uses its reflectors to notify current subscribers of a given standards category when a draft standard is being developed or is being voted upon. When a SCC has determined that consensus has been achieved on a draft standard, they can recommend to AMSO that the standard be forwarded to that category’s Senior Reviewers for voting.  If approved by AMSO, SNAP will automatically send an electronic mail message to each appropriate Senior Reviewer.  This message will contain a “hot-link” to that Senior Reviewer’s voting page along with information on the draft standard.  Provided they have Internet access, the Senior Reviewer can select the “hot link” and be taken directly to their voting page.  Senior Reviewers may either vote “Yes” or “No”.  If they vote “No” a comment field must be completed or the vote will not be accepted.  When the comment field is completed, an electronic message is automatically sent to both AMSO and the appropriate SCC.  Every effort will be made to resolve the Senior Reviewer’s concerns prior to the closure of voting.THE ARMY STANDARDS REPOSITORY SYSTEM (ASTARS)For each standard in ASTARS, you will find information about the standard and a point-of-contact.  To the maximum extent practical, all of the items described in ASTARS will be available to the public for download or linked to another web site where the standard is available for download.  Standards in ASTARS can be password-protected when access needs to be limited.  However, classified standards will not be stored in ASTARS.  Those standards not available for public release will follow the release procedures for M&S described in Army Regulation 5-11.When first entering ASTARS, a user has three ways to find the standard that they are interested in: View All, Browse, or Search.  By selecting View All, the user is given a list of all standards, tools, and documents housed in ASTARS, regardless of their associated category.  The standards title, a brief description, the category, and submission date are provided.  By selecting Browse, the user is taken to ASTARS’s Browse page.  Here the user may select a specific Standards Category to look in.  Again, a list of all standards associated with that category is listed.  By selecting Search, the user is taken to ASTARS’ Search Documents page.  Here all of the standards, tools, and documents in ASTARS can be searched by title, description, keywords, submitter, file name (e.g., standard.doc or algorithm.ppt), or file type (i.e., .doc, .xls, or .ppt).  But regardless of how a user locates a standard in ASTARS, to obtain further information or – provided that access to it is not limited – download the standard the user selects simply selects the document’s title.SUPPORTING SBAThrough the application of M&S Standards the development of simulations and models to support the acquisition process – as well as the V&V of models and simulations – can be accomplished faster, with fewer resources, and reduced risk.  By using approved standards, M&S developers have a solid foundation upon which to build.  M&S developers can begin their design efforts by querying ASTARS to see if a standard presently exists to meet their needs.  If a standard is found it can be used directly or an SRD can be submitted to modify the standard for this particular use.  In addition, by providing a forum for analytical, acquisition, and training M&S developers to leverage off of one another’s work, the Army’s M&S Standards Process has the potential to promote Integrated Product and Process Development throughout a systems’ acquisition lifecycle. THE INTERNETMore and more today the starting point for finding information, on almost any subject, is the Internet.  In order make it easier for M&S users and developers to find information on Army M&S Standards and the Army M&S Standards Development Process, every approved standard in ASTARS – as well as related documents and tools – is registered in the Army Node of the MSRR ( HYPERLINK http://www.msrr.army.mil http://www.msrr.army.mil). In addition, AMSO recently registered its’ Home Page ( HYPERLINK http://www.amso.army.mil http://www.amso.army.mil), the Army portion of the DoD MSRR, SNAP, and ASTARS on 50 of the Internet’s best know search engines.  CONCLUSIONSThe objective of the Army’s M&S standards development process is to create an environment that promotes the sharing and reuse of M&S algorithms, heuristics, procedures, and processes.  The objective is not to create written standards that will sit unused in ASTARS.  The continuous and iterative nature of the process permits the Army M&S community to keep pace with rather than react to technological advances.  Via SNAP and ASTARS, the Army is moving progressively closer to its goal of developing “a comprehensive set of standards that facilitates efficient development and use of M&S capabilities”.REFERENCESDoD 5000.59-P; DoD Modeling and Simulation Master Plan, October 1995Army Model and Simulation Standards Report FY 98, October 1997The Army Model and Simulation Master Plan, October 1997About the AuthorSLANA EUBANKS McGLYNN is the Chief of the Policy and Technology Division of the U.S. Army Modeling and Simulation Office in Washington, DC.  She has over 26 years experience in the fields of automation, logistics, Army studies, and computer modeling and simulation.  Her most recent management positions have been in designing a strategic vision for developing and implementing standards and policies for models and simulations, which promote reuse and interoperability.Since 1990 she has represented the Army in all matters pertaining to data used in M&S.  She is the Army’s Functional Data Administrator for M&S Data, co-chairs the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) Authoritative Data Sources Working Group (WG) and holds leadership positions on the DMSO Data Verification Validation and Certification WG and the DoD Modeling and Simulation Resources Repository Implementing Committee (IC).Ms McGlynn has a Bachelor of Science degree in Mathematics from Marshall University in Huntington, West Virginia, and a Master of Science degree in Systems Management from the University of Denver.  She is a graduate of the Army Management Staff College, the U.  S.  Army War College in Carlisle Barracks, Pennsylvania and the Executive Leadership Training Program at the Office of Personnel Management’s Federal Executive Institute.  She is a Certified Acquisition Professional, Level III, in the functional specialty of Program Management in the Army Acquisition Corps.LTC DON TIMIAN is Deputy Chief, Policy and Technology Division of the U.S. Army Modeling and Simulation Office in Washington, DC.  He has over 19 years of service in the Army.  Since 1992, LTC Timian has served as an Operations Research and Systems Analyst / model and simulation specialist at the Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) Analysis Center – Scenario and Wargaming Center; III Corps Plans and Exercises (Battle Simulation Center); and the Text and Experimentation Command (TEXCOM).LTC Timian has a Bachelor of Arts degree in Chemistry from the University of Arizona and a Master of Science degree in Operations Research from Kansas State University.FIGURE 1.  DoD M&S ObjectivesFIRGURE 2.  The Army’s M&S Standards Development ProcessFIGURE 3.  The Standards Requirement DocumentFIGURE 4.  SBA Vision and Goals