Enhancing the RPR FOM To Include STOW 97 CapabilitiesJoseph J. BerkeleyBMH Associates, Inc.5425 Robin Hood Road, Suite 201Norfolk, VA 23513-2441757-857-5670berkeley@bmh.comPete MullerATI, Inc.1221 Shaker DriveHerndon, VA 20170-2415703-861-1313muller@ati-dc.comKeywords:HLA, DIS, Real-Time, RPR, STOW, FOMABSTRACT: The Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) standard was designed to promote interoperability between real-time simulations. The Real-Time Platform Reference (RPR) Federation Object Model (FOM) provides the functionality of DIS in a High-Level Architecture (HLA) environment. The RPR FOM aids in transitioning existing DIS-based real-time simulations to HLA compliance through the mapping of DIS Protocol Data Units (PDUs) to HLA objects and interactions. DIS is an evolving standard and currently provides support for Entity, Warfare, Logistics, Simulation Management, Emissions, and Radio functional requirements. The Synthetic Theater Of War 97 (STOW 97) FOM evolved from DIS 1278.1 and provides enhancements including support for environmental functional requirements such as dynamic terrain, as well as enhanced support for 3D visualization and minefields.The RPR FOM is a general-purpose reference from which other FOMs are meant to be derived. This document will compare the RPR FOM to the STOW 97 FOM and describe how the RPR FOM can be extended to include the additional capabilities provided by the STOW 97 FOM.1. BackgroundThe Department of Defense (DoD) has mandated that the High Level Architecture (HLA) be the standard technical architecture for all DoD simulations. Funding for non-HLA compliant simulations will cease as of the first day of fiscal year 1999, and all non-HLA simulations will be retired as of the first day of fiscal year 2001. (Kaminski, 1996) However, there exists a wide range of real-time, platform-level simulations based on the Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) standard that are currently in service. In order to facilitate the reuse of these simulations, the Real-Time Platform Reference Federation Object Model (RPR FOM) was created to ease the transition from DIS to HLA compliance for existing DIS-based simulations. The RPR FOM is based on the functionality of the IEEE 1278.1-1995 DIS standard.2. IEEE Std. 1278.1-1995The DIS standard was designed to promote interoperability between real-time, platform-level simulations. DIS specifies not only the protocol that simulations will follow when communicating with one another, but also the representation of the data communicated. These bits of data are packaged into Protocol Data Units, or PDUs. There is a PDU for each interaction within a DIS exercise. DIS currently supports functional requirements for Entity, Warfare, Logistics, Simulation Management, Emissions, and Radio interactions. As an evolving standard, DIS does not fulfill all possible functional requirements for existing real-time simulations. "IEEE Standard for Distributed Simulation - Application Protocols", section 1.3.4.2, "Future capabilities", acknowledges this fact and offers examples of future additions to the standard, such as environmental support and data distribution management. (IEEE Std. 1278.1-1995)3. STOW 97 ACTDBrief HistoryThe Synthetic Theater of War Advanced Concepts Technology Demonstration (STOW ACTD) is a Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) program designed to demonstrate the capabilities of high-resolution (platform-level) simulation as applied to Joint Command and Staff Training and Mission Rehearsal. The STOW 97 ACTD, which took place in October 1997 in support of Unified Endeavor 98-1, successfully demonstrated many advances in simulation technology. STOW 97 developed a joint synthetic battlespace with significant improvements in the Synthetic Natural Environment including realistic weather and dynamic terrain. Many of these improvements were not supported in DIS and new interactions needed to be defined. In addition to the new environmental interactions, significant improvements were made to improve missile models, electronic warfare, 3D visualization, mine warfare, and combat identification. In JointSAF, the forces available to the trainer were expanded to include most of the combat forces of all of the Services as well as a flexible Opposing Force (OPFOR). Details of STOW capabilities can be found at the STOW web site at http://stow98.spawar.navy.mil. A brief description of STOW technologies follows.Ordnance ServerThe Ordnance Server provides high-fidelity missile fly-outs using Combat Training System (CTS) models (formerly known as TACTS/ATCS models). These are the same missile models used on Air Force and Navy instrumented air combat training ranges. This was an important advance because it demonstrated the use of Service models that were independent of the missile fly-out models available within SAF. It issues entity state updates and detonation interactions.Openscene ModStealthModStealth displays a 3D visualization of the battlefield using terrain, object, and interaction data consumed from the network. It allows free-flight over the terrain or attachment to entities within the environment, and publishes its location and movement attribute values via a "stealth_state" object.Total Atmospheric and Ocean Services (TAOS)TAOS provides a wide variety of high fidelity, tactically significant atmosphere, ocean, and surf zone models, and is capable of providing uniform or gridded data. Access to a realistic, dynamic battlefield environment allows client simulations to increase the accuracy and fidelity of their physical and behavioral models.DT Sim/DT ScribeDT Sim and DT Scribe provide the capability to make changes to the terrain database and features existing on it. DT Sim provides dynamic placement of craters, ditches, and obstacles. DT Scribe arbitrates requests by federates wishing to cause changes to the terrain database, and sends Environmental Change Notifications (ECNs) to notify simulations to update their terrain representations.  This allows the destruction of buildings and other structures that populate the terrain database through the use of multistate objects (MSOs).MinefieldsSupport is provided for individual and aggregate collections of mines, as well as objects to mark cleared paths through a minefield.IFFAn IFF interaction was created to support the transmission and interrogation of Identify Friend or Foe (IFF) force identification information.  The same IFF model was used by all of the Services.4. RPR FOM and STOW 97 FOMMany of the capabilities showcased in the STOW program did not have corresponding PDUs in the DIS 1278.1 standard. These new PDUs were implemented in STOW along with the standard DIS 1278.1 PDUs. One of the requirements of the STOW 97 ACTD was that it operate in an HLA environment, however, prior to the STOW 97 ACTD there were no ready-made FOMs with which to transition the STOW technologies to HLA. The STOW 97 FOM was created to enable STOW to operate in an HLA environment. It includes objects and interactions for all of the DIS 1278.1 PDUs, as well as support for the enhancements mentioned earlier. As such, it is a superset of the existing DIS 1278.1 functionality, and includes much of the functionality proposed for future versions of DIS. The STOW 97 FOM also includes some features that are specific to the ModSAF variant of real-time simulations, such as Persistent Object (PO) interactions that allow multiple simulators to share the load of simulating entities.The RPR FOM, on the other hand, is a general-purpose reference from which other FOMs are meant to be derived. The current version of the RPR FOM, v0.3, implements the full functionality of the current DIS standard, 1278.1-1995. However, there are still deficiencies relative to the functionality in the STOW 97 FOM, such as the aforementioned lack of support for minefields, environment, and dynamic terrain. Although it may be used without modification, in its present form the RPR FOM is not capable of fully supporting a DIS-based exercise on the level of complexity of STOW without modification and extension. A comparison of the capabilities of the RPR FOM versus the STOW 97 FOM reveals that the RPR FOM is actually a subset of the STOW 97 FOM. 5. Differences between the RPR FOM and the STOW 97 FOMBoth FOMs provide the basic functionality of DIS 1278.1-1995 to DIS-based simulations. While some differences in nomenclature exist between the RPR and the STOW 97 FOM, each has a corresponding object or interaction for each DIS PDU. However, the two differ in the following areas:VisualizationThe RPR FOM has no direct support for Stealth. Although stealths may be used with the RPR FOM (in a consume-only mode), the STOW FOM has a "stealth_state" object that allows the stealth federate to publish information about its location and orientation for consumption by other federates.WarfareThe RPR FOM lacks certain Warfare features currently found in the STOW 97 FOM. The RPR FOM does not contain support for the "launch" interaction needed by the Ordnance Server, nor does it contain support for minefields. There is no IFF interaction in the RPR FOM.EnvironmentEnvironmental support in the RPR FOM is limited to a description of the environmental entity's geometry and volume. The STOW 97 FOM includes data about environmental entity type, model, and state, as well as providing support for ECNs that are used for generating dynamic terrain.6. Enhancing the RPR FOM to Include STOW 97 CapabilitiesThere are a number of reasons to include the added capabilities of the STOW 97 FOM in the RPR FOM. Foremost, doing so will provide other DIS-based federates access to a high-fidelity synthetic environment consisting of robust, dynamic weather models, as well as dynamic terrain and terrain objects. Equally important, federates will be able to easily take advantage of the Ordnance Server's high-fidelity missile models. The inclusion of an IFF interaction will allow friendly/non-friendly force interaction, leading to greater simulation realism. Land and sea simulations will be able to take advantage of minefield objects. Finally, support for the "stealth_state" object will permit federates to know the location and orientation of any stealths that populate the synthetic battlespace.In order for the RPR FOM to achieve the same level of functional capability as the STOW 97 FOM, several objects and interactions need to be added to the RPR FOM. Determination of the necessary objects, interactions, and attributes required to achieve this is taken from "Scientific and Technical Report, STOW Advanced Concept Technology (ACTD) Federation Object Model (FOM)" by J. Holcomb.VisualizationIn order to support the capability for a federate to be aware of a stealth entity's state information, a "stealth_state" object needs to be implemented in the RPR. This object shall contain attributes for the stealth's linear velocity, location, and orientation, both at sample rate and instantaneous, as well as attributes for dead reckoning and vehicle marking.WarfareOrdnance Server capability requires the addition of a "launch" interaction containing identification information for the firing entity, the target, and the munition, as well as information specifying the location the munition was fired from and the target's location and range. Attributes shall be included that specify the missile's targeting method, initial velocity, and burst information which describes the munition type, warhead, fuse, quantity, and rate. The interaction shall also contain attributes containing event id and mission index information.Minefields require the addition of a "minefield" object containing attributes describing whether or not the field is active, minefield appearance, force identification, and vertex information detailing the minefield's boundaries. A "mines" object also needs to be created containing attributes specifying whether or not each mine is active, the location, orientation, temperature and depth of each mine, and the munition and fuze type. For mine clearing a "lane" object needs to specify the boundaries of the path cleared through the minefield. This object will contain attributes for the force identification of the force responsible for clearing the path, the width of the path, and the vertices of the centerline of clearing. Marker flags for the cleared lane need to be represented as "marker" objects containing attributes for guise information, force identification, and marker location.IFF requires the addition of an "iff" interaction containing attributes for the emitting identity's identification, the type and name of the IFF emitting system, mode information, the location of the emitting system relative to the entity, and operational data for the system. EnvironmentSupport for dynamic weather, terrain, and terrain objects requires the addition of "environmental" and "gridded_field" objects, as well as an "ecn" interaction which is used to inform federates of changes to the synthetic environment. The "environmental" object needs to contain attribute data for the environmental entity type, the model used to represent the entity, active or inactive status, and model-dependent data regarding state and geometry. The "gridded_field" object will contain attributes for grid size and orientation, the coordinate system used, and whether or not the grid axes are constant. Also included will be information specifying the type of environmental entity described, the updated environmental state, the number of environmental objects updated, the sample rate, and indexing information to keep track of multiple pieces of the update. The "ecn" interaction will include attributes for the ID of the federate requesting the change, the ID of the DT Scribe, the type of ECN, the data detailing the changes to the environment, and fragmentation and sequence information for large ECNs that have been broken into multiple packets.RationaleAs stated earlier, the RPR FOM will be used to transition currently existing DIS-based simulations to the HLA and is meant to be a baseline that can be either subsetted or extended to suit a particular federation's needs. Subsetting by its nature does not require any changes to the Reference FOM. Extension of the Reference FOM by federation designers, on the other hand, reduces the potential for reuse and interoperability with other simulations. (Shanks) To ensure interoperability when adding new capabilities requires changing the base Reference FOM itself.The technologies developed for the STOW program are mature and well tested, and include capabilities the designers of DIS proposed as additions to future versions of the DIS standard. The RPR FOM is intended to be based on the DIS standard, therefore, it makes sense to add those extra capabilities already present in the STOW 97 FOM to the RPR FOM. As the DoD has mandated the transition from DIS to HLA and the retirement of non-HLA based simulations, it furthermore makes sense to bypass adding these capabilities into the DIS standard itself, and instead insert them directly into the RPR FOM. This will allow other DIS-based simulations easy access to these new capabilities during their transition to HLA.The STOW 97 FOM already contains all of the functionality of the RPR FOM, so the question arises as to the reason for not replacing the RPR FOM with the STOW 97 FOM. Primarily, the STOW 97 FOM and the RPR FOM were created with different goals in mind. The STOW 97 FOM was created to fulfill the specific requirements of the STOW program for the STOW 97 ACTD and does not take advantage of HLA's object-oriented design principles. The RPR FOM, however, was created from the ground up using the HLA Object Model Template, ensuring that it follows the object-oriented design philosophy and rules of the HLA. In order to guarantee HLA-compliance to the simulations that will use the Reference FOM, this is the desirable choice.7. ConclusionThe STOW 97 ACTD achieved many advances in simulation technology that were proposed by the designers of DIS as future additions to the DIS standard. STOW 97 technologies such as advancements to Synthetic Natural Environment, minefield support, IFF, and Ordnance Server capability are mature and tested. As the DoD has mandated no further work on non-HLA simulations, the advances STOW has made should be integrated into the RPR FOM.References[1] Kaminski, USD(A&T) Memorandum “DoD High Level Architecture (HLA) for Simulations,” September 10, 1996[2] "IEEE Standard for Distributed Interactive Simulation - Application Protocols", IEEE Std. 1278.1-1995[3] Holcomb, J.: "Scientific and Technical Report, STOW Advanced Concept Technology (ACTD) Federation Object Model (FOM)"[4] Shanks, Graham: "The RPR FOM: A Reference Federation Object Model To Promote Simulation Interoperability"Author BiographiesJOSEPH BERKELEY is a Software Engineer with BMH Associates, Inc. in Norfolk, VA. He received his B.S. degree in Computer Science from Old Dominion University.PETE MULLER is a Senior Systems Engineer with ATI, Inc. He has twelve years of experience in Modeling and Simulation. His current position is the STOW-97 Technology Transition Director.