Conceptual Modeling in the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS)Steve RisnerKen Porter Science Applications International Corporation3045 Technology ParkwayOrlando, FL 32826-3299(407) 384-2909 x534, (407) 384-2909 x591 Steve_Risner@jsims.com, Ken_Porter@jsims.comLee LacyLarry O’Brien, Ph.D. Dynamics Research Corporation60 Frontage Rd.Andover, MA 01810(407) 380-1200, (508) 475-9090 x1221llacy@drc.com, lobrien@drc.comGary Kollmorgen BMH Associates, Inc.5425 Robin Hood Road, Suite 201Norfolk, VA 23513-2441(757) 857-5670kollmorg@bmh.comKeywords:  JSIMS; training; interoperability; reuse; standards; simulation; conceptual model; VV&AABSTRACT: This paper describes the collaborative effort of the Joint Conceptual Model of the Mission Space (JCMMS) Integrated Product Team (IPT) to provide authoritative descriptions of the mission space for subsequent development and representation in the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS). The JCMMS products:· Establish a base of mission space knowledge for developing JSIMS, · Support JSIMS Enterprise object-oriented analysis and design, and · Provide a basis for verification, validation, and accreditation (VV&A) of JSIMS  JSIMS is a simulation system that will support the twenty-first century Warfighter’s preparation for real world contingencies. The system will provide garrison and deployed exercise capability to meet current and emerging training and operational requirements in a timely and efficient manner. By interfacing to the Warfighter’s real “go to war ”systems, the view into the simulation world mirrors that of the real world.Simulation designers must have a clear understanding of the domain to be simulated in order to produce a model or simulation that is valid and sufficient for the intended purpose or use. The domain description must describe the multiple uses of JSIMS and must include a depiction of the entities, actions, tasks, and interactions that must be represented. The primary purpose of a conceptual model of the mission space (CMMS) is to provide that domain understanding. In addition, the CMMS facilitates simulation interoperability, reuse of simulation components, and operational validity among Department of Defense (DoD) simulation developments through the sharing of common, authoritative information.For the development of JSIMS, the mission space has been divided into areas of responsibility called "domains." JCMMS development domains are constituted by Service responsibilities, not geospatial boundaries. Associated with each domain is a JSIMS Executive Agent (EA) who is responsible for providing conceptual models of that domain.The JCMMS identifies and describes the entities of the mission space, their attributes, relationships, methods and processes, and interactions. It must be aligned with and bounded by JSIMS requirements. Because JSIMS development is based on mission space knowledge captured in the JCMMS, a requirement to represent a part of the mission space in JSIMS implies a corresponding requirement for the JCMMS to describe that part of the mission space. It follows that the JCMMS will describe all aspects of the mission space to be represented in JSIMS, including organizations, processes, information flow, and equipment /material.1. IntroductionThe value of a warfare simulation is directly related to the credibility of its representation of real-world military operations, equipment and systems, and environmental factors.[1] Simulation designers must have a clear  understanding of the domain to be simulated in order to produce a model or simulation that is valid and sufficient for the intended purpose or use. The domain description must be multi-dimensional and must include a depiction of the entities, actions, tasks, and interactions that must be represented. The primary purpose of a conceptual model of the mission space (CMMS) is to provide that understanding. In addition, the CMMS facilitates simulation interoperability, reuse of simulation components, and operational validity among Department of Defense (DoD) simulation developments through the sharing of common, authoritative information.Figure 1.  JSIMS Operational VisionThe following sections describe the enterprise-wide, collaborative effort of the Joint Conceptual Model of the Mission Space (JCMMS) Integrated Product Team (IPT ) to provide authoritative descriptions of the mission space for subsequent development and representation in the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS). (Note: The JSIMS Enterprise is a interdependent, collaborative effort of the JSIMS Partner Programs, including both government agencies and their contractors, operating as a single unified team.)2. BackgroundThe development of JSIMS must take into consideration the system to be developed, the simulation development process and initiatives, and successful approaches from previous efforts. 2.1 Joint Simulation System (JSIMS)JSIMS is being developed to provide an operationally valid, synthetic environment for the Commanders in Chief (CINCs), their components, other Joint organizations, and the Services to: Jointly train, educate, develop doctrine and tactics; Formulate and assess operational plans; Assess warfighting situations; Define operational requirements; and Provide operational input to the acquisition process.2.2 Simulation Development ProcessThe most important aspect of a successful, integrated simulation development process is producing models of the real world domain that are valid and sufficient for the intended purpose or use.  The simulation development process involves a transfer of knowledge about the real world to simulation designers and developers. As a part of this process, simulation developers begin by analyzing how civilian and military organizations and entities perform missions and tasks. They then select the parts of the real world to represent as well as the required level of resolution. Historically, this analysis has been performed by software developers without the continuous, active participation of authoritative, domain knowledgeable personnel, and has been repeated for each new model or simulation system developed.[2] Once a project has completed development, the carefully collected and organized real world knowledge is usually contained in software development documentation or buried deep within the computer code of the simulation. JSIMS planners and developers recognized that better methods were needed.2.3 Conceptual Model of the Mission Space (CMMS)The Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) developed a technique of capturing domain knowledge using a simulation implementation-neutral view of those organizations, entities, actions, tasks, and interactions that occur in the “real world”.[1] A CMMS remains simulation implementation-neutral by addressing the superset of entities, actions, and interactions that occur in any mission space, before the simulation developer makes any decisions to ignore, instantiate, or abstract these from the “real world” for the particular simulation development.Conceptual models are bridges between the Warfighter, who owns the combat process and serves as the authoritative source for validating CMMS content, and simulation developers. The conceptual models capture the basic information about the important organizations and entities and their key actions and interactions and serve as a reference for simulation development. Additionally, a CMMS provides a common viewpoint and serves as a vehicle for communications among Warfighters, doctrine developers, trainers, C4I developers and analysts. Such a foundation allows all concerned parties to be confident that DoD simulations are founded in solid, warfighting realism. Conceptual models serve as the means for capturing, sharing, and evolving this knowledge.Figure 2 depicts how the CMMS supports the simulation development process. For simplicity, the development process is depicted as a “one pass” waterfall activity. Iteration and feedback are critical components of the software development activity, but are not shown in this figure.2.4 Prior  Knowledge Acquisition EffortsIn the past, many simulations were developed without active participation by knowledgeable and authoritative military domain experts. This led to inaccuracies in the results of the simulations and required costly modifications to correct. JSIMS is leveraging the prior efforts of several related and partner programs including: the DMSO CMMS Prototype, Phase 1[3]; the WARSIM 2000 Training/Requirements Analysis Program (T/RAP)[4]; the US Army’s Functional Description of the Battlespace (FDB) [5]; the DMSO CMMS Technical Framework[1]; the DMSO VV&A Recommended Practices Guide  (RPG)[6]; the US Army’s Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT) program[7]; the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency's (DARPA) Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) program[8]; and the JSIMS Joint Program Office’s JCMMS prototype. These efforts were particularly useful during the early stages of the JCMMS planning and format development.The US Army’s Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT) program was one of the first to add “subject matter experts” (SMEs) to the simulation development team. Their purpose was to transfer their knowledge of the military domain using service approved information to the simulation developers by Combat Instruction Sets (CIS). The CIS contains both text and diagrams and are the authoritative source which describes processes, behaviors and interactions of organizations and equipment. The software developers used these to develop CCTT.  Prior to CCTT, the active participation by authoritative, domain experts was informal at best.3. ApproachThe JSIMS approach for conceptual modeling focuses on developing a complete and integrated JCMMS based on the content required to develop the simulation. The JCMMS serves as the basis for validation and is designed to support the needs of both validators and simulation developers.3.1 Joint Conceptual Model of the Mission SpaceThe Joint Conceptual Model of the Mission Space (JCMMS) provides authoritative descriptions of the Joint mission space for subsequent development and representation in JSIMS. In the terminology of the JSIMS Enterprise, these descriptions are called “conceptual models” of the mission space. This is consistent with Objective 1-2 of the Department of Defense (DoD) Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Master Plan, which states:“Develop a conceptual model of the mission space for each DoD mission area to provide a common basis for development of consistent and authoritative M&S representations.”For the development of JSIMS, the mission space has been divided into areas of responsibility called "domains." JCMMS development domains are constituted by Service responsibilities, not geospatial boundaries. Associated with each domain is a JSIMS Executive Agent (EA) who is responsible for providing conceptual models of that domain. For example, the US Army is the JSIMS EA for the Land domain. In practice, the JSIMS EAs typically delegate the conceptual modeling task to a JSIMS Development Agent (DA). The JCMMS products:Establish a base of mission space knowledge for developing JSIMS,Support JSIMS Enterprise object-oriented analysis and design, andProvide a basis for Verification, Validation and Accreditation of JSIMSJCMMS products must support the JSIMS Object-Oriented Process (JOOP) as depicted in Figure 3. This process has been tailored from an iterative software development process based on Use Cases[9]. Domain knowledge and expertise is required at various stages of the development process. During JOOP Phases 2-3, System Object Oriented Analysis, the JCMMS IPT supports the development of JSIMS Use Cases and Graphical User Interface sketches. This is done through conceptual models, if available, and via active participation and reviews of the JOOP products during their development by military domain experts. (Note: In the JOOP, a Use Case is a statement of functionality required of the software.)The complete and integrated conceptual models produced by the JCMMS IPT are formally available for use at JOOP Phases 5-6, Software Object Oriented Analysis. During this phase, the JCMMS IPT supports identification of classes and their interactions via conceptual models and reviews of the JOOP products, while during JOOP Phases 7-9, Software Object Oriented Design, most of the support provided is on an as-required, case-by-case basis to clarify information contained in the previously supplied conceptual models.3.2 JCMMS Content AnalysisThe JCMMS Integrated Product Team (IPT) based the determination of the required elements of a conceptual model and their subsequent format by focusing on the requirements of two types of users: (a) Warfighters who must validate the conceptual models and (b) JSIMS developers who will ultimately use them. This does not mean that the JCMMS IPT decides the content of a conceptual model, but rather determines the minimum characteristics/attributes that a conceptual model must contain in order to be consistent with other conceptual models developed by other conceptual model developers.The JCMMS identifies and describes the entities of the mission space, their attributes, relationships, methods and processes, and interactions. It must be aligned with, and bounded by, JSIMS requirements. Because JSIMS development is based on mission space knowledge captured in the JCMMS, a system requirement to represent a part of the mission space in JSIMS implies a corresponding requirement for the JCMMS to describe that part of the mission space. It follows that the JCMMS will describe all aspects of the mission space to be represented in JSIMS, including: Organizations - Permanent arrangements of equipment, personnel, and material into units designed to perform specified functions (e.g., aircraft carrier), or temporary arrangements of units organized for a specific operational mission (e.g., joint task force).Processes - Related activities and information items (e.g. orders, intelligence briefs) by which organizations (or elements thereof) accomplish a mission. Typically, these are based on Service doctrine and training standards (also known as Standard Operating Procedures, Tasks, or Behaviors). Most of the conceptual models developed for JSIMS will fall into this category; likewise most of the software development effort will also be devoted to simulating mission space processes.Equipment and Material - Physical characteristics and performance of unmanned, individual, and crew-served equipment as influenced by human operators, doctrine and the physical environment; characteristics and capabilities for all classes of supply and material.3.3 JCMMS as the Basis for Verification and Validation (V&V)One of the primary objectives of building the JCMMS is to ensure that JSIMS is an accurate representation of the real world. Therefore, the JCMMS IPT must produce validated representations as part of a verifiable development process, and the models produced must support the verification and validation of JSIMS representations of entities, behaviors, tasks and interactions. In this respect, the JSIMS Verification Validation and Accreditation (VV&A) Working Group may be viewed as a customer of the JCMMS. The conceptual models themselves are validated by the Services, Executive Agents, and by the Joint Warfighting Center (JWFC), through the VV&A Working Group. The JSIMS VV&A Plan, when approved, will define the validation of the JCMMS, and the role to be played by JCMMS in the overall JSIMS VV&A process.The JCMMS is authoritative because the conceptual models therein are:Based on authoritative sources designated by the JSIMS EAs, Validated by the JSIMS EAs in accordance with Service and/or Joint modeling and simulation policy, andDesignated by the JSIMS Enterprise Analysis and Integration Team (EAIT) as necessary to be represented in JSIMS.Figure 4 depicts how the conceptual models support the V&V of JSIMS via a two step V&V process. First, the conceptual models are validated against the “real world”.The second step involves verifying that the development of JSIMS is consistent with the descriptions contained in the JCMMS.3.4 Conceptual Model Format DesignIn deciding on the format to use for capturing the information that constitutes the conceptual models, the JCMMS IPT considered: flexibility of the approach; prior investments by the JSIMS Partner Programs; and the ability of Warfighters to understand the descriptions in order to validate them. The JCMMS Enterprise considered, but rejected, an Object Oriented (O-O) conceptual modeling approach. In this approach, the domain information would have been captured using an object oriented tool set (e.g. Rational Rose or SOMATiK). However, participants in the evaluation of this approach expressed concerns that domain knowledge acquisition personnel would have difficulty capturing the information in this way due to their lack of familiarity with both O-O methods and the tools considered. Additionally, Warfighters would have difficulty in understanding the products while reviewing them for accuracy.The format chosen was a text-based description referred to as a Formalized Data Product (FDP).  The term FDP is derived from the DMSO CMMS Technical Framework.[1] This framework defined formalized data as “structured text descriptions with supporting diagrams.” The JCMMS text-based approach was adapted from the conceptual modeling effort supporting the US Army’s WARSIM program.[5]One of the key concepts for producing an integrated JCMMS is the idea of Cross-DA (Developing Agent) Interactions (XDIs). An XDI is “an event or process through which a part of the mission space described or modeled by one DA affects a part of the mission space described or modeled by another DA.” Based on experience from legacy simulations, we observed that the many design and implementation problems occurred where one simulation module interacted with another. Most modules developed by a single development team were internally consistent, however problems were encountered when they attempted to interoperate with modules developed by others. The development of the JCMMS is being partitioned across various developers, making it crucial that Cross-DA interactions are complete and consistent.The JCMMS Standard Format for FDPs contains five document templates that are used to construct an FDP.  These templates are:FDP Meta-DataFDP Process DescriptionFDP Organization DescriptionFDP Information Item DescriptionFDP Communication Network DescriptionThe FDP Meta-Data template contains the identifying and administrative information for an FDP.  This information includes: the name and ID of the product, the preparer(s) name(s) and contact information, the security/classification information, the product history, requirements traceability, authoritative data sources, and V&V status.  The other four templates are used to describe key content areas of the mission space: —processes, organizations, information items, C4I networks; and the environment.The FDP Process Description is used to describe mission space processes, like those specified in the Universal Joint Task List (UJTL) and the Army Training and Evaluation Program (ARTEP) standards.The FDP Organization Description is used to describe a mission space organization such as a Joint Task Force Headquarters, a Surface Action Group, or an Air Wing.  The FDP Information Item Description is used to describe mission space information, such as an order, a reports or a plan.  The FDP C4I Network Description is used to describe a C4I network (e.g. GCCS, AFATDS) that connects mission space organizations.A single FDP consists of one meta-data document (instance of the FDP Meta-Data template), and one or more description documents (instances of the FDP description templates), in any combination of description types.The organization of an FDP is the author’s responsibility, but the FDP must meet the following constraints:The meta-data document and all its associated description documents must be contained in a single file that conforms to JSIMS documentation standards (currently Microsoft’s Word version 6.0 for text documents).The FDP meta-data document must identify all the descriptions that comprise the FDP.3.5 JCMMS Development ProcessThe JCMMS development process is documented in the JCMMS Development Plan (JDP). There are several inputs to the JCMMS development process as depicted in Figure 5. They are:JSIMS Breakout Analysis Spreadsheet (JBASS).  The JBASS is the planning tool used by JSIMS developers as guidance for what should be represented in JSIMS, and therefore described in the JCMMS. The JBASS provides a complete list of the units and equipment that must be included in the conceptual models, and a preliminary list of the required interactions. The JBASS also provides guidance on the level of detail at which each unit or type of equipment must be represented, and identifies the JSIMS EA or DA responsible for developing the conceptual model. The JBASS is sequenced by build and version.Figure 5.  JCMMS Development ProcessConceptual Modeling Standards.  Standards ensure that conceptual models developed by different authors are similar in form and use the same terminology. Standardization is necessary for an integrated JCMMS and promotes better understanding by all its users. Conceptual modeling standards include a Common Semantics and Syntax (CSS) and the FDP templates and are documented in the JCMMS JDP which is available at http://www.jsims.com/jcmms/products.html. Mission Space Knowledge.  This input is obtained from authoritative sources designated by the JSIMS EAs and may be in the form of written material (e.g. doctrinal publications, training documents, field manuals) or interviews with designated domain subject matter experts (SMEs).  In essence, the purpose of the JCMMS is to filter and organize this knowledge into a form suitable for JSIMS development. A key premise is that a conceptual model does not, and should not, contain descriptions of all processes and procedures that a unit/organization performs, but only those required by the JSIMS developers. Also note that all descriptions contained within a conceptual model need not be represented in code. In fact, many of the information items described for organizations will come from members of the primary exercise training audience or role players via real world C4I systems and not directly from the simulation.The work products of the JCMMS development process are:Formalized Data Products - These mission space descriptions are produced by members of the JCMMS IPT, and delivered to the JSIMS Integration and Development (I&D) Contractor for integration and storage in the JCMMS Repository.  The product standards are contained in the JCMMS Development Plan, Appendix A.List of Cross-DA Interactions - A list of the cross-DA interactions that are described by the JCMMS, based on knowledge acquisition performed during JCMMS development as depicted in Activity 1, Figure 5.  This list is maintained by the JCMMS IPT.The JCMMS Repository is part of the JSIMS Modeling and Simulation Resource Repository and leverages the efforts by the Army’s Functional Description of the Battlefield (FDB) [5]. It contains all of the authoritative descriptions used to develop JSIMS. In addition to the JCMMS developers, its primary users are the JSIMS simulation designers and developers. To learn more about the FDB or to request access go to http://fdb.orlando.veda.com:443/.JCMMS development is accomplished in coordination with both DMSO and the Joint Warfare Simulation (JWARS). In this regard the programs have agreed to work together to develop common scenarios (referred to as a focused context) and coordinate their information gathering to be used in the development of JSIMS and JWARS conceptual models. Information gathering involves literature searches (both paper and electronic) and meetings/interviews with military operations subject matter experts. The goal is to synchronize activities on an agreed-upon timeline/schedule to support the common information gathering effort, coordinate site visits and interviews so that multiple information gathering organizations can benefit from a single joint meeting with a specific set of mission space Subject Matter Expert’s whenever practical, and share and disseminate gathered information, both literature and SME interaction summaries.[10]4.  Observations and Lessons LearnedAs part of its continuous process improvement, the JCMMS IPT has made several discoveries and captured several lessons learned. Among these are: the need to develop a standard method to represent the environment; developing a better methodology for representing equipment-to-equipment interactions; the need to have a common understanding of what is meant by Cross-DA Interaction (XDI); and dealing with the fact that the JSIMS Partner Programs had separate and distinct contracts, schedules and implementation philosophies that needed to be reconciled.4.1 Programmatic ChallengesOne of the first challenges that faced the JCMMS IPT was the fact that the JSIMS Partner Programs had separate contracts, asynchronous schedules and very different implementation philosophies. These had to be reconciled before the JCMMS development could begin in earnest. The IPT had to “press on” with choosing a common development methodology and the subsequent JCMMS development concurrently with this reconciliation.4.2 Refining the JCMMS ApproachTo no one’s surprise, the JCMMS development process has required refinement. Among the areas that were/are being addressed include the need to develop a standard set of terms to describe environmental effects, developing a better methodology for representing equipment-to-equipment interactions,  and the need to have a common understanding of what is meant by Cross-DA Interaction.The JCMMS IPT has on-going efforts in all three of these areas. We are working with the JSIMS Enterprise AIT and the JSIMS Synthetic Natural Environment (SNE) Working IPT (WIPT, a permanent subgroup to an IPT) to clarify the system requirements for resolution and fidelity, which affects descriptions of the mission space and the representation of environmental effects. We also needed to define, quite explicitly, our meaning of XDI and precisely where they are documented within FDPs, since the interactions we are interested in highlighting are those that cross boundaries of development responsibility, but the real world has only domains.During our development of the JCMMS, we discovered a problem with our approach to representing equipment-to-equipment interactions. The original approach of representing interactions in the battlespace was the combination of the behaviors of two or more entities. For example, representing the “detection” of a tank by a infra-red satellite would involve behaviors and characteristics of both the satellite and the tank, which would return its signature (infra-red, radar, etc.). Unfortunately, this simple methodology had two fatal flaws. First, it did not scale to the volume of different XDIs that JSIMS must represent. As one can readily see from the example above, any entity that can “detect” would have to list every entity that it could “sense”. Not only did this cause a combinatoric explosion, but the addition of a new FDP would require revising all other affected FDPs, causing a continuous editing process.The IPT chose to address this problem through the creation of Interaction FDPs (I-FPDs). An I-FDP captures all relevant behavioral elements in one separate FDP. Using this methodology in the “detection” example described above, the infra-red satellite would “point” to a Detection FDP. In effect, the I-FDP would act as a conduit of information between FDPs. Use of this technique solves the scaleability problem since all “sensors” and all entities that could be “sensed” would only have to point to the Detection I-FDP. This also allows the addition of new entities without rework of existing FDPs.5. SummaryJSIMS is a simulation system that will support the twenty-first century Warfighter’s preparation for real world contingencies. The system will provide garrison and deployed exercise capability to meet current and emerging training and operational requirements in a timely and efficient manner. By interfacing to the Warfighter’s real go to war systems, the view into the simulation world mirrors that of the real world.The JCMMS is a cooperative, enterprise-wide collaborative effort of the Joint Conceptual Model of the Mission Space (JCMMS) IPT to provide authoritative descriptions of the Joint mission space for subsequent development and representation in the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS). The JCMMS products:Establish a base of mission space knowledge for developing JSIMS, Support JSIMS Enterprise object-oriented analysis and design, and Provide a basis for Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) of JSIMS JCMMS identifies and describes the entities of the mission space, their attributes, relationships, methods and processes, and interactions, it must be aligned with, and bounded by, JSIMS requirements.One of the primary objectives of building the JCMMS is to ensure that JSIMS is an accurate representation of the real world.  Therefore, the conceptual models produced must support the verification and validation of JSIMS representations of entities, behaviors and interactions. The JCMMS is authoritative because the conceptual models therein are:Based on authoritative sources designated by the JSIMS EAs, Validated by the JSIMS EAs in accordance with Service and/or Joint modeling and simulation policy, andDesignated by the JSIMS EAIT as necessary to be represented in JSIMS.In deciding which format to use for the JCMMS, the JCMMS IPT considered such variables as: flexibility of the approach; prior investments by the JSIMS Partner Programs; and the ability of Warfighters to understand the descriptions in order to validate them. The format chosen was a text-based description referred to as Formalized Data Products (FDPs).One of the key concepts for producing an integrated JCMMS is the idea of Cross-DA Interactions (XDIs). Since the development of the JCMMS is being partitioned among multiple EA/DAs, it's crucial that Cross-DA interactions are coordinated and consistent.The JCMMS Standard Format for FDPs contains five document templates, in Microsoft Word 6.0 format, that are used to construct an FDP.  These templates are:FDP Meta-DataFDP Process DescriptionFDP Organization DescriptionFDP Information Item DescriptionFDP Communication Network DescriptionThe work products of the JCMMS development process are:Formalized Data Products - These mission space descriptions are produced by members of the JCMMS IPT, and delivered to the JSIMS Integration and Development (I&D) Contractor for integration and storage in the JCMMS Repository.A list of the cross-DA interactions that are described by the JCMMS, based on knowledge acquisition performed during JCMMS development. This list is maintained by the JCMMS IPT.The JCMMS Repository is part of the JSIMS Modeling and Simulation Resource Repository and leverages the efforts by the Army’s Functional Description of the Battlefield (FDB) [5]. It contains all of the authoritative descriptions used to develop JSIMS. In addition to the JCMMS developers, its primary users are the JSIMS simulation designers and developers. 6. References [1]	Sheehan, Jack; et al: “CMMS: Basic Concepts, Advanced Techniques, and Pragmatic Examples”, (Paper 98S-SIW-127), Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 9-13, 1998. [2]	Lacy, Lee and Dr. Larry O’Brien: "Conceptual Modeling for WARSIM 2000", Proceedings of the Interservice/Industry Training Systems and Education Conference, (I/ITSEC '97), Orlando, Florida, December 1-4, 1997. [3]	Tuttle, Cynthia ; Lee Lacy; et al: “Conceptual Models of the Mission Space Prototype”, Proceedings of the 1997 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 3-7, 1997.[4]	French, Daniel; et al.: “The U.S. Army's Training-Requirements Analysis Program (T-RAP)”, (Paper 98S-SIW-126), Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 9-13, 1998.[5]	Pettitt, Brian; Rhinesmith, Frank; and Milks, Wes: “The Functional Description of the Battlespace”, (Paper 97S-SIW-075), Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 3-7, 1997. [6]	DoD Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) Recommended Practices Guide (RPG), November 1996, DMSO home page, http://www.dmso.mil/docslib/mspolicy/vva/rpg/, RPG POC: pglasow@msis.dmso.mil.[7]	Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT), Mike Edwards, Project Director, edwardsa@stricom.army.mil, http://www.stricom.army.mil/STRICOM/PM-CATT/cctt.html[8] Fledman, CDR Peggy, et al: “Synthetic Forces Lessons Learned from the STOW 97 ACTD”, (Paper 98S-SIW-092), Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 9-13, 1998.[9] Dougherty Francis L., et al: “JWARS contribution to the DoD Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS)”, (Paper 98S-SIW-137), Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 9-13, 1998.[10] Texel, Putnam and Williams, Charles: Use Cases Combined with Booch/OMT/UML: Process and Products, Prentice Hall, Inc., 1997.Author BiographiesSTEVE RISNER is a Senior Systems Analyst with SAIC and is currently the JSIMS JCMMS IPT Lead. He has over 10 years experience in command and control of military operations and 10 years in the development and use of simulations to support battlestaff training at the Warrior Preparation Center (WPC), USAF Battlestaff Training School (BTS), and HQ USAF Modeling and Simulation Directorate. He was a command pilot with over 2,500 flying hours in the F-4, F-5 and F-111 including combat experience in Desert Storm.LEE LACY is the Director of Orlando Operations for DRC.  Lee supported the definition of the DIS EMF recommended practices.  He has supported the development of many simulation systems over the last ten years including the T-45TS, SPA-25G Embedded Training System, Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT), and WARSIM 2000.Dr. LARRY O’BRIEN has Dr. Lawrence O'Brien has over 20 years experience in human factors engineering and system engineering. He is currently head of group of over 40 analysts which are providing knowledge acquisition and simulation support service to DoD programs. He is project manager for DRC's knowledge acquisition efforts on NASM program and DRC project to build a Knowledge Acquisition Tool (KAT) for DMSO. GARY KOLLMORGEN is a Senior System Engineer at BMH Associates, Inc.  He is the Lead Modeler for JSIMS-Maritime, the Navy component of JSIMS.  Gary has been involved with knowledge acquisition and verification, validation, and accreditation for the DARPA STOW project and JSIMS-Maritime for the past two years.  He has over 20 years Naval Aviation experience and 10 years working with models and simulations in the military domain.KEN PORTER is a Senior Systems Engineer at SAIC.  His current responsibilities include process improvement for the JCMMS IPT.  Ken previously contributed to the WARSIM 2000 program in the area of military unit behaviors, and was Principal Investigator for research in artificial intelligence applications to cognitive modeling of command and control.  He has over 15 years experience developing large-scale information systems, AI and real-time software, and computer hardware.