JTT SIMULATION USING AN HLA APPROACHAUTHOR(s):   Michael Semenoro, Alan Hansen, Richard Martino, and Kenneth SullivanABSTRACT:This paper addresses a Command, Control, Communications, Computer, and Intelligence (C4I) simulation currently under development using simulation standards leading toward High Level Architecture (HLA) compliance.  The Joint Tactical Terminal (JTT) simulation model is an ongoing effort that will test C4I standards during simulation support exercises with the Common Ground Station (CGS).  Further analysis of this simulation will allow examination of data transfer and verify Run Time Interface (RTI) standards for C4I.The JTT and the Commander's Tactical Terminal (CTT) both receive and disseminate C4I, and battlefield targeting time-sensitive information to tactical commanders and intelligence nodes.  These terminals allow Army, Air Force, Navy and Marine Corps users to exploit Integrated Broadcast Service (IBS) networks: Tactical Reconnaissance Intelligence eXchange Service (TRIXS), Tactical Information Broadcast Service (TIBS), Tactical Related Applications (TRAP), and Tactical Data Information eXchange System-B (TADIXS-B).  In addition to receiving intelligence data, JTT and CTT transmit TRIXS or TIBS data.Development of a JTT simulation in supporting collection and dissemination of C4I messages using the US Army Common Ground Station (CGS) system is the latest Pre-Planed Product Improvement proposal.  Simulated Signal Intelligence (SIGINT) sensors such as Rivet Joint and Guardrail Common Sensor will provide intelligence data messages.  The intelligence data will be “wrapped” into Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) Protocol Data Unit (PDU) and Command Control Simulation Interface Language (CCSIL) messages.  These messages are then reformatted into Tactical C4I system messages during CGS training exercises.  A planned feature is that the CGS operator will not be able to discern between live and simulated data.  This capability allows for full operational use of the JTT by the CGS operator during training exercises.This interactive exchange of messages currently employs the Distributive Interactive Simulation (DIS) standards.  High Level Architecture compliance will be the next step after successfully verifying interactive message exchanges.  This paper specifically addresses simulation interoperability standards that will expedite HLA compliance.  Further, distributed simulations for all new systems used in Advanced Warfighter Experiments (AWEs) and other simulation experiments are required to support and interface with the Joint SIMulation Systems (JSIMS) environment.KEYWORDS:    C4ISR Interoperability Standards, JTT, CTT, Simulation, Common Ground Station (CGS), Joint STARS, SIGINT, HLA1.  INTRODUCTIONA Command, Control, Communications, Computer, and Intelligence (C4I) simulation is under development and addresses the simulation standards leading to High Level Architecture (HLA) compliance.  The ongoing effort will test C4I standards and examine data transfer using the Run Time Interface (RTI).  Technology developed by the US Army Space and Missile Defense Command will be able to bridge Distributive Interactive Simulation (DIS) compliant simulations into current Tactical C4I systems.  This capability will enable the Joint Tactical Terminal (JTT) to either receive C4I information from simulators or live data.  This simulation effort will support military personnel with the ability to train and operate the JTT within the Common Ground Station (CGS). 2.  JTT/CGS SYSTEMSThe JTT is a dissemination terminal that provides critical intelligence data to warfighters.  The JTT allows users to exploit the current Integrated Broadcast Service (IBS) intelligence networks: Tactical Reconnaissance Intelligence eXchange System (TRIXS), Tactical Information Broadcast Service (TIBS), Tactical Related Applications (TRAP) Data Dissemination System (TDDS), and Tactical Data Information eXchange System-B (TADIXS-B).  In addition, the terminal will support the evolving IBS broadcast architecture, including changes to message formats transmission protocols, and use of different portions of the RF spectrum.  The terminal also supports Demand Assigned Multiple Access (DAMA) in SATCOM channels and General Purpose Links (GPL) in both Line-Of Sight (LOS) and SATCOM modes.The JTT comes in multiple terminal configurations that will meet various user requirements.  The Common Integrated Broadcast Service-Modules (CIBS-M) consists of hardware and software modules that will directly integrate into current and future C4I systems to provide IBS functionality. The JTT is an integral part of the CGS system.  The signal intelligence data coming from the JTT will make the CGS’s training mission realistic.  This will occur by providing additional information in conjunction to the standard near real time Joint STARS sensor data to the CGS operator.  The CGS program provides a system platform to develop the JTT simulation effort through use of Pre-Planned Product Improvements supports acquisition.  The CGS currently supports a DIS compliant simulation interface that imbeds the JTT simulation effort.  This integration effort will become an integral part of the CGS Trainer and participate in JSIMS exercises.Message FormatsThe following message formats are necessary to translate the simulation data to tactical protocols: TRIXS; TIBS; TRAP and TADIXS-B.The TRIXS network provides the data structure and direct dedicated links to disseminate critical, time sensitive tactical SIGINT reconnaissance, intelligence, and surveillance information to battlefield commanders.  TRIXS currently uses UHF line-of sight to broadcast data from Guardrail aircraft.  This high accuracy targeting data is available to multi-service/Joint Command, Control, and Intelligence (C2I) users.  The data or signal packet consists of a header and packet body.Each header will synchronize and identify each packet with a unique word and a Bose-Chauduri-Hocquenghem (BCH) word.  The data packet body includes three parts: message header; address header; and data.  Each part has a separate checksum.  The separate data packets are 8-bit ASCII message with a maximum length of 2000 characters or a Tactical Digital Information Link (TADIL)-J format message.  Standard character messages use USMTF (compliant to MIL-STD-6040) and include the tactical report (TACREP), tactical electronic intelligence (TACELINT) report, and technical report (TECHREP).TIBS is a theater broadcast/network that disseminates tactical information with a binary data format.  Joint operational users are able to retrieve this time sensitive data through UHF broadcasts from aircraft or Department of Defense satellites in geo-synchronous orbit.  Users include National, Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, and Special Operational tactical and intelligence units.In each slot, the TIBS message consists of a header and body.Each header will consist of a Modem Preamble, unique word, and a BCH message type.   The Modem Preamble provides carrier and clock references that permits acquisition of the message and resolution of its phase ambiguities.The message body consists of encrypted encoded interleave blocks of data.  The data is a string of digital data following a checksum.  Spare bits allow direct mapping to integral multiples of interleave block size.  The length of the messages can vary to six different types.  This encoding consists of initial words listing the data fields.TRAP and TADIXS-B are worldwide broadcast systems providing global direction and cueing in a binary TADIXS-B data format.The TRAP waveform is a continuous data stream with no recognizable message boundaries or identifiers.  The data format has synchronize words within a data stream.  Each word will have a data checksum following it.  Data transmission can be redundant by up to three synchronize messages.  The TRAP system will collect and then disseminate multiple messages through UFH satellite communications (SATCOM) broadcasts.  The tactical users are from the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps.TADIXS-B signals are broadcast over one four fixed frequency channels.  The waveform is a continuous data stream with no recognizable message boundaries or identifiers.  The data format has synchronize words within a data stream.  Each word will have a data checksum following it.  Data transmission can be redundant by up to three synchronize messages. This information is primarily for commanders to supportIndications and Warning (I&W) surveillance sensor, targeting nomination and weaponeering battle execution and battle damage assessment (BDA).CGSMotorola has developed the Common Ground Station (CGS) under the direction of the PM Joint STARS Program within the U.S. Army Communications-Electronics Command (CECOM) Intelligence and Information Warfare Directorate (I2WD).  The CGS is the next-generation Ground Station Module (GSM) that features multi-sensor reception, processing and display capabilities and disseminates intelligence and target data to C4I nodes for purposes of surveillance and target attack.  The CGS system receives data that includes Moving Target Indicator (MTI), Fixed Target Indicator (FTI) and Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) from the E-8 sensor aircraft.  In addition, the CGS transmits Radar Service Requests (RSRs) to the Joint STARS aircraft.  The CGS is capable of receiving Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) imagery (both telemetry and video), Signal Intelligence (SIGINT) data via the Joint Tactical Terminal (JTT).   The Apache Long Bow, ARL, Ground Based Common Sensor, U2-R EMTI and Predator UAV are additional sources for sensor data.  The CGS data processing tools are available to allow for exploitation of radar detection data, imagery and SIGINT and the development of tailored targeting and intelligence products.  Some products include the accumulation of the MTI, imagery and SIGINT data into a database.  The display of the multiple data sources along with replay by time integration and time compression, software assisted target track creation and prediction, digital map and image processing, and emitter location with uncertainty ellipses.  The All-Source Analysis System (ASAS), Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data System (AFATDS), and Maneuver Control System (MCS) will receive targeting and intelligence products.  Figure 1 depicts the current CGS sensor interfaces.  The CGS consists of a configured hardware and software system that is comprised of two Sun SPARC Ultra Workstations and applications support software on a local area network (LAN) with distributed databases to support geographically remote deployments.Figure 1.	Current CGS Sensor InterfacesBuilding upon the modular, open client/server architecture of the CGS, Motorola has developed convenient hooks or Application Programmers Interfaces (APIs) for database, simulation and peripheral software engines.  Included within their API inventory is a real-time, IEEE DIS interface.  The CGS is currently interoperable with DIS based simulation systems to send and receive entity level data.  This was accomplished by integrating a Network Interface Unit (NIU) into the CGS Architecture.  The NIU manages the receipt and transmission of simulation data using the DIS protocols.  The NIU filters data, maintains an entity table, calculates updates to entity position and velocity using dead reckoning algorithms, and stores the data in shared memory with the simulation application.  The current NIU will be replaced with a new NIU developed through a PM Joint STARS sponsored Pre-Planned Product Improvement (P3I) for the CGS system.  This version has one API that is both DIS compliant and interoperable with the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) High Level Architecture (HLA) Run-Time Infrastructure (RTI).E-8 Roles, Mission and TaskingJoint STARS utilizes surveillance, attack support, command and control, and intelligence support capabilities to enhance the mobility, lethality, survivability, and accuracy of air and land combat forces.  Joint STARS is instrumental in developing an understanding of the enemy situation; and contributes to plans to delay, disrupt, and destroy the momentum of the enemy force.  These plans are based on the Joint Force Commander’s (JFC) overall objectives, the Joint Force Land Component Commander’s (JFLCC) scheme of maneuver, and the Joint Force Air Component Commander’s air campaign guidance (JFACC).The JFACC determines the number of Joint STARS aircraft and orbits needed to provide the required coverage.  In support of the JFC’s guidance and campaign objectives, the JFLCC allocates the corps commanders or units to be supported and for how long.  During mission execution, the corps commanders or units being supported request changes in coverage area, times, or radar parameters; they coordinate these changes by direct communication with the E-8 mission crew.The Air Tasking Orders (ATO) is the means by which the Joint STARS E-8 aircraft is normally tasked.  The ATO lists all the call-signs, radio frequencies, units to be supported, orbits, direct attack aircraft (DAA) with preplanned targets to be updated by Joint STARS, Wide Area Search (WAS) radar area of coverage, take-off time, and mission duration.  The ATO is issued in sufficient time for the aircrew and supporting elements to plan their missions and covers a specific period (normally 24 hours). 3.  C4ISR SIMULATION INTEROPERABILITY STANDARDSThrough analysis of the CTT/JTT simulation interface to the Common Ground Station, it is apparent that a communications simulation interoperability standard can be useful in ongoing development efforts.  The apparent lynchpin for simulation as well as external systems is the entity of the communications packet.  Analysis has indicated the following relevant characteristics and components:Physical Connectivity:A physical connection must be made (e.g. network connectivity) and will be the responsibility of the external system owner.  The most economical method of connectivity is to existing real-world networks.  This places the responsibility on the simulation to inject data into the real world network while placing no requirements on the external system.  In doing so, this exercises the connectivity of the external system, as it is in actual non-simulation operations.Data Connectivity:External systems are able to receive and transmit data in standard formats (e.g. US Message Text Format (USMTF), Distributive Interactive Simulation (DIS), Variable Message Format (VMF), and database).  The simulation must be able to receive and transmit these standard formats.  Text messages are a simple example and have many standards by service, etc.  Databases are more of a challenge to synchronize.  Since databases are “pulled” instead of “pushed” down a line to a specific destination.  A need may exist to perform complex operations such as rollback.  Databases may also represent real-world data sets that cannot be corrupted.In order for a communications simulation, such as JTT to work, each of the communicating systems must deliver and receive communication packets in a format and protocol they mutually understand.  These packets moreover must be coherent and continuously synchronized if data is to flow seamlessly across both the simulation and the real-world communications systems.  Simulators must be able to receive and deliver data across communication interfaces without disrupting real world systems.Additionally, with all the communication systems involved with JTT, any interoperability standard also needs to address the environmental impacts on communications.  Particular examples include communication distances, weather, jamming/ electromagnetic interference, and information warfare activities may exist is the simulation domain only.  As the integrated JTT simulation supports live system training, the communications packets, must “suffer” all the impacts to throughput that can be computed in the simulation and deliver to the real world systems the “impaired” and “impeded” results.  The standards that exist for a communication packet must be cognizant of “cumulative impacts” on the packets.  This will affect the transmission of packets through successive channels and media.With these basic requirements in mind, we would suggest that a communication packet Federation Object Module (FOM) be developed which would become the interoperability standard for simulations.  This FOM would take advantage of avatars or ghosts in the simulation to represent activities on going in the real-world communications activity.  The FOM would recognize single and cumulative environmental impacts on packet activity, and contain mechanisms for protocol/ format translation, synchronization, and coherency.  The end objective and rationale for development of this standard would be the seamless interoperability of actual world communications systems with distributed simulations.  The trainer in figure 2 uses existing hardware that can either interface with simulators or live data.Figure 2.	Complex Simulated EnvironmentThere is preliminary work ongoing in this area by the Joint SIMulation Systems (JSIMS) program, which might serve as a model for the development aspects of the communications packet standard.  As an interoperable training simulation program, representatives from the various Service Development Agents for JSIMS have met to develop the Joint Conceptual Model of the Mission Space (JCMMS) to guide object model development and software design.  These efforts have resulted in the adoption of Formalized Data Products (FDPs) which are somewhat similar to the DIS protocols, in that they document real world equipment characteristics involved in real-world interactions.  FDPs describe in detail objects, entities, organizations, communication senders/ receivers, and processes.  Once the conceptual modeling and FDPs are complete, a Resolution and Battlespace Interaction Tiger Team (RABITT) then develops the system level design for battle-space mission space interactions and documents the implementation decisions.  The C4I Representation and Architecture Working Group (CRAWG) then attempts to tie all of this together by performing analysis on the use of various C4I and simulation mixes to achieve successful training.We believe that the communications packet is probably the best standard for a communications interoperability standard, and urge the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization to begin its development immediately.4.  JTT/CGS SIMULATIONThe current plan is to use Commercial Off The Shelf (COTS) and Government Off The Shelf (GOTS) technologies to send simulation data to the CGS via the Commanders’ Tactical Terminal-3 channel (CTT3) and eventually the JTT.  This effort will use the CGS as a complete system for training.  Simulation requirements for FY 98 will focus on enhancing CGS training features and demonstrating the interfacing of the Tactical Simulation Interface Unit (TSIU) to the CTT3/JTT.The TSIU is a GOTS technology from the US Army Space and Missile Defense Command (USASMDC), Space and Missile Defense Battle Lab, in Huntsville, Alabama.  The TSIU allows for two-way communications between live tactical systems and simulation elements in a synthetic battlefield environment.  This two-way transmittable capability exists between the DIS Network and the Tactical Systems.  Through the DIS network, the TSIU uses pseudo and Command Control Simulation Integration Language (CCSIL) messages to communicate with DIS Simulators.  Figure 3 shows the TSIU architecture, data flow and systems currently supported.  The tactical systems receive data transmissions in a variety of tactical protocols.  These protocols include messages such as USMTF, TIBS, TRAP, TDDS, Forward Area Air Defense (FAAD) Data Link (FDL), VMF, TADIL-B/A, and Surveillance & Control Data Link (SCDL)-Variant via serial and Local Area Network (LAN) ports.  This technology can be HLA compliant by using the VR-Link upgrade from MAK Technology.  This upgrade will take 3 months to implement.  USASMDC is planning to prioritize HLA compliance within the first quarter of FY 99.Figure 3.	TSIU ArchitectureThe TSIU consists of a Sun Ultra Computer and associate software packages.  USASMDC has an ongoing schedule to implement TSIU version updates up to FY 04.  The goals for FY 98 will be to emulate TRIXS as a C4I Tactical protocol and add CGS as a tactical system to the TSIU.  Further, the integration of a Semi-Automated Forces (SAFOR) generator into the TSIU is planned.  The SAFOR generator known as the Integrated Target Environment Scenario Tool (ITEST) and is a DIS simulator that generates large numbers of simulated entity targets.  Aggregate entity counts on the order of several thousand per scan are required to represent the MTI environment a Joint STARS system covers.  This system is currently incorporated into the CGS Training systems.Implementation - The interface of simulation data to the CGS will occur in a two step approach.The first step is to connect the TSIU to the CGS.  This can verify the reformatting ability of the TSIU to generate tactical data messages from existing simulators.  In addition, interactive simulation between the simulator and operator will test the TSIU bridging feature.  Figure 4 depicts the architecture for phase 1.Figure 4.	Phase I Implementation The second phase  (in figure 5) will include the addition of the Multi-Arena Remote Simulator (MARS) to radiate RF signals from the TSIU to the CTT3/JTT located within the CGS.  This will replicate the data sources received by the CTT/JTT.  The CGS operator will have the capability to set the CTT/JTT filters and select specific simulator network transmissions.Figure 5.	Phase II ImplementationThe above steps will provide a feasible and practical methodology for the implementation and verification of current C4I standards.4.  CONCLUSIONA host system that integrates the JTT/CTT3 can reduce simulation costs by incorporating this technology.  The CGS system is providing the P3I funding to develop and start this training effort.  Other systems can tailor this technology to meet their specific goals.This simulation effort will test C4I standards that will expedite HLA compliance.  The various Intelligence networks and message formats that this simulation will utilize, affects users from all branches of DOD.   Allowing proficient use of simulation exercises in Advanced War-fighter Experiments (AWE) and other experiments leading to support and interface with the JSIMS environment.The conversion of this technology to HLA compliance will ensure the full capability currently under development within the DIS paradigm.  This will be useful for future interoperable simulations.The adoption of a C4ISR Simulation Interoperability Standard based on the communication packet will go a long way toward conversion, expediting and promoting Simulation Interoperability.References1.  “Operational Requirements Document For The Joint Tactical and Common Integrated Broadcast Service Modules”, 13 September 19962.  “System Specification For the JTT/CIBS-M”, Raytheon E-Systems Reference No. DAAB07-96-R-S998, 19 September 19973.  “Multi-Arena Remote Simulator Translator Operator’s Manual”, Raytheon Systems Company TM 55-00034-004, January 15, 19984.  “Tactical Simulation Interface Unit Briefing”, Mr. Dan Fugit from CRC, Thermo Information Solutions, Inc., 5 March 19985.  “Commanders’ Tactical Terminal System Description”, Project Manager Electronic Warfare/Reconnaissance, Surveillance and Target Acquisition Fort Monmouth, N.J., 20 November 19926.  “Joint STARS in STOW”, Spring 98 SISO SIW Paper #  98S-SIW-122, March 1998Author’s BiographiesMichael Semenoro is an Electronics Engineer working for the US Army Communication Electronics Command Intelligence, Information Warfare Directorate at Fort Monmouth, New Jersey.  Currently working in the Modeling & Simulation field since Nov. 97 to support PM JSTARS JTT/CGS systems.  Mr. Semenoro’s background encompasses project management and hands-on technical experience with avionics communication, phototypesetter, industrial control, entertainment, meteorological, and counter narcotic systems.  He has a Master of Science Degree in Electrical Engineering with a minor in computers from Fairleigh Dickinson University, Teaneck, New Jersey.  His Bachelor of Science Degree in Electronics Engineering is from New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, New Jersey.Richard J. Martino is currently a Project Engineer for the US Army Intelligence and Information Warfare Directorate located in Fort Monmouth, NJ.  Mr. Martino has over 20 years experience on military INTEL systems.  Since 1993 has worked on Distributed Interactive Simulation systems and techniques for a variety of projects.  His current assignment centers on providing technical support for the Joint STARS Common Ground Station system and trainer.Mr. Martino graduated from Pratt Institute with a Bachelor in Electrical Engineering (72).  In addition, he graduated from Fairleigh Dickinson University with a Masters Computer Science (79) and Masters in Management Science (83).Alan S. Hansen is Chief of the Processing and Dissemination Branch for the US Army Intelligence and Information Warfare Directorate located in Fort Monmouth, NJKen Sullivan is a Simulation Systems Engineer for MRJ Technology Solutions in Orlando, Florida.  Currently working on the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) Program in requirement analysis, system testing, and security engineering.  He has worked in the simulation field supporting C4ISR since 1978.  He has a Master of Science degree in Engineering Management.Acknowledgement for editing this paper goes to Mr. Kamman Lok (PM JOINT STARS), Mr. Michael Karpie (PM JOINT STARS), Mr. Donald Carver (USASMDC), and Mr. Daniel Fugit (Coleman Research Corporation).Special Acknowledgement for writing and editing C4I Standards portion of the paper goes to Mr. Bryn Marelli (MRJ Technology Solutions). EMBED Word.Picture.8  