Data Lessons Learned from DLA's ICIS Program 12/97John Gunshenanjpg@bbn.com617-873-2760 Ann Haltemanahaltema@bbn.com617-873-2761Robin Hughesrhughes@bbn.com617-873-4282 Geoffrey Knauthgknauth@bbn.com617-873-5257 Gary Kratkiewiczkratkiew@bbn.com617-873-2476Harold Perryhperry@bbn.com617-873-3622 Mike Walczakmwalczak@bbn.com617-873-2007Keywords: Data, Lessons Learned, ICIS, DLAABSTRACT:DLA's Integrated Consumable Item Support (ICIS) program assembles failure and consumption rate data from over 40 systems from all services and DLA.  ICIS projects demand based on Time Phased Consumer Densities, often drawn from one or more TPFDDs.  ICIS models sourcing that demand against current inventory and industrial capacity, and assesses DLA's ability to meet projected demand.This paper summarizes the state of the ICIS data.  It briefly describes the process the ICIS program uses to acquire and manage data, and lessons learned over the past 5 years of researching this data.1. OverviewThe Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) developed the Integrated Consumable Item Support (ICIS) Model to assess DLA’s ability to support execution of OPLANs, to identify problem items in advance, and to help DLA make intelligent procurement decisions.ICIS is intended to support operations, exercises, assessments, and procurement decisions.  ICIS operates on classified TPFDDs, using classified failure and consumption rate data.  DLA has an unclassified ICIS system for development, testing, and support of unclassified exercises and briefs.  The unclassified data used for ICIS testing has some flaws, but it is generally representative of the classified data.The results of a full ICIS assessment can easily consume 9 Gigabytes of disk space, covering over 100,000 DLA-managed NSNs over a 270-day scenario.  At least 50,000 of those NSNs would be spare parts identified by the Services as critical.An ICIS assessment starts with Time Phased Consumer Densities, often extracted from one or more TPFDDs.  Consumers include personnel, weapon systems, vehicles, generators, radios, etc. etc.  In order to project demand for material, ICIS bounces these consumer densities against failure and consumption rate data from the Services.  ICIS then sources this projected demand against DLA Inventory and Industrial Capacity.  ICIS produces demand fill projections, and a variety of metrics of interest to the logistics community.ICIS input data includes many hundreds of data files from well over 40 different DoD systems from all services and DLA.  Some of these data files are available over the net.  Others arrive via various tape formats, floppy disks, and e-mail.  Different files are refreshed at different rates, including daily, weekly, quarterly, and annually.  Fully half of the effort invested in ICIS has gone into finding acquiring, and understanding the best available data to support ICIS assessments.  The other half of the effort has gone into the ICIS software itself.  While ICIS operates on the best available data, that data has lots of holes.  The ICIS team works with the Services to identify holes and to encourage the data sources to fill those holes where possible.  As ICIS receives wider exposure, other programs have stepped forward to provide new and better data to the ICIS program.  We expect this process to continue as the ICIS program matures.Detailed ICIS Program and System Documentation lives on the web at www.icis.hq.dla.mil.  This paper provides a brief overview of some ICIS data issues of interest to the SIW community.  Mr. Calvin Smith, DLA CAIW, manages the ICIS program.  Government Program Managers interested in ICIS can reach Mr. Smith at 703-767-5251, calvin_smith@hq.dla.mil.  Mr. Smith is always interested in discussing integration and interoperation with other programs that can help improve the operational utility of the ICIS program.  ICIS briefings can be arranged through Mr. Smith.2. Time Phased Consumer Density (TPCD)The preparation of time-phased consumer density data from a TPFDD for use with ICIS typically begins by loading a JOPES B8 file into Oracle.  Specialized SQL queries are then applied to extract relevant data into separate ASCII files for different services and classes. We are continually developing new support for new classes of supply.These files are then "cleaned" by removing spurious records, refining certain values and sorting on appropriate fields to improve subsequent use.  Examples of some of these steps are:  - removing records that are comments or blank - deriving consistent MDS values for Air Force data- replacing obsolete Army LINs with suitable    replacements- sorting Army data by NSN and DEST_RDDAs an example of the scale of the extracted data consider the test "1002X_LFX Southwest Asia" TPFDD. The original B8 file (5,714,786 bytes; 36,860 records) was enhanced with TGS (TPFDD Generation System: replaces "exercise" data with "real world" values. It also fleshes out level 4 cargo detail records for Army units using REQVAL). The resultant file grew to 22,256,508 bytes;  263,460 records.  The extracted and cleaned time-phased consumer density files had the following profiles:Table 2.1: Class 1 (subsistence)All Services:13,266 bytes430 records for a total of 512,690 personnelTable 2.2: Class 2 (clothing)Army:134,521 bytes2,243 records for 2,231 different unitsTable 2.3: Class 3 (bulk fuel)Army:4,031,496 bytes36,650 records for 2,725 different NSNsAir Force:12,545 bytes121 records for    29 different MDS valuesUSMC Ground:1,142,260 bytes13,930 records for 3,532 different weapon systemsUSMC Air:2,786 bytes24 records for    14 different MDS valuesNavy Air:2,786 bytes24 records for    14 different MDS valuesNavy Surface:4,093 bytes47 records for    47 different unit namesTable 2.4: Class 4 (construction)Navy:102 bytes6 records for     2 different battalionsTable 2.5: Class 9 (repair parts)Army:130,842 bytes2,073 records for   443 different NSNsAir Force:4,396 bytes82 records for    29 different MDS valuesUSMC Ground:451,508 bytes12,592 records for 2,971 different weapon systemsUSMC Air:1,851 bytes24 records for    14 different MDS valuesNavy Air:1,851 bytes24 records for    14 different MDS valuesNavy Surface:3,133 bytes47 records for    47 different unit names3. Subsistence (Class 1)The ICIS Subsistence assessment capability came on line in December of 1997.  The ICIS team is actively working with DPSC subsistence experts to refine and develop these algorithms, data, concept of operations, etc.  This section describes the 12/97 ICIS Subsistence assessment capability.  The ICIS Subsistence Assessment module is one of the more straightforward ICIS modules.  It starts with Time Phased Personnel Density data, usually extracted from one or more TPFDDs.  To project demand for meals, ICIS bounces these time phased personnel densities against Meal Plans provided by each service.  ICIS Sources this demand against DLA Quantity On Hand data, and against Industrial Capacity data.  Units almost always deploy with some subsistence.  An OPLAN might specify that they deploy with 15 or 30 days worth.  Filling this requirement results in an initial surge in subsistence demand to DLA.Theater reserve stocks are an important component of the Subsistence picture.  ICIS views theater reserve stocks as a fallback food supply which the theater will use in the event DLA cannot supply the required meals.  Initial theater stocks come from prepositioned Subsistence.  DLA ships additional Subsistence to supplement these reserve stocks.  OPLANs typically specify a Safety Level for theater reserves.  For instance, an OPLAN may specify a requirement for 30 days worth of food in the theater reserve as of day 30 of the deployment.  Note that the size of this Safety Level requirement changes over time, as personnel densities change.The ICIS Subsistence module tries to provide all required meals from DLA depots, without requiring the theater to dip into reserves.It takes time to ramp up production rates to full Industrial Capacity.  The ICIS Subsistence Module will help Subsistence Planners determine when to “light off” the industrial base.  Lighting off the industrial base early minimizes the Subsistence footprint on strategic airlift.  If they call off the war, however, we’ll end up with lots of food on hand.  Lighting off the industrial base late reduces the risk of being stuck with unwanted food, at the expense of a greater strategic airlift footprint.In order to deliver meals when required, ICIS needs to know how much time to allow for transportation.  Ideally, all subsistence would ship by sea, leaving precious airlift for other priorities.  ICIS currently uses a user-defined constant to represent transportation time.  In the near future, ICIS will interoperate with USTRANSCOM’ s AMP system to determine transportation time for each shipment.  This will allow ICIS to accurately calculate when we need to light off the industrial base.The Subsistence planner can influence two key variables in the Subsistence model: how much prepo is available and when to “light off” the industrial base.  The prepo value determines the depth of the in-theater “cushion” of MREs available to cover for any DLA shortfalls.  The subsistence planner will provide input to the CINC as to recommendations for these variables.  The planner will also provide the CINC with feedback as to the impact of the CINCs’ decisions regarding these values.Time Phased Personnel Density records contain [day], [service code], [pax-dens], and [geoloc].  ICIS usually extracts this date from one or more TPFDDs.Industrial Capacity records from DPSC/HRI contain [meal type] [meals/module] [lbs] [cb.ft.] [comps. on hand] [modules on hand] [month 1] [month 2] [month 3] [month 4] [month 5] [month 6].  After 6 months, the industrial base is at full capacity.  ICIS continues to use the 6 month value after month 6.The MRE inventory records contain [category], and [qty].4. Clothing and Textiles (Class 2)ICIS does not model textiles yet.ICIS models clothing for Army and the USMC, using Time Phased Personnel Densities and Service-supplied failure and consumption rate data.We do not have consumption rate data for the Navy and Air Force.  In the near future, we plan to use historical consumption rates to project demand for these services. The ICIS team has contacted various sources for data covering textiles, chem suits, etc.  As this data becomes available, we will incorporate it into this module.5. Fuels (Class 3)The ICIS Fuel Assessment module differs from other ICIS modules in that it models the supply chain all the way back to individual refineries.  The other ICIS modules model the supply chain back to DLA, and then use general industrial capacity data to model industry production capacities.  Only fuels models specific industrial production sites.ICIS does this because location drives the fuel problem.  ICIS projects time phased demand by location, and models the flow of fuel from the refineries through the fuel distribution system.The ICIS Fuel Module also models Host Nation Support (HNS) in considerable detail.  HNS is a crucial aspect of the fuel equation in theaters with significant local fuel production and/or storage capacity.  HNS plays a significant role in some US Central Command scenarios, for example.  A thorough treatment of the ICIS Fuel data is beyond the scope of this document, due to page count limitation.  To briefly summarize, ICIS has fuel consumption rate data from all services.  From DFSC, ICIS draws fuel inventory and storage capacity data, HNS data, Refinery Capacity data, peacetime distribution plans, etc.Modeling the fuel distribution network back to the refineries adds a significant level of complexity, when compared to the other classes of supply.At a 12/97 classified CENTCOM Fuels conference, we compared the ICIS Fuels assessment projections against projections brought to the conference by fuels experts from throughout CENTCOM.  The ICIS projections matched the experts’ expectations with 90-95% accuracy.  This joint conference considered demand from all services for specific, classified TPFDDs.6. Construction and Barrier (Class 4)6.1 Army ConstructionThe Army construction demand projector uses the time-phased personnel arrival information from the TPFDD to project the density of Force Provider  modules.  Then based on the density,  the demand for Force Provider sustainment parts can be calculated.6.1.1 Data Required- TPFDD (number of troops arriving in theater by day) is provided by the user. - Force Provider sustainment database was developed by DLA based on data provided by the PM, Force Provider Engineering Team and LOGSA.6.1.2 Data Statistics- 1 MEI- 346 critical line-replaceable NSNs6.1.3 Data IssuesIt would be preferable if the Force Provider deployment information were contained in the TPFDD. The specification states that at some point in the future the TPFDD will identify Force Provider requirements.6.2. Army Barrier6.2.1 OverviewArmy demands for barrier material are provided by the Army in two parts:A.  Predeployment demand shortfallsB.  Sustainment demand6.2.2 Data Required- Predeployment demand is provided by the Army   Materiel Command through the Aviation-Troop Command to DLA/DORO.- Sustainment demand is represented by a standard list of 26 NSNs, which was included in the specification.6.2.3 Data Issues- We haven’t received the predeployment demand shortfall data yet.  - A source for maintaining the standard sustainment demand list needs to be identified.  Like all data, this list will get out of date eventually if not maintained.6.2.4 Data Statistics- 26 sustainment demand NSNs- 0 predeployment demand shortfall NSNs (not yet available)6.3 Navy Construction and Barrier6.3.1 OverviewThe Navy C&B demand projector uses the Unit Type Code (UTC) arrival information from the TPFDD to determine the deployment of Navy Advanced Base Functional Components (ABFC’s).  The ABFC Table of Allowances (ABFC-TOA) Database maps the UTC to the ABFCs that deploy with that UTC.  The ABFC-TOA also provides the data to determine the quantity of each NSN needed to sustain the ABFC for 60 days.6.3.2 Data Required- TPFDD for extracting the time-phased UTC deployment schedule is provided by the user-  The ABFC-TOA database is provided by the Civil Engineering Support Office, Port Hueneme, CA.6.3.3 Data IssuesNone.6.3.4 Data Statistics- 87 MEIs (ABFCs)- 1078 NSNs to be considered6.4 Air Force Construction6.4.1 OverviewThe Air Force construction demand projector uses UTC from the TPFDD to determine the deployment of support packages for Harvest Eagle, Harvest Falcon and REDHORSE deployable support facilities.  The War Reserve Requirements and Spares Support List system, or D040 system, provides the NSNs and quantities required to support these facilities for 60-days.6.4.2 Data Required- TPFDD for extracting the time-phased UTC deployment schedule is provided by the user- D040 listings are provided by the Item Management Division, HQ Air Force Materiel Command6.4.3 Data Issues- REDHORSE D040 files are not yet available.6.4.4 Data Statistics- MEI Harvest Falcon has 93 components and 349 NSNs- MEI Harvest Eagle has 12 components and 690 NSNsNo data on REDHORSE6.5  Marine Corps Construction and Barrier6.5.1 OverviewDLA is relying on the Marine Corps War Reserve System (WRS) to provide the ICIS model with USMC demand data for construction and barrier.6.5.2 Data Required- WRS file icisei.txt is provided by Marine Corps Logistics Base (MCLB), Albany GA., Mobilization Branch.6.5.3 Data Issues- Since the Marine Corps prepares the demands based on known Oplans, ICIS cannot project demand for an arbitrary TPFDD.- Current data file only contains barrier materiel.6.5.4 Data Statistics- 8 NSNs corresponding to 8 TAMCNs (all barrier materials)7. Medical (Class 8)7.1 Overview The Army (USAMMA), Air Force (AFMLO) and Navy/Marine (NMLC) medical planners are located at Ft. Detrick, Maryland.  The medical planners have their own projection capability.  ICIS receives its medical projection data from each medical organization in the form of a pseudo requisition stream to DLA for a predetermined scenario.  In April 1997, the medical planners projected demand for a dual MRC scenario.7.2 Data statisticsTable 7.1: Medical items in projected demand dataDLA   8,537   (1041 DVD)Air Force149,498Army  81,258Navy/Marines  48,9947.3 Data issuesThe medical community is moving away from DLA stocked items for their supply items.  Current business practice is direct vendor delivery (DVD) of supply items whenever possible.  ICIS does not currently handle DVD items.  For medical in particular, there is a need to capture the industrial base capacity to fill a demand for non-stocked items.The key concern for the medical community is substitution.  The need for interchangeable and substitution information is necessary to increase the accuracy of potential fill rates.  This information is not currently available.The current DLA published administrative lead time (ALT) is believed to be not accurate for medical items because of automated requisition processing.  The DLA Personnel Service Center (DPSC) sets ALT.  DPSC'srationale is not currently understood by the Services medical community .ICIS uses the DPSC ALT numbers.ICIS would be a more useable assessment tool for the Services medical community if there were a way for them to feed ICIS gross requirements and assets for the assets they own before drawing against DLA assets.  This would provide the total picture of an OPLAN as opposed to DLA only.Having the services project demand outside of ICIS reduces the flexibility of ICIS to be responsive to changes or “what ifs” posed by the user community8. Spare Parts (Class 9)8.1 IntroductionICIS projects demand for spare parts using the following types of data: - Time-phased weapon system densities - Critical parts lists for weapon systems - Failure factors - Weapon system lists - OPTEMPOICIS sources the spare parts using the projected demandand DLA data for current assets, due-ins, and lead times.8.2 Time-Phased Weapon System DensitiesICIS obtains the time-phased weapon system deployment densities from the TPFDD. 8.2.1 Issues - ICIS only considers weapon systems included in the TPFDD. This ignores most Navy aircraft. - The number of weapon systems deployed by an TPFDD is sometimes greater than the programmed authorized inventory. - The TPFDD shows deployment of Navy ships rather than weapon systems. ICIS determines weapon system deployment based on weapon systems used  on a representative hull of each ship type. This may not give accurate densities for weapon systems on the actual ships in the TPFDD. - The TPFDD describes Marine Corps weapon systems only at the TAMCN level and not at the IDN level. This prevents mapping the weapon systems to specific Class 7 NSNs.8.3 Critical Parts Lists For Weapon SystemsICIS determines which critical parts are on each weapon system using data supplied by the services. 8.3.1 Issues - A part might be considered critical by one service but not another.  For example, for a particular model of the M1A1 tank, the Army considers 17 parts to be critical, while the Marine Corps considers 169 parts to be critical. ICIS thus ignores the potentially large Army demand for the parts critical only to the Marine Corps, resulting in an over-optimistic sourcing projection.8.4 Failure FactorsICIS obtains failure factors from service data for the Army and Navy Sea.Air Force, Navy Air, and Marine Corps Air failure factors do not exist. ICIS computes them based on the past two years of peacetime demand for a part and the past two years of peacetime flying hours for aircraft using the part.  8.4.1 Issues - The computation method for Air Force, Navy Air, and Marine Corps Air failure factors may result in values that do not accurately model combat conditions. - The computation method for Air Force, Navy Air, and Marine Corps Air failure factors ignores the fact that parts may fail at different rates on different aircraft. - The peacetime demand used in failure factor computation covers all weapon systems from the Air Force, Navy, and Marine Corps, not just aircraft. This results in over-estimated failure factors for parts used on non-aircraft weapon systems, since their demand will be included in computing the failure factors. This will be more of a problem for Navy Air and Marine Corps Air, since they have significant quantities of non-aircraft weapon systems. - Failure factors are not available for Marine Corps Ground items. We directly compute the daily demand rate by dividing the (War Reserve Material Requirement) WRMR by 30. - Marine Corps Ground WRMR is precomputed for two OPLANs. ICIS generates demand for other OPLANs using the closest matching OPLAN (as defined by the ICIS user who built the composite scenario).8.5 Weapon System ListsICIS builds weapon system lists by taking the intersection of weapon systems in the TPFDD and in the service data. - Weapon systems that are not in both the TPFDD and service data are ignored. - Air weapon systems in the TPFDDs are sometimes less specific than weapon systems in the service data. In these cases, ICIS uses the less  specific name. For example, the TPFDD will refer to F15A/B, whereas the  service data will refer to F15A. ICIS will use the name F15A/B. - The granularity and coverage of weapon systems differs between the services:- Air weapon systems are always aircraft. This excludes engines and non-aircraft weapon systems.- Army and Marine Corps Ground weapon systems include large weapon items such as tanks, large non-weapon items such as trucks, and smaller items such as pumps and radio sets.- Navy Sea weapon systems are large ship-based items, including weapon items such as missiles and non-weapon items such as sonar and cooling systems.8.6 OPTEMPOICIS obtains or assumes an OPTEMPO from service data. 8.6.1 Issues - Army failure factors are based on fighting at maximum intensity for 15 days in Europe.  - There is no allowance for Army buildup, surge, or sustaining OPTEMPO.  - Once they enter the theater, Army weapon systems are assumed to be at 100% until the end of the war. - Air Force, Navy Air, and Marine Corps Air OPTEMPO is based on standard profiles and is not specific to the OPLAN. - Flying time to theater is not included in the OPTEMPO profile or used to compute failures. - OPTEMPO not considered for Navy Sea. - Marine Corps Ground OPTEMPO is built into the WRMR.8.7 DLA Data for SourcingICIS uses DLA asset and due-in data for sourcing the projected part demand. 8.7.1 Issues - Asset and due-in data is accurate as of the data pull date, not for the planned start of the composite scenario. - Production lead time ignores order quantity; it is the same whether one or one million parts are ordered.8.8 Scale of DataICIS considers the following numbers of different spare parts for each service (those considered critical by each service):Air Force16,024Army3,799Navy Sea28,303Navy Air55,006Marine Corps Ground2,458Marine Corps Air5,247Total96,398*Parts Used By Multiple Services  10,401Note that the total is less than the sum of the services because some of the parts are shared between services.ICIS considers the following numbers of weapon system types for each service:Air Force40Army418Navy Sea98Navy Air11Marine Corps Ground138Marine Corps Air6Total711A large dual MRC ICIS composite scenario contains 77,006 spare parts, 32,166 of which are used on more than one weapon system. This composite scenario has 422 weapon systems.9. Repair Depot DemandICIS models Repair Depot Demand using the Component Maintenance System (CMS).  CMS looks at the past 8 quarters of demand to DLA and projects the historical demand rates into the future.  This demand is broken out by Depot, and the user can apply a different multiplier to the demand rate of each depot.The “Spare Parts” module described above captures only those items the Services have identified as Critical Parts on Critical Weapon Systems, and it only captures demand due to deployed Critical Weapon Systems.CMS captures Repair Depot Demand for both Critical and non-critical items.  It also captures “field” demand for those items at historical rates. 10. OPTEMPOHistorically, OPTEMPO data has been nearly impossible to acquire.  The OPLAN describe OPTEMPO in narrative text form, but there has never been a machine-readable source of OPTEMPO data.At CENTCOM’s request, the ICIS team is developing an OPTEMPO editor that will allow the warfighting CINCs to lay out planned Time Phased OPTEMPO for  the following communities:- Army Tracked- Army Non-Tracked- Air Force- USMC Air- USMC Ground- Navy Air- Navy Sea- Strategic AirliftThis OPTEMPO data will enable ICIS to project demand much more precisely.11. Class Of SupplyClass Of Supply is a notion that causes much confusion.  In general, no one knows the class of supply for an arbitrary NSN.  The Army has a data file called AMDF which lists the class of supply for 1.2 million NSNs of interest to the Army.  That leaves 4.8 million NSNs whose Class of Supply is unknown.The ICIS team invested over a man-year of effort pursuing this issue.  We considered deriving Class of Supply from Federal Supply Class.  We looked for other sources of data.  We struck out.The transportation community uses a Logistics Factors File (LFF) that lays out pounds per man per day for each Class of Supply.  The LFF does not go to the NSN level of detail. The Army has declared its intention to stop maintaining AMDF, and to use DLA’s FEDLOG data instead.  FEDLOG has no notion of Class Of Supply.Any system that uses Class Of Supply as a concept at the NSN level of detail is likely to have trouble finding class of supply data.12. Predeployment Demand SpikeBefore a unit deploys, it receives a “Warning Order”.  Typically, the warning order is supposed to arrive 30 days before a unit deploys.  During that 30 day period, the unit makes final preparations for the specific deployment planned, whether tropical, temperate, desert or arctic, etc.A funded warning order comes with a “Project Code” to which all expenditures are billed.  This amounts to a “blank check” which allows the unit to requisition the material and equipment it needs to go to war.Upon receipt of a funded warning order, each unit’s Material Management team works through the night to build a pile of requisitions to submit the next morning.  These requisitions will fill any holes in the unit’s go-to-war stocks.  This can be quite a substantial pile of material.The ICIS team refers to these requisitions as the unit’s “Predeployment Demand Spike”.  After 5 years of steady, low-level effort, the ICIS team has not found a way to predict this predeployment demand spike.  The data does not seem to exist.The Army predeployment demand spike is by far the largest.  The other services are much smaller, and they have most of their initial go-to-war stocks on the shelf.  The Army simply does not have the funds to stock all this material.  In investigating this issue, the ICIS team has interviewed a wide assortment of Army logisticians.  Unfortunately, all available data about Army stockage objectives, Authorized Stockage Levels (ASL), etc are peacetime data.  No one seems to know exactly what a unit will requisition upon receipt of a funded warning order.13. ConclusionICIS does the best it can with the best available data.  Unfortunately, the best available data is often far less than one would hope.The ICIS program has developed an approach to data acquisition that works fairly well for us.  We send expert logisticians out in search of the data required.  They make a solid effort to acquire the data from the appropriate organizations, acting formally as agents of DLA.  These initial efforts involve many briefings and presentations to logistics & support organizations.  These efforts  often yield data that is less than ideal.  The ICIS team incorporates this data into our assessments, with appropriate caveats.  When the warfighters see what we’ve done, and the limitations imposed by the inadequate data, then take steps to get us the data we need.  The warfighters are extremely motivated to get a solid handle on logistics.  They are generally thrilled to see the level of detail that ICIS provides, and they have been extremely helpful in getting us the data we need to provide them with timely and accurate Logistics Assessments.The ICIS program is a work in progress, built using an evolutionary development approach.  We put working systems out there on the web for people to see, and then we watch to see who throws rocks at it.  We then engage the rock throwers, asking them how we can improve the system.  This approach is not smooth, but it is the most effective approach we’ve found.