The Army Experiment 4 (AE4) Simulation to Army Battle Command System (ABCS) ExperimentsMr. Joseph M. BrennanU.S. Army Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM) 407-384-3855, DSN 970, email:  joe_brennan@stricom.army.mil Keywords:  Army Experiment 4 (AE4); Army Battle Command Systems (ABCS); Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I); Modular Reconfigurable C4I Interface (MRCI); Run Time Manager (RTM); Tactical Simulation Interface Unit (TSIU); Appliqué Interface; Medical Situational Awareness and Control (MSAC); Vehicle Health Monitoring System (VHMS).ABSTRACT:  This paper provides a discussion on the results of the Army Experiment IV (AE4) experiments which were executed 4 August through 5 September 1997.  During the AE4 experiments, interfaces between various simulations and Army Battle Command Systems (ABCSs) were evaluated.  Three separate experiments were performed to study various aspects of digitization of the battlefield: A Corps Battle Simulation (CBS) experiment, a Corps Level Computer Generated Forces (CLCGF) experiment, and a Dismounted Battlespace Battle Lab (DBBL) experiment.  These experiments overlapped sufficiently to provide “two way” information flow from the division down to the individual soldier level.  Discussion of the following simulation to ABCS interfaces is provided: The Run Time Manager (RTM), the Modular Reconfigurable C4I Interface (MRCI), the Tactical Simulation Interface Unit (TSIU), the Simulation Support Modules (SSMs), The Federation of Intelligence, Reconnaissance, Surveillance and Targeting, Operations, and Research Models (FIRESTORM)/High Resolution Simulation Stimulator (HRSS) simulation, the Mitre Appliqué Interface (MAI), and  the Land Warrior System command and control interface to Appliqué.  Additionally, discussion is provided on the Medical Situational Awareness and Control (MSAC) System, the Vehicle Health Monitoring System (VHMS), and Command Forces (CFOR). OverviewThe Army Experiment 4 (AE4) coordination, integration, and some development activities were performed under the U.S. Army Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM) Advanced Distributed Simulation Technology (ADST) II contract. The AE4 ADST II contract tasks were performed by Lockheed Martin Information Systems, and their subcontractors.  The AE4 sponsor was United States Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC).   Other participating organizations are provided in references [1], [2], and [3]. From 4 August through 5 September 1997, the AE4 team conducted a suite of experiments designed to create a working simulation that stimulated Army XXI tactical command and control (C2) systems from division level down to the platform/individual soldier levels.  These experiments were broadly characterized as follows:Corps Battlefield Simulation (CBS) ExperimentCorps Level Computer Generated Forces (CLCGF) ExperimentDismounted Battlespace Battle Lab (DBBL) ExperimentThe AE4 experiment architecture is illustrated in Figure 2 on the following page.  The AE4 experiment architecture was comprised of simulation systems, interface technologies, and Army Battle Command System (ABCS) components.The AE4 experiments provided a baseline simulation and tactical interface environment which provided valid and realistic insight into the linking of simulations with Army XXI C2 systems.  These experiments were performed using a distributed simulation network (comprised of various simulations) and a separate tactical communications network (comprised of the Army Battle Command System (ABCS) version 2.0.4 (with patches) configured for each level of command).  The simulation and tactical communications networks were		Figure 2 -- AE4 architecture diagram for CBS, CLCGF, and DBBL experimentsinterconnected utilizing various interfaces. These interfaces were evaluated for their potential for Warfighter training applications.  AE4 Observations and ResultsSimulation-ABCS InterfacesRun Time Manager (RTM)The RTM is a United States Army Space and Missile Defense Command (USASMDC) product developed by Booz-Allen Hamilton. The RTM provides a “two way” interface between aggregate level simulations (e.g., CBS for the AE4 CBS experiment) and entity level simulations (e.g., Extended Air Defense Simulation (EADSIM) for the AE4 CBS experiment), providing Aviation and Air Defense data to Forward Area Air Defense (FAAD) systems to include:  Low Altitude Air Picture (F-3 messages), Theater Ballistic Missile (TBM) Early Warning (F59-63 Messages) via FAAD Data Link (FDL), and High Altitude Air Picture via Tactical Digital Information Link-Broadcast (TADIL-B) (M0, M2, & M82).  Activity generated in EADSIM, such as aircraft detection by air defense radar, is translated into the appropriate tactical message formats and provided to FAAD systems at division and brigade levels.  During the AE4 CBS experiment, the RTM provided a link from CBS to EADSIM, creating a high fidelity entity-based environment (in EADSIM) from the aggregate air and missile defense objects modeled and ghosted in CBS.The RTM operates as follows:  The aggregate level simulation acts as the controlling simulation over the entity level simulation.  All unit attributes (location, speed, direction, formation, etc.) and engagement results are obtained from the aggregate level simulation, and passed on to the entity level simulation.  The RTM accomplishes the “cause-effect” relationship by utilizing Simulation Management (SIMAN) Protocol Data Units (PDUs) (e.g., “Stop”, “Freeze”) to control entity level simulations while obtaining the required data from CBS. In addition to CBS/EADSIM/FAAD, the RTM operates with the Air Warfare Simulation (AWSIM - Air Force aggregated simulation model), and the Joint Maritime Command Information System (JMCIS) which is one of the primary tactical C2 systems being used by the Navy.  Modular Reconfigurable C4I Interface (MRCI)The MRCI is part of a prototyping effort sponsored by the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO), and was developed by Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC).  The MRCI is comprised of modular, reusable components which reduces the need for numerous unique interfaces. The MRCI resides between target live C4I systems, and the High Level Architecture (HLA) Run Time Infrastructure (RTI). The AE4 CBS Experiment provided a means by which to evaluate the performance of the MRCI in providing an interface between CBS and MCS systems.  This was a proof of concept experiment for determining whether or not the MRCI could be used to provide an HLA implementation for CBS, and to determine whether or not the MRCI might serve as a viable alternative to the Simulation Support Modules (SSMs). A total of four MRCI workstations were used to support the AE4 CBS experiment.  One MRCI was integrated with CBS using a System Specific Interface (SSI) to translate CBS data into Command and Control Simulation Interface Language (CCSIL) messages.  The remaining three MRCIs were used as designed for the STOW ’97 program, accepting CCSIL messages and providing the required data to the three Maneuver Control Systems (MCSs) (one each at the Division, Brigade, and Battalion levels).  In this manner, a STOW97/HLA implementation of CBS was performed. In addition to the SSI developed to link MRCI to CBS, a second SSI was developed to interface the MRCIs to the target MCSs.  This permitted the MRCIs to intercept messages so that the messages could be routed to the appropriate simulation units, and allowed the tracking of resources.  The MCS SSI consisted of loading a software application onto the target MCSs, thus allowing the “Sendmail” functionality to be used.  It is noted that due to the aggressive AE4 schedule and other issues, a “one way” implementation of the MRCI was performed only for position tracking of CBS units. FIRESTORM/HRSS The Federation of Intelligence, Reconnaissance, Surveillance and Targeting, Operations, and Research Models (FIRESTORM)/High Resolution Simulation Stimulator (HRSS) simulation is an interactive training system which utilizes an artificial intelligence implementation to challenge friendly force commanders.  FIRESTORM continuously reacts to battlefield events, and attempts to take advantage of given tactical situations. FIRESTORM provides the simulation models required to provide data to the All Source Analysis Systems (ASAS) contained within the Analysis Control Element (ACE) to include:  Image Intel (IMINT), Signal Intel (SIGINT) - consists of Electronics Intel (ELINT) and Communications Intel (COMINT), Human Intel (HUMINT) - provides Surveillance, Size, Activity, Location, Unit, Time, & Equipment (SALUTE) reports and Spot reports, and Rotary Wing Aircraft (RWA) models - which provide Spot reports similar to those provided by HUMINT.The FIRESTORM simulation models currently include the Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV), Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (JSTARS) Simulator (JSS), Multiple UAVs in a Simulation Environment (MUSE), Advanced Synthetic Aperture Radar System (ASARS), Ground Based Common Sensors (GBCS), Common Ground Station Surrogates (CGS(S)), and Intelligent Minefields (IMF).  The HRSS provides deaggregated representation (ground truth data) of entities moving on the terrain so that battlefield sensors can be used to detect these entities (resulting in perceived information).FIRESTORM can be used with CBS, Janus, Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS), and other Joint Training Confederation (JTC) simulations to provide a realistic ISR environment.It was noted during the AE4 CBS experiment that FIRESTORM overwhelmingly defeated friendly forces contained within CBS.  This was attributed to the use of a scripted scenario for the AE4 CBS experiment.  FIRESTORM was designed as a training simulation to “punish” friendly force commanders who do not effectively take advantage of tactical situations as they arise during scenario execution.  Thus, FIRESTORM requires dynamic interaction by friendly force commanders.  The use FIRESTORM/HRSS  with a scripted scenario (such as the one used to support the AE4 experiments) requires constant monitoring to ensure that appropriate adjustments are made.   Simulation Support Modules (SSMs) The SSMs are legacy systems that were developed by TRADOC Test and Experimentation Command (TEXCOM) and the Electronic Proving Ground (EPG), and are primary interfaces used for providing the linkages between CBS and the Army Tactical Command and Control System (ATCCS).  Initially, the SSMs were designed to support technical and operational testing, but have recently been used to support training exercises as well (e.g. Division XXI).  It is noted that the SSMs (in conjunction with CBS) provide “ground truth” data from CBS to the target C4I systems, and not “perceived’ data as was the case with some of the other simulations/interfaces discussed in this document.Tactical Simulation Interface Unit (TSIU)The TSIU is a USASMDC product being developed by Coleman Research Corporation.   The TSIU is an interface which translates data between aggregate/entity level Distributed Interactive Simulations (DIS) (such as Eagle and Modular Semi-Automated Forces (ModSAF)), and the Army Battle Command System (ABCS) utilizing a wide variety of message protocols.  The TSIU is used in conjunction with simulations such as EADSIM and the C4I surrogate simulation to realistically model C2 messaging based on perceived information rather than ground truth information. The AE4 CLCGF Experiment provided a means by which to evaluate the performance of the TSIU in utilizing aggregated (Eagle) and deaggregated (entity level simulations) simulation data to provide simultaneous multi-level (i.e., division, brigade, battalion, company, and platoon) feeds to tactical C2 systems, and in providing a “two way” VMF interface between Appliqué systems and simulations.  One of the primary reasons the TSIU was selected for participation in the AE4 was it’s robust capability for stimulating multi-echelon ATCCS systems.  The TSIU was enhanced for the AE4 to provide an interface between simulations and Appliqué systems.  This was envisioned to be a worthwhile investment because the entire functionality of the TSIU would be resident within a single Sun SPARC 20/Ultra SPARC workstation, resulting in minimal hardware requirements and contractor support costs for supporting exercises.Currently most of the data flow though the TSIU is “one way” from simulations to the ABCSs. As more simulations are developed such that they can accept “input” data from C4I systems and react appropriately, the TSIU can be enhanced to provide the required “two-way” information flow.   A proof of concept for “two- way” information flow was demonstrated during the AE4 CLCGF experiment, in that enhancements were made to the TSIU for translation of simulation data to Variable Message Format (VMF) data (for communication with the Appliqué systems) and vice versa.  VMF data was provided to a developmental version of ModSAF containing the CCSIL libraries (referred to here as the Command Forces (CFOR) ModSAF, but also commonly referred to as the STOW ‘97 version of ModSAF) for execution of an automated “call for fire” function.  In addition, friendly and perceived enemy icons appeared on the appropriate Appliqué screens as generated by the Eagle/ModSAF simulations.The TSIU provides the capability to pass information from the simulation environment to the target C4I systems to include:  blue force tracking (United States Message Text Format (USMTF) S507, VMF K5.01, CCSIL 201), high and low altitude air picture (TADIL-B, FDL), early warning Nuclear, Biological, Chemical (NBC) (NBC-1,4, USMTF C488, VMF K5.61), early warning Theater Ballistic Missile (TBM) (predicted impact point – FDL F-59, FDL F-60, FDL F-61, FDL F-62, FDL F-63, USMTF C121), intelligence data (Spot reports via VMF K4.52), Radar Exploration Reports (REXREPs), SALUTE reports, red order of battle, JSTARS Moving Target Indicator (MTI), telemetry (UAV/JSTARS position), TBM (estimated launch point, pairing with impact point), Tactical Electronics Intelligence (TACELINT), and ACE (USMTF S309)), and C2 messaging (USMTF, VMF) to include:  call for fire (VMF K2.04, CCSIL 401) and status reporting.The primary TSIU enhancements performed in support of the AE4 were the following:Stimulation of target Appliqué systems with simulation data -- The TSIU was enhanced to provide a translation of CCSIL to Variable Message Format (VMF) messages so that “perceived” simulation data could be transmitted to the Company level and platoon level Appliqué systems, allowing Blue Force Tracking and monitoring of Spot Reports by operators using the target Appliqué systems.  This resulted in friendly and perceived enemy forces to be displayed upon the Appliqué screens. “Call For Fire” Function -- The TSIU was enhanced to provide a translation of VMF to CCSIL messages to facilitate an automated “Call For Fire” function from given Appliqué systems to CFOR ModSAF.  CFOR ModSAF, however, did not react to the message.  This was viewed to be a limitation within CFOR ModSAF (a developmental version). The logged simulation data streams from the AE4 CLCGF experiment were used to fully stimulate (through the TSIU)  the ABCSs at each level of command for display at the Association of the United States Army (AUSA) convention 13-15 Oct 97 in D.C. This required compressing the three and a half hour logged experiment scenario into a twenty minute scenario.  This demonstrated that the TSIU could be used with a data logger system to support robust After Action Review capabilities.  The TSIU has been successfully utilized in experiments of the past to include:  AE2, AE3, Digital Training Exercise (DTX) - Fort Rucker, and Roving Sands Experiment - White Sands Missile Range, Battlespace Integration Concept Emulation Program (BICEP), and is a Warfighting Rapid Acquisition Program (WRAP).Mitre Appliqué Interface (MAI)The MAI was the result of an internal research and development effort performed by Mitre Corporation.  The MAI provided a “two way” interface between Appliqué systems and simulations. The MAI development effort examined the potential of the HLA to provide a framework for integrating C4I systems with simulations by developing a technical approach for linking C4I systems with simulations utilizing the HLA.  The baseline capability was extended by introducing realistic communications effects to C2 message traffic between /among simulation and C4I systems using the HLA/RTI.The MAI provided friendly force tracking, enemy force tracking (via spot reports), and battle damage assessments data to Appliqué systems. The following automated feature was also accommodated via this interface:   the translation of VMF free text Movement Orders into CCSIL using the MAI, so that movement could be automatically executed by CFOR ModSAF. The MAI experiment set-up included a company and platoon level Appliqué system, and was conducted in two phases.  During the first phase, the MAI functionality was demonstrated using the Fort Hood database which contained an artificial obstruction to block Line Of Sight (LOS) communications between C2 vehicles.  During the second phase, the MAI functionality was demonstrated using the natural terrain obstructions contained within the Grafenfels database.  The following was observed during these phases of the AE4 CLCGF experiment:Entity state Protocol Data Units (PDUs) provided own vehicle locations (as well as all other vehicle locations), thus simulating the effect of the Global Positioning System (GPS).VMF free text messages issued by the Appliqué systems were translated into CCSIL execute directives, and used to modify CFOR ModSAF entity tasking.  Specific identifiers contained within the free text allowed the performance of this function.  This functionality was demonstrated for obtaining status reports (e.g., mission capability, available supplies, etc) from given CFOR ModSAF entities, and task these entities to change their paths.All messages passed between CFOR ModSAF and the Appliqué systems were transported through the HLA/RTI.  The HLA implementation utilized the RTI version 1.0.2, and was comprised of the following three federates:Communications Effects Federate – Consisted of a propagation model (based on the Terrain Integrated Rough Earth Model (TIREM) model which calculated the propagation/degradation of message traffic over terrain, taking into consideration LOS, and external effects such as jamming, and interference), a VMF to CCSIL translator, a CCSIL to VMF translator, and a position Situational Awareness (SA) server (used to provide data updates to target Appliqué systems on a periodic basis when specified minimum threshold values were exceeded for time between updates and distance traveled).  When specific data was not available for sending to the target Appliqué systems, the icons on the Appliqué screens became stale (colors changed to a lighter shade indicating no update received). C4I Federate: Designed to perform the general integration of C4I command and control systems.  For this particular experiment, two Appliqué systems represented this federate.Simulation Federate: Designed to perform the general integration of simulation systems.  For this particular experiment, CFOR ModSAF represented this federate.Land Warrior (LW) InterfaceThe Land Warrior Interface was developed by Hughes Aircraft Corporation.  The LW Interface provides a communications linkage between the LW system and Appliqué in addition to linkages to simulations supporting the AE4.  The LW interface system provided the VMF conversions required for supporting the “two way” LW C2 system linkage to Appliqué.  Spot reports were sent from the LW system to the Appliqué system resulting in enemy icons being displayed on the target Appliqué system.  As entities populated the Appliqué system, these were displayed within the LW Integrated Helmet Assembly Subsystem (IHAS) eye piece as overlays. The C2 linkage between the LW system and Appliqué was a significant accomplishment in that it provided a means by which dismounted soldiers could communicate with higher headquarters.  Note:  An Appliqué interface (residual from Force Protection Experiment (FPE) III in Nov ’96) was used to stimulate the Appliqué system with friendly force simulation data.C4I Simulations  Medical Situational Awareness and Control (MSAC) SystemThe MSAC system was developed for the United States Army Medical Research Materiel Command (USAMRMC) and the Army Medical Department (AMEDD) Center & School by Mystech. The MSAC serves as a C2 system for tactical medical operations, providing total situational awareness for friendly and enemy forces/objects such that Line and Medical Commanders are challenged to make “real time” battlefield decisions with respect to route planning considerations, selection of available evacuation platforms and treatment facilities, and in providing medical logistics. A casualty generator is used to provide notification regarding casualties.  As casualties are incurred, the medical support team executes their mission taking into account the data received by the MSAC system.  MSAC provides a map-based display with overlays, symbology, and other graphics capabilities to present red and blue force orders of battle, terrain details, routes, landing zones, and other data critical to line and medical commanders.  Using a Netscape implementation, MSAC allows users to click on various map icons to display database records and reports for selected functional areas.  During the AE4 CLCGF experiment, the MSAC demonstrated a “plug and play” capability via a Wide Area Network (WAN) connection.  The MSAC development under the AE4 program provided a proof of concept that geographically dispersed medical units could participate in “real time” combat simulation exercises for training purposes by merely “plugging” into the network.  This was a significant accomplishment because, prior to the AE4 only stand-alone simulation systems were used to support medical soldier training.Currently the MSAC has been fully integrated with the MCS/Phoenix (P) beta version which provides the required situation awareness data.  For the AE4, portions of the MSAC system were integrated with the MCS baseline version as a proof of concept.  In the future it is anticipated MSAC will be integrated as part of the Combat Service Support Control System (CSSCS).Vehicle Health Monitoring System (VHMS)The VHMS was developed by the Aviation and Missile Command (AMCOM) Logistics Laboratory.  The VHMS consists of the following components:VHMS module -- This component is mounted on a live military vehicle, and is used to collect and transmit data on system performance to include: fuel & ammunition levels, and critical engine and suspension components.  This data is transmitted to the VHMS workstation located at a remote location. VHMS workstation -- This component is used to receive live data from the VHMS module, model the functionality of the VHMS for simulated entities, and transmit the digital logistics data received through a target Appliqué system to CSSCS.During the AE4 CLCGF experiment, the VHMS workstation combined the data received from the VHMS simulation and live VHMS module, and successfully populated the target Appliqué system with the required information.  The live data was provided by a tank operating at Eglin Air Force Base.  The Appliqué system performed a “roll-up” of the data received so that this could be passed on to the CSSCS.  It is noted however, that the linkage between Appliqué and the CSSCS was not established due to database correlation problems.  This was not a problem within the VHMS, but the target C4I systems, and is one example of the interoperability problems that can exist among ABCS systems. The VHMS experiment demonstrated a means by which the CSSCS can be utilized at the Battalion level (i.e. linking Appliqué to CSSCS).  The use of the CSSCS at Battalion level is currently only a concept (generally,  CSSCS supports the Brigade and Division levels), but may be worth consideration in the future given the logistical information that can be provided from Appliqué systems. Additional information concerning the VHMS can be found at the following web site address:   http://loglab.redstone.army.milOther SystemsDescriptions of the various other systems supporting the AE4 (e.g., Eagle-MCS, CFOR, CBS, Eagle/Simulation Interface Unit (SIU)/ModSAF, EADSIM, Post Engagement Ground Effects Model (PEGEM), C4I Surrogate, Analysis Control Element (ECE)/Analysis Control Team (ACT), Appliqué Interface (AI) – FPE III version, Soldier Visualization Station (SVS), Omni-Directional Treadmill (ODT) system, Dismounted Infantry SAF (DISAF) and Computer Generated Forces (CGF)-X) and observations regarding these are provided in references [1], [2], and [3].Conclusions and RecommendationsSeveral conclusions and recommendations have resulted from execution of the AE4 experiments.  These are discussed below:Perceived versus Ground Truth.  It is important to define the distinction between perceived and ground truth data.  Perceived data better accommodates training applications.  Perceived data creates the “fog of war” effect which results when sensors provide information which may not be entirely accurate (as would be the case with ground truth data), or limited to no information when sensor systems become damaged.  Perceived data provides the necessary challenge for training applications for the following reasons:trainees will be challenged to take measures for ensuring battlefield sensor systems are adequately protected.trainees will be challenged to weigh tradeoffs (potential threat versus benefit gained) prior to committing battlefield sensors for specific missions.  given that specific battlefield sensor information is not received, trainees will be challenged to troubleshoot the networks to determine the cause (e.g., damage to sensor system, network problem, etc) and take corrective action as required.The use of ground truth data provides strong potential for a  negative training effect because: trainees would be receiving more accurate information than would be the case in the real world. there would not be a need to protect sensor assets (ground truth information would be received whether the sensors were damaged or not).trainees would be spending more time focusing on the mission, and less time on trouble shooting and verification/validation as would be the case in an actual battlefield scenario.Perceived data can be accommodated the following ways:providing adequate models of battlefield sensors and communications links to provide perceived information regarding the entities detected.  During the AE4 experiments the following simulation/interface combinations provided perceived data in this manner:  TSIU/EADSIM/ C4I Surrogate/CFOR ModSAF, FIRESTORM, and RTM/EADSIM.providing adequate modeling of communications effects. During the AE4 experiments the following simulation/interface combination provided perceived data in this manner:  CFOR ModSAF/ MAI/CES.b.    Designing C4I systems and associated training as one system.  Because the use of simulation is the most effective means of providing battlefield conditions/data for stimulation of C4I systems in a training environment, it is recommended that C4I systems and other fielded systems be designed with this in mind (i.e., the fielded system and training package be considered as one complete system).  This would better allow appropriate tradeoffs to be made in the design of fielded systems with respect to training considerations, and better accommodate the objectives for embedded training.  By optimizing fielded C4I systems and associated training systems as a whole, overall design constraints would become more apparent.  These design constraints could then be communicated to the training community to ensure effort is not expended on the development of training solutions which are not considered feasible.  Note:  It was speculated during the AE4 experiments that the loading of software onto fielded C4I systems for training purposes was not acceptable, however, three of the approaches evaluated relied on this approach (i.e., Eagle-MCS, MRCI, and MSAC). Dual Ethernet cards for C4I systems.  It is noted that training might be better accommodated by providing dual Ethernet cards for each fielded target C4I system where possible.  Some of the approaches utilized (during the AE4 experiments) for linking simulations to C4I systems relied on providing both simulation and actual C4I system data to the target ABCSs.  Because the target ABCSs only contained one Ethernet card, the simulation and the tactical communications networks had to be combined to accommodate this data transfer.  Lessons learned from simulation/C4I experiments of the past indicate that combining these networks will significantly increase potential for network failure. C4I/Simulation-based laboratory benefits.  The results from the AE4 experiments indicate that there exists significant benefit for utilizing a simulation based laboratory to provide a controlled environment for testing ABCS interoperability, performing human factors analysis studies, experimentation with visual/audio cues and information filtering, prototyping new systems, optimizing system designs, and general debugging purposes.  Currently due to the level of sophistication of the ABCSs, a significant amount of initial and reinforcement training is required to maintain an adequate level of operator expertise, thus enhancements to the ABCSs (and other C4I systems) in some of the areas mentioned above could offer a significant benefit.  It is noted that much of the system problems that might be encountered during large scale training exercises could be detected and corrected prior to the start of these exercises using a laboratory environment.  This could offer a significant reduction in cost.  In addition, the level of significance for a given training exercise could substantially improve because, given that errors are observed during the exercise there would be a higher level of confidence that these could be attributed to operator error and not the systems themselves. Entity level tracking for constructive simulations.  Constructive level simulations would better accommodate training requirements for modern C4I systems if they could track units all the way down to the entity level.  Tracking of units down to the entity level would prevent the following problems observed during the CBS driven AE4 experiment:Data overload due to non-realistic movement of units.  Within CBS entire aggregated units may be moved at a given time.  This has high potential for causing a data overflow problem within target C4I systems because, given a set of aggregated units have moved within CBS, every component member of the parent aggregate units may need to be moved individually within the C4I systems (which track units all the way down to the entity level).  It is noted that the data overflow problem can be further aggravated by stimulating ABCSs with ground truth data versus perceived data.Lost entities during unit partitioning.  At specific points in a given scenario there may be a need to partition lower level units away from their associated parent units (e.g., terrain reasoning, scouting missions, etc.).  However, these units may become lost when C4I systems (which track units down to the entity level) attempt to provide separate orders to units at a lower level of aggregation than the driving simulation supports. Conversion between VMF and CCSIL.  It is noted that the translation between VMF to CCSIL was not considered to be a trivial task.  This is because there does not exist a one-to-one conversion between these message sets.  The CCSIL message format is of a more generic nature and can be used to represent several different message types.ABCS networks.  Currently, the ABCS network used in the field is configured with several routers to accommodate the required information flow.  During the AE4 experiments (and other simulation/C4I experiments of the past), it was determined that these routers were not required (all routing was performed within the workstations themselves).  This implementation offers a significant reduction in costs, logistical support requirements, and network administration/ troubleshooting support requirements, and offers a  significant increase in network reliability.  Alternative interfaces to the SSMs.  One of the experimental objectives for the AE4 CBS experiment was to evaluate other alternatives (in addition to the SSMs) for linking CBS to the ATCCS.  The primary concern with the SSMs is that development and maintenance can be a tedious and expensive procedure, and a large amount of exercise control staffs and support personnel are required to support large scale exercises.  The MRCI provided a proof of concept for linking CBS to MCSs via the HLA, but only provided position tracking of the units contained in CBS.  The RTM provided a robust interface between CBS/EADSIM and FAAD systems, but will require additional development for providing linkages to the other ATCCS. Thus, a significant amount of development is required before the MRCI or RTM will serve as a viable alternative to the SSMs.  The SSMs will continue to be required for supporting CBS exercises until robust alternatives become available. Recommended Follow–on WorkBased on the observations made during the AE4 experiments, the following are some areas of follow on work that offer potential benefit to the simulation/C4I community:Supporting the development of automated tools which can be utilized to clear ABCS databases.  During the AE4, a significant amount of time was spent in manually clearing the databases within the ABCSs to prepare them for population with new simulation data.  This clearing procedure had to be performed for every experiment run.  Automated tools could substantially reduce this effort.  Supporting the development of automated tools which can be utilized to validate the master unit lists contained within the ABCSs with the units contained within a given scenario.  This would reduce the probability of error, and offer a reduction in set-up time. For those simulations which have the capability to react to external information being provided from C4I systems (such as the version of Eagle used for the Eagle-MCS piece and CFOR ModSAF), perform appropriate enhancements to interfaces to facilitate “two-way” information flow.Develop an implementation for CBS which combines the functionality of the RTM and portions of the TSIU with the EADSIM/C4I surrogate simulations. The RTM has demonstrated the capability to provide entity level representation (in EADSIM) for stimulation of FAAD systems based on perceived information.  Given that the RTM/TSIU is provided with the appropriate enhancements, EADSIM and the C4I surrogate could be linked to CBS (in similar fashion to RTM and EADSIM during theAE4 CBS experiment) to provide intelligence feeds to the ASAS systems which would be based on “perceived” information.  This would offer a lower fidelity (and lower cost) alternative to using FIRESTORM to support stimulated ASASs with perceived data for CBS exercises. Perform additional experiments with the RTM to determine whether or not it is feasible to utilize the RTM as a linkage between CBS and the other ABCSs (as an alternative to the SSMs).  It is noted that use of a similar approach to that provided during the AE4 CBS experiment (CBS combined with entity level simulations) for linking CBS to the remaining ATCCS components may not be feasible (in particular when providing stimulation of MCSs).  This is primarily because, the amount of hardware and support personnel required to provide entity level representation of the aggregate forces contained within CBS (especially for the ground forces) could be substantial. Development of HLA enhancements to the various interfaces provided to support the AE4 experiments. Performing joint C4I experiments using some of the AE4 C4I interfaces to determine any additional considerations which should be made with respect to these systems. Combining the functionality of current interfaces (such as the TSIU, RTM, and MRCI) with a communications propagation model to enhance perceived data implementations. Performing more robust modeling of communications networks such that when messages are sent across separate communications networks (e.g. two separate companies) access will be delayed due to the messages having to “hop” across networks.  A simplified approach was used to support the MAI portion of the AE4 CLCGF experiment.  Stochastic modeling might provide a good means for modeling network “hopping”.Performing more robust modeling of communications models so as to better simulate the functionality of the Tactical Internet Model.  The implementation used as part of the MAI directly passed communications information between the company commander and subordinate units.  A more realistic implementation would be to pass information from wingmen to platoon leaders, and then from platoon leaders to company commanders.AE4 Residuals and RecipientsThe AE4 residual components discussed in this document are identified below:ResidualRecipientMRCIDARPA/SAICRTMSMDCTSIU EnhancementsSMDCFIRESTORMBCBL Fort HuachucaMSAC EnhancementsUSAMRMC/AMEDDVHMS EnhancementsAMCOM Logistics LaboratoryMitre Appliqué InterfaceMitre CorporationLW integration with AppliquéSTRICOM/DBBLAll other AE4 residuals are discussed in reference [2].Additional details concerning AE4 components and execution are provided in references [1], [2], and [3].  The final version of the AE4 After Action Report will be available January 1998.The following Army Programs could benefit from the AE4 residuals:Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT) – has a need for integrating Appliqué systems into CCTT simulators, and stimulating them using simulations.Warfighter’ Simulation (WARSIM) 2000/STOW-Architecture (A) – has a need to address future Army training requirements to include linkages between simulations and C4I systems.One SAF – has a need for investigating linkages between aggregate and entity level simulations.References[1] Joseph Brennan, Kent Bimson, and Mike Kalaf: “The Army Experiment 4 (AE4) Simulation to Army Battle Command System (ABCS) Experiments” (Fall ’97 SIW paper), June 1997. [2] STRICOM and the ADST II AE4 contractor support team:  “Draft Army Experiment IV (AE4) After Action Report”, Nov 1997.[3] STRICOM and the ADST II AE4 contractor support team:  Technical Concept For Army Experiment IV (AE4) DO 0034 – CDRL AB02”, 29 August 1997.Author BiographyMR. JOSEPH M. BRENNAN is a Systems Engineer at United States Army Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM) in Orlando, Florida.  Mr. Brennan earned a Master’s of Science degree in Industrial Engineering from Texas A&M University in Bryan, Texas.  Mr. Brennan earned a Bachelor’s of Science in Mechanical Engineering from University of Central Florida in Orlando, Florida.  Mr. Brennan’s research interests include the study of linkages between simulation and ABCS components, and technologies relating to HLA.				