Simulation Based AcquisitionRobin FrostUSD(A&T) DTSE&E/SEPentagon, Rm 3D1075Washington, DC 20301-3000frostrl@acq.osd.milDave ThomenScience Applications International Corporation8301 Greensboro Drive, Suite 209McLean, VA 22102dthomen@mail.etas.comKEYWORDSSimulation Based Acquisition; SBAABSTRACT:  The Defense Department envisions an acquisition process supported by the robust, collaborative use of simulation technology that is integrated across acquisition phases and programs. The goals of Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) are to:      (1)    Substantially reduce the time, resources, and risk associated with the entire acquisition process;      (2)    Increase the quality, military worth, and supportability of fielded systems while reducing total ownership cost throughout the total life cycle; and      (3)    Enable Integrated Product and Process Development (IPPD) across the entire acquisition life cycle. As Dr. Patricia Sanders, Director, Test, System Engineering and Evaluation, cited in a recent paper entitled “Simulation Based Acquisition”: “It is clear that integrated product and process development, backed by a strong commitment to computer-based modeling and simulation tools, provides a dominant and competitive edge in the commercial marketplace and a distinct warfighting advantage on the battlefield.  It provides an alternate path for getting to market first, at lower cost.  In the process, quality is improved.  The underlying technology is widely available, and market forces are driving industry toward simulation-based acquisition.  So what is needed to fully embrace this approach?” (reference [1])The benefits from the SBA process will be realized not only as time and cost savings within individual programs, but also as cost savings when a program makes use of design repositories, reengineered tools and products from other programs. 1.	IntroductionThere are several revolutions underway today within the Department of Defense.  The Revolution in Military Affairs challenges us to be prepared for uncertainty; to do things differently than they have been done before.  Our focus has shifted to such things as information dominance, rapid force projection, and smart self-contained weapons.  As we modernize our armed forces, this revolution is defining what we must buy.  Likewise, the Revolution in Business Affairs directs that we place management emphasis on core competencies.  There is an emphasis to reduce overhead, leverage computer technology and implement integrated products.  This revolution is impacting how we buy.It is becoming clear that modeling and simulation (M&S) will become core resources as we face these multiple fronts and their implications for the future of acquisition within DoD.  In response to the changes in military affairs, we must replace existing equipment with fewer systems having greater flexibility and complexity.  For all those involved in the acquisition of these new systems (whether determining if they will meet the requirements or how they will contribute in a system of systems environment), the use of M&S early and throughout the acquisition process will become essential.  To fully implement the acquisition reforms, the members of the integrated product teams (IPTs) will need to communicate their ideas in a collaborative environment and share a common vision and understanding of the proposed system.  M&S will be the catalyst that will make that happen.OSD has taken on a new initiative, called Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA), that addresses, through robust use of simulation, what we buy and how we buy it.2.	What Is SBA?2.1	BackgroundTo understand the need for SBA, we need to look at where we are today in acquisition.  On an average, systems take 8 to 10 years to design, and 15 to 20 years to field.  The current environment is characterized by the fact that the full potential of IPPD and the IPTs is not realized, 90% of our costs are set much before milestone II of a program’s life, and our operation and support costs have become the proverbial tail wagging the dog.  In many cases, M&S continues to be characterized by highly specialized, one time use models with unique data requirements, and limited reusability.  See figure 1.Figure 1The Vice President has directed, as part of the National Performance Review goals, that delivery time for our new systems is to be cut by 25%.  Our DoD leadership has stretched this goal to make an even more aggressive target of 50%.  The Defense Systems Affordability Council has recognized the potential that M&S brings to acquisition and has tapped SBA to be one of the three top initiatives to help realize the stretch goal they have set before themselves.2.2	VisionToday, SBA is only a concept.  Although elements of SBA can be found to exist in current programs, the entire concept has yet to be developed and implemented.  SBA is more than just the use of M&S in the acquisition process.  SBA is the envisioned future operating concept of the DOD acquisition system (see figure 2). Specifically, the Acquisition Council of the DoD Executive Council on Modeling and Simulation (EXCIMS) has stated that the vision of SBA is:An acquisition process in which DoD and Industry are enabled by robust, collaborative use of simulation technology that is integrated across acquisition phases and programs.  The goals of Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) are to:Substantially reduce the time, resources, and risk associated with the entire acquisition process;Increase the quality, military worth and supportability of fielded systems while reducing total ownership costs throughout the total life cycle;Enable Integrated Product and Process Development (IPPD) across the entire acquisition life cycle.Figure 22.3	Evidence for Confidence in SBAThe confidence the DoD leadership has placed in SBA is based on strong and reliable evidence demonstrated in recent acquisition programs.  In the Study on the Effectiveness of Modeling and Simulation in the Weapon System Acquisition Process, instances are cited that illustrate the potential benefits of SBA [Ref. 2].  Examples include how M&S tools have permitted the Navy to reduce the standard parts list from 95,000 for the Seawolf class submarine to about 16,000 for the NSSN.  The Army Tank and Automotive Research Development and Engineering Center was able to design a new, low silhouette tank prototype using 14 engineers for 16 months, whereas it previously took 55 engineers 36 months.  Using CAD on the Air Force B-2 permitted them to achieve first-time correct tube bending of expensive titanium electronic cable conduits.The evidence from programs such as these, combined with examples from industry (e.g., the automotive and aircraft manufacturers) and the research initiatives of DARPA and other agencies (e.g., Simulation Based Design) illustrates the potential contribution a comprehensive, integrated simulation-based approach to defense acquisition can have.  SBA entails a deliberate and coordinated use of M&S across the many acquisition domains, over all phases of a program’s life cycle.  It further promotes the reuse of M&S between programs.3.	Not Just TechnologyAlthough it has been the advances in computer and other M&S enabling technologies in recent years that has made the concept of SBA feasible, it is not the technological challenges that offers us the biggest hurdles in the next few years, rather it is the cultural and process changes that pose the greatest challenges to implementing SBA.This past fall, a team composed of representatives of government and industry examined the question of how to implement SBA.  Some of their findings were as follows:3.1	SBA is InevitableThe evidence of what can now be done with M&S in acquisition, and the number of independent initiatives currently underway indicates that, if given enough time, the acquisition process will eventually evolve into a simulation-based approach.  The issue is whether we can afford to wait that long, or if there are smart steps we can take now to accelerate its realization in 2007, rather than 2027.3.2	Shared Use of Data, Tools and Techniques is EssentialThis sharing must occur between all participants of the process, not only between government and industry, but also among government, and between industries.  In many cases the most significant barriers are the legal, bureaucratic and social barriers that stand in the way.  This issue goes beyond proprietary data rights.  Although we have seen examples (e.g., a “model marketplace” established at Boeing’s Defense and Space Group) where they are making headway in this area, we may need changes to existing policy or the creation of new policy.  Other changes, however, are not precluded by policy, but simply need to be instituted to overcome existing cultural or process obstacles.3.3	Compatible Processes and ApproachesThe team recognized that there must be a single overarching SBA process and approach.  Economies cannot be realized if industry must respond to four different SBA processes with the four Service respectively.  Neither can Government define SBA without the participation of industry.  Together, a single framework for SBA must be forged.3.4	Cultural ChangesCultural resistance to change is a significant barrier.  The recent industry survey on acquisition reform implementation revealed “cultural resistance”, for the most part ascribed to government, as being the most frequently cited barrier to acquisition reform implementation (reference [3]).  The test community, for example, is currently undergoing a cultural shift with the evolution of the Simulation Test and Evaluation Process (STEP), a sub-process of SBA.  This new paradigm is a collaboration of simulation and test as part of an effective evaluation strategy.  The traditional “test-fix-test” approach becomes a “model-simulate-fix-test-iterate approach” with problems fixed as they are discovered.  As further evidence of the significance of overcoming existing cultural barriers, an American Defense Preparedness Association (ADPA) study in 1996 indicated that there are no technical showstoppers to implementing SBA, rather the primary issues associated with SBA were largely cultural (reference [4]).3.5	IncentivesProgram Managers will need incentives to change from the traditional approach of weapon system acquisition to a new approach that incorporates the tenets of SBA.  Given the extensive use of modeling and virtual prototyping early in the program, it is likely that future programs will experience even greater costs earlier in the acquisition process.  (The savings comes when total ownership costs are examined.)  The challenge is to identify the incentives needed to motivate the acquisition community to alter current acquisition processes and budgets, and to accelerate adoption of the SBA initiatives.3.6	InvestmentTo understand the numerous initiatives currently underway, to address all aspects of the current acquisition process, and to explore the potential to and impact on all the functional domains within the acquisition community, a significant investment and refocusing of resources may be required.  Standards and tools already being developed will continue, policies will have to be written, and investment will be required to establish the community-wide infrastructure that is needed.  SBA can leverage the tools and technologies currently being developed in both government and industry.  SBA can also benefit from and build upon the investment that the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office has made in establishing a common technical architecture for the entire DoD M&S community.4.	Acquisition In 2007What will the acquisition environment look like 10 years hence?  This question was recently addressed at the Military Operations Research Society SIMTECH 2007 Workshop held in December 1997.  Working from the same vision statement cited above, a group of government and industry participants identified four elements that would characterize the future state of acquisition.  These are:4.1	Increased contractor total system responsibility with more efficient government insightsA “trusted partnership” is needed in the future.  This partnership will establish a close working relationship between government and industry, with industry given more responsibility for the product produced and  government providing insight rather than oversight.  Working together will enable a closer collaboration of data and models.4.2	Highly integrated electronic work environment across all life cycle functionsIt is envisioned that much of acquisition will be conducted in a virtual state.  There will need to be concurrent and continuous development with constant evaluation of alternatives.  The analysis of requirements and the development of associated training elements are an integral part of the acquisition process.  The process readily accommodates the insertion of technologies, and is flexible to accommodate sudden changes in force needs as it responds to a diversity of real world requirements.  The IPTs will need to be resourced, funded and empowered to participate in the highly integrated electronic work environment.4.3	Reduced life cycle costs and development time to be consistent with commercial practicesWith greater industry responsibility should come a reduction in development times to align with commercial practices.  This will be needed to ensure the technologies incorporated in a program are current and not obsolete.  Up front investments will need to be made to reduce the total life cycle costs and to reduce the time between the decision to build and fielding.  Even though quantities procured in the future will be smaller, savings will accrue due to economies realized through the integrated use and reuse of M&S across programs.  We also expect lower production costs when virtual manufacturing and other simulation techniques enable us to reopen manufacturing lines rather than maintaining inefficient lines for low production systems (i.e., ships).4.4	DoD Commitment to Life Cycle Cost as a Basis for Acquisition Selection/DecisionsKnowledge of total life cycle costs will need to be captured in system models and simulations.  These will be the basis for acquisition decisions.  It is therefore, imperative that models and simulations be authoritative representations of the real world entities they represent, and that the data, likewise, be equally credible.  5.0	Current Initiatives UnderwayOSD is committed to making SBA a reality, and recognizes the need for change in the acquisition process if we are to be able to modernize the force.  A joint task force is currently being created to develop the roadmap that lays out how DoD will move from our current process to that which fulfills the vision set forth earlier.  Composed of representatives from all the DoD components, under the leadership of Defense Systems Affordability Council through Dr. Sanders, Director, Test, Systems Engineering and Evaluation and the M&S community’s Acquisition Council, and in close cooperation with industry, this task force will chart the course whereby DoD transitions to an acquisition process that is enabled by a robust, collaborative use of simulation technology that is integrated across phases and programs.6.	SummaryWhether the SIMTECH 2007 characterization of future acquisition is completely accurate or not, it does indicate the direction defense acquisition is moving.  To fulfill the objectives of acquisition reform, and to achieve the vision as specified by the Acquisition Council, it will require further changes in the way we acquire defense systems.  That direction leverages the inherent strengths of M&S made feasible due to recent advances in M&S enabling technologies.  The principle challenges that remain are primarily cultural and procedural.  Although technical challenges lie ahead, there are no real technical showstoppers.  Identifying the specific changes in how we do business, and undertaking the challenges of implementing those changes is the real work in the months and years  ahead.  The revolutions in military affairs and business affairs are changing what and how we buy.  The acquisition community is called upon to contribute to the development of SBA, to seek those opportunities to employ M&S in their acquisition programs  and to share the experiences they have gained.  7.	References[1]	Dr. Patricia Sanders, Simulation Based Acquisition, Program Manager, Vol. 26 No. 140 (pp. 72-76), September - October 1997[2]	DTSE&E study: “Study on the Effectiveness of Modeling and Simulation in the Weapon System Acquisition Process”,  October 1996[3]	Coopers & Lybrand study “Acquisition Reform Implementation, An Industry Survey”, October 1997[4]	ADPA, “Study on the Application of Modeling and Simulation to the Acquisition of Major Weapons Systems”, September 1996 Author BiographiesROBIN FROST is a Systems Engineer in the Systems Engineering Directorate of Office of the USD(A&T).  Ms Frost holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Systems Engineering from the University of Virginia.  She has worked as an engineer and an engineering supervisor for IBM and the US Navy, and has served in the Office of the Secretary of Defense since 1995.  She oversees OSD policies on M&S in Acquisition, Chairs the Acquisition Functional Working Group under the Acquisition Council and heads the Industry Government team researching SBA.DAVE THOMEN, a Senior Analyst with SAIC, provides technical support to USD(A&T) DTSE&E on M&S in Acquisition.  He holds a Master of Science degree in Operations Research from the Naval Postgraduate School.  He supported the development of the Simulation, Test and Evaluation Process (STEP) Guidelines and has participated on the Government Industry Team researching SBA.