The Susceptibility Reduction Simulation (SRS) FederateJeffery V. MosleyOptiMetrics, Inc.3115 Professional DriveAnn Arbor, MI 48104-5131(734) 973-1177 x204 HYPERLINK mailto:mosley@omi.com mosley@omi.comKeywords:Survivability, Signature Management, EOCM, SensorsABSTRACT: The goal of the SRS Federate is to produce an HLA compliant phenomenology-based simulation of non-ballistic survivability enhancement suites in tactically relevant operational scenarios. Our simulation federate will support man-in- the- loop and computer- in- the- loop interactions for one-on-one, few-on-few, and many-on-many engagements. The building of sequentially complex engagement scenarios supports system level and force-on-force analyses and effectiveness quantification against threat sensors, and precision guided or smart munitions.1. BackgroundGround combat vehicle susceptibility reduction technologies are those that seek to manage vehicle unique and identifying electro-optical signatures, and use electro-optical sensors and countermeasures in complementary ways, to enhance system and crew survivability against precision guided munitions. When used together these technologies constitute survivability suites. Figure 1.01.1 The Goal of SRSThe goal of the SRS Federate is to produce an HLA compliant phenomenology-based simulation of non-ballistic survivability enhancement suites in tactically relevant operational scenarios. Our simulation federate will support man-in-the-loop and computer-in-the-loop interactions for one-on-one, few-on-few, and many-on-many engagements. The building of sequentially complex engagement scenarios supports system level and force-on-force analyses and effectiveness quantification against threat sensors, and precision guided or smart munitions.The SRS Federate combines existing models and interactive simulations in novel ways in support of RDA analysis, user requirements determination, and virtual vehicle integration and testing. The current capability provides simulation of facetted visual and IR signature treatments, laser and missile warning sensors, smoke, IR and APS countermeasures against a range of battlefield sensors and munitions.   1.2 SimulationThe concept of simulation as it will be applied to federate entities seeks to enhance our ability to assess the performance of competing technologies or components in synthetic environments, and to facilitate suite assessments. Distributed and object-oriented simulations, fed by higher fidelity engineering models and physical test results, will be combined into what is called an HLA compliant federate. The complementing federates or simulation objects include those from the munitions development community, and simulation interoperability proto-federations (sensors, synthetic environments, and weapons systems). Together, we will become an HLA Federation of simulations, providing a capability that can be used in either a distributed mode or as a data source providing aggregated performance values for constructive models and simulations. 2.0 Significance of the ProblemCurrent and future combat system developments will include integrated suites of non-ballistic survivability enhancements. The assurance of combat mission effectiveness will surely rely on the capability susceptibility reduction measures to reduce, if not eliminate, the threat from precision guided and smart munitions. Traditional design and trade study methods will not be sufficient to support the development of functional and performance specifications for integrated susceptibility reduction (SR) suites. The need to quantify user requirements so that they point or focus on technologically achievable design alternatives is crucial to cost effective technology integration.Beyond this, the question of which part of the threat engagement profile is best exploited by which part of the SR suite is often noted. Specifically, when does signature management provide the most benefit? What level of automation should an EO sensor countermeasure suite have in a manned combat system? How effective must each constituent of the SR suite be, to provide the required system and force level operational effectiveness with cost, weight, power, and space as constraints?SR Suite SpecificationsImportant, if not crucial to the design of SR suites, is the understanding of the intended threat environment, its sensor and munition constituents, their reaction timelines, and potential counter-countermeasures. To provide potential suite development contractors with unambiguous functional and performance specifications, the government material developer must have quantified discrete performance levels for the suite identified. The performance levels must also account for variations in environment, the threat, and potential host vehicle interactions and interfaces. Of great importance is the interaction at the hardware and software interfaces. The SR suite will in most cases be competing with other add-on systems on current combat systems, whereas with a new start system, the space claim may be sufficiently accounted for in design. The intended functionality must be identified for the suite developer as these functions may rely on integrated vehicle solutions that require host vehicle software and processor resources. User interface is also a concern. Not only must various audio and visual warnings be developed and standardized, but also the warning information must be provided to the combat vehicle crew in a timely and unambiguous manner. Information overload is a real concern for current and future digitized and data-bused combat systems.SR Development ScenariosThe pieces which must come together to support virtual and physical test and evaluation should complement developmental or technical testing as well as operational evaluation. With an eye on system and component acquisition costs, the material developer must make efficient use design and testing resources, to mitigate acquisition milestone decisions and exit criteria. For virtual or simulated test and evaluation, the scenarios may overlap to provide the user with an early evaluation of the proposed suite, and the technical tester with a focused view on what should matter in the physical system test. Concepts for development and evaluation scenarios extend from distributed networks to closed battlelab experiments. The latter supports the sometimes classified nature and programmatics of SR suite development.2.2.1 Tactically Relevant Scenarios These will be motivated by the user to represent the most stressing environments for SR suite operation. Usually focused on close combat, a total scenario may extend back to the point of combat system embarkation. The inclusion of scenarios for the littoral environment, which support Marine Corps and Navy surf-to-shore scenarios are also to be considered tactically relevant. The use of AAR from previously fought real battles can be especially helpful to quantify the contribution of the enhanced survivability provided by SR suites, in a way that is easily perceivable by the user, (OPTEMPO, FERs, etc.). The selection of tactical scenarios should seek to use as much of the actual functionality of the SR suite, as can be effectively managed. The range of potential scenarios is rather large, sometimes only small subsets of detail to actual close combat forces contact. The scenario developer can specify vignettes that provide the focus at the highest level of conflict within an engagement.The SR suite functionality provided by the Federate can be digitally tethered to battle lab simulators and used in warfighting experiments, allowing relief from scripted battles.  Additionally, as training systems such as the Bradley Advanced Training System (BATS), and CCTT are fielded, user requirements can be turned into software and hardware interfaces, which can be programmed into the operational combat system.2.2.2 Virtual PrototypingVirtual prototyping and design scenarios, as mentioned previously, should mimic or further dissect the important physical (operating hours, terrain profiles, tactics and doctrine) interactions from operational or tactical scenarios and vignettes. Although design scenarios will focus on the component to system interactions in addition to the interactions between the SR suite to the atmosphere, they can help the user to develop enhanced tactics, training, and doctrine relating to the SR suite. The use of virtual reality techniques allows the designer and the user to virtually see system interfaces, and verify SR suite form and fit prior to solidifying the design. The use of models and simulations that are a part of the SRS Federate help to provide the user and the developer with top level system impacts from the SR suite. Interaction with the synthetic natural environment is key to designing the SR suite. Electromagnetic signatures as both cueing and detection measures are key to the list of functional requirements for the SR suite.The Federate will take advantage of known test performance of the SR suite components to provide base line representations of the suite capabilities. These virtual representations can be formalized into digitized specifications for virtual fabrication and physical prototyping.Threat SR Suite Interaction ModelingIt is a part of the development approach of the SRS Federate to survey efforts of other organizations to provide authentic representations of certain parts of the simulation environment. Chief among these is the representations of precision guided and smart munitions. Figure 1.0 above identifies the generic mix of munitions which are of interest to material developers and of the Federate. Accurate accounting of munition, seeker, and man in the loop engagement parameters down to the level of discrete simulation is envisioned as a required function for SR suite demonstration and evaluation. The need to know when an engagement time line begins, and when the SR suite acknowledges that engagement, is crucial to quantifying suite effectiveness, and assessing computational accuracy of threat p(d)t and SR suite sensor p(d) for a given set of encounter parameters, (i.e. range, atmospheric attenuation, FOV, and aspect angle). The processes for both the threat and the SR suite related to target acquisition and threat avoidance must account for discrete changes in altitude or angle of arrival in the threat attack profile (jinking), to include man-in-the-loop off target designation, where threat seeker guidance signals are not put directly on target until a second or two before the round impacts. SR suites are designed to increase the miss distance of the threat round in a signature management of soft kill countermeasure application, or to destroy the round in flight to avoid being hit for a hard kill application. Traditionally the munition sensor and SR suite signature management effects have both been modeled either generically, or by stochastic approach. Similarly, the effects of the hit avoidance portion of the SR suite have been modeled parametrically, with no regard to the gain in signature as the seeker approaches, or dynamic atmospheric phenomena which effects both the SR warning sensor sensitivity and EO countermeasure effectiveness.  At best, the effectiveness of threat and SR suite component interaction has amounted to a weighted roll of the dice.The SRS Federate seeks to engage fully the advancements of SIW forum participants in the areas of sensors, environment, and weapons systems, to integrate know effects of selected SR suite constituents into a physics based synthetic environment. The Federate will support real time and slower than real time simulation of threat SR suite interactions.SR AccreditationThe plan for validation of the products and functions of the SRS Federate will, as mentioned previously, focus on simulating against known or tested SR component values. It is envisioned that future combat systems will integrate non-ballistic survivability components into survivability suites for enhanced self-protection. Contacts have been made with the SIW validation forum to assist in the validation certification of the Federate. Short of this, the user or material developer’s major decision authority will be charged with certifying that the Federate is accredited for use in development programs.The accreditation strategy is to develop entrance criteria relating to the minimum functions of the Federate, which are to be verified prior to its use in any experiment. The entrance criteria will include interoperability as needed with other simulation models and tools to support interactive and distributed simulation. The ability to collect on-line data related to PDU processing will be a part of the validation process. Simulator and stealth display interface must also be verified.Final validation will come upon certification that the Federate accurately simulates or has identified interim fixes to simulate ground combat signature management and electronic warfare interaction with specific threat munitions and sensors in synthetic natural environments.2.5  Human Cognitive BehaviorAreas which effect the functionality of the Federate are real and simulated human cognitive behaviors. In past Army battle lab experiments the integration of semi-automatic, manual, and tactical countermeasures which are complemented by SR suite performance were not completely exercised. It is important to note that combat vehicle crews of today do not wish their on-board countermeasure systems to activate themselves, other than for passive warning receivers. Additionally, it may be the crew's decision not to activate any countermeasure or to use evasive tactics to include counterfire.  The ability of the vehicle crew to select the level of automation for their countermeasure system is tactically relevant and must be included as a function of the Federate user interface.  A function of the SRS Federate will be to identify and resolve human-in-the-loop reaction times to provide higher fidelity simulations.2.6  CGFsThe Federate will utilize ModSAF CGFs for BLUFOR unit build-up and for the OPFOR. As stated above, the deployment of automatic countermeasures may not be desirable for human in the loop. For CGFs, the decision time line for receiving and processing sensor data, and countermeasure activation must be accounted for. Additionally, the human cognitive behavior related to tactical countermeasures must be standardized in upgrades to the ModSAF code. As mentioned above, the Federate seeks to leverage and to facilitate the advances in simulation to support the realization of the SRS goals.3.0 SRS Technical ApproachLINK PowerPoint.Show.8 "\\\\IC9\\WWWDEV\\Technical Papers\\98-TP-01fig2.ppt" "" \a \pFigure 2.03.1 Supporting Models and SimulationsThe SRS Federate development consists of using existing models and simulations together with the emerging HLA distributed infrastructure and development standards to achieve its goal. Currently available models include the Visual Perception Model (VPM). VPM replicates human behavior with respect to target detectability. The model has been successfully calibrated to visual perception test results. The Federate will use VPM in lieu of man in the loop, for quantification of both visual and IR detection of the target. Detection probabilities can be passed to ModSAF or CASTFOREM to support analysis and evaluation. (See Figure 2.0)MultiSIM IDS provides the distributable link and common interface for simulating the performance and effectiveness of sensor, countermeasure suites. The simulation plays the effects of receiver sensitivity to threat signatures and engagement cues. MultiSIM projects the countermeasure ability to disrupt the threat munition in terms of p(hit) by shifting the munition's aimpoint.  The simulation is compatible with existing manned simulators and ModSAF CGFs. The munition's effective probability of hit can be transferred to either ModSAF or CASTFOREM to support analysis and evaluation. (See Figure 2.0)3.2 Technical TasksCurrently we are conducting a survey of government and industry existing and emerging simulation tools and components to support the Federate goal. Upon completion of the survey, it may be come necessary for the Federate to create its own objects, as they may not be available. Among these, it is expected that certain munition simulations will need to be developed. In this event, the Federate would focus only on a small subset of the munitions of greatest importance and highest fidelity to the user.Improvement of the cognitive behaviors of ModSAF entities to represent realistic combat crew reaction to threat warning is needed. Assessment of the current CGF rule set is underway.Internal to the Federate, enhancement of the existing threat resolution module is required. Current design of the module does not replicate the capabilities needed to allow the crew to select threat priority or countermeasure preference. The module must also provide a status accounting of countermeasures expended and threat occurrences. Schedule for DevelopmentThe current schedule for Federate development is contingent on the receipt of additional funding to complete the required programming enhancements. Funding is available to complete the initial government and industry survey, and to provide interface specifications for the identified models and simulations.A demonstration is planned for the May-June 1998 time frame, which will serve to demonstrate graphically the interaction of CGFs and selected SR suites with several munition systems.The schedule for completion of this project is to coincide with the initiation of Phase II of the Suite of Survivability Enhancement Systems (SSES) advanced development (involves the integration of several sensor technologies with EO countermeasures such as jammers). The SSES program is managed under the PEO for Ground Combat and Support Systems, Project Manager for Ground Systems Integration. Given complete funding receipt by the summer of 1998, the schedule can still be met.4.0 Federate Assessment Much interest has been received as to the potential for the Federate to support near-term survivability trades studies, user demonstrations, and virtual test and evaluation. Potential support to programs such as the Future Scout/Calvery System, Future Infantry Vehicle, and Future Combat System has been identified. As mentioned above, support to SSES program phases is encompassed as part of the Federate goal. Government and industry interest should continue to increase as hard products are developed.5.0 ConclusionsThe SRS Federate maintains an open invitation to potential users of its products and capabilities. OptiMetrics, Inc., the principle for the SRS Federate development, encourages industry and government organizations to provide information about known tools, simulations and data which support the creation and viability of the Federate. Future capabilities to develop SR suite digital specifications may be attempted, and are well within current simulation and distributed communication architecture capability. The achievement of such a capability will greatly enhance designer and user connectivity to produce robust SR suites which will enhance combat vehicle crew and system level survivability into the next century.EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8