Starting Points for Representing Humans within the High Level Architecture (HLA) The Human Starter SOM and Human FOM Starter SetShirley M. Pratt and Paul T. Barham Reality by Design, Inc.910 Major Sherman Lane, Suite 205, Monterey, CA 93940831-655-0440 HYPERLINK mailto:pratts@gdi.net pratts@gdi.net and  HYPERLINK mailto:barham@rbd.com barham@rbd.comDeborah A. FullfordMÄK Technologies Inc.185 Alewife Parkway, Cambridge, MA 02138617-876-8085 HYPERLINK mailto:deb@mak.com deb@mak.comJeff KoechlingBoston Dynamics Inc.614 Massachusetts Ave., Cambridge, MA 02139617-868-5600jck@bdi.comKeywords:HLA, FOM, SOM, Human Representation, Modeling and Simulation.ABSTRACT: In January 1999, the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) organized a small working group of government and industry representatives to develop a starter Simulation Object Model (SOM) for representing humans within the High Level Architecture (HLA) across the live, virtual, and constructive simulation domains. The Starter SOM was designed to be extendible so that it could serve as a common starting point for a variety of different simulation uses. During the Starter SOM development, several issues arose when building a common set of data for the Starter SOM and determining what users needed to get started using the HLA. To address these issues, DMSO extended the effort to cover the development of a Human Federation Object Model (FOM) Starter Set. The FOM Starter Set will provide a starting point for individual combatant (IC) and non-combatant (NC) federate/federation development teams who want to use HLA but desire or need a well-designed example to help them get started. This paper discusses the development of the Human Starter SOM, the evolution towards the development of the Human FOM Starter Set, and the lessons learned to date.1. IntroductionThe Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) has recognized the need for and the importance of creating common starting points for using High Level Architecture (HLA) for related groups of users in the same or related domains. While the HLA allows users the flexibility to choose what, when and how data will be communicated during a distributed simulation, there are currently very limited resources available to support the development of HLA Simulation Object Models (SOMs) and Federation Object Models (FOMs), key steps toward using the HLA [1]. Reference FOMs, such as the Real-time Platform Reference (RPR) FOM, and most of the existing object models in the Object Model Library (OML) have been developed for specific purposes and are not meant to serve as guides or starting points for future extensions and reuse by others [2]. The Object Model Data Dictionary (OMDD) provides numerous potential object model components but it provides no real object model framework to build upon [3].To help related groups of users get started using the HLA, DMSO started an initiative in January 1999 to create a Starter SOM. Starter SOMs were to be new object models, independent of all other existing SOMs and FOMs, including reference FOMs. The Human Starter Simulation Object Model was the first Starter SOM effort. The area of human simulations, which includes the simulation of individual combatant (IC) and non-combatant (NC) operations, has not been covered well by any existing object models and was not supported well by previous distributed simulation approaches such as Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) and Simulation Network (SIMNET) [4]-[6]. The purpose of this Human Starter SOM was to provide a starting point or common foundation for all IC/NC related federates in order to increase reuse and interoperability. It would contain the core data elements needed by the majority of the entity level human simulations across the live, virtual, and constructive domains. The development of the Human Starter SOM involved tension between a SOM that would include only those "Lowest Common Denominator" data elements that would be used by all simulations, and a SOM that could be useful on its own, without any extensions.  The working group felt strongly that a common starting point for federations would be more useful than a starting point for individual federates. Thus, DMSO extended the effort to cover the development of a Human FOM Starter Set. This paper discusses the development of the Human Starter SOM, the evolution towards the development of the Human FOM Starter Set, and the lessons learned to date.2. Starter SOM Overview DMSO organized a working group consisting of representatives from various organizations to participate on the Human Starter SOM effort. Participants were chosen based on their experiences working with individual combatant and non-combatant modeling and simulation and the HLA:Boston Dynamics, Inc. (BDI)Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) Lockheed Martin Information Systems (LMIS) Advanced Simulation Center (ASC)MÄK Technologies, Inc. Reality by Design, Inc. (RBD)Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC) Applied System Software Engineering Technology (ASSET) GroupU.S. Army (USA) Soldier and Biological Chemical Command (SBCCOM) Natick Soldier System CenterThe working group was limited in size in order to concentrate the efforts toward developing the Human Starter SOM. “Reach-back” groups that also have interests in modeling humans within the HLA were identified to help broaden the base of knowledge and expertise for the working group.The objective of the Human Starter SOM was to address entity level simulations of humans across the live, virtual, and constructive domains. The Starter SOM was meant to serve only as a common starting point and be complete enough to be useful but not overly complex. Namely, it would not contain data elements that were only applicable for specific domains or applications or those that solve existing human simulation issues not shared by the larger human simulation community. The Starter SOM needed to be readily extendible and it was expected that natural follow-on efforts would emerge to extend the Human Starter SOM for specific domains. Other Starter SOM design considerations are discussed in [7].The working group sought to fill the Starter SOM with the common data elements that comprised the intersection of the three simulation domains. It began the Human Starter SOM development process by reviewing a proposed list of data elements that were thought to be needed to support distributed human simulations. This initial list was developed independently of any existing object models (FOMs/SOMs, reference or otherwise) and other legacy networking protocols. By consensus, the group made additions, deletions, and modifications to the list. 3. Human Starter SOM The working group identified ten data elements describing a human object as relevant to the majority of distributed human simulations. Though human interactions were considered during the working group’s discussions, the group decided to focus on identifying and describing the attributes of the human object. A snapshot of the Human Starter SOM components is shown in Table 1.The working group described each data element, breaking some of them down into constituent attributes. Wherever possible, they defined data structures, data values or enumerations, and units. The representation of some attributes, such as the position coordinate system, were left to be decided when federating with other simulations. In other cases, details such as enumerations were fully specified. The selection of attributes and specification of enumerated values is obviously open ended. Each data element provoked many different ideas and opinions.A data element was split into separate single attributes when the working group found that it could be described by multiple quantities that could each stand alone as individual attributes (e.g., Life State). Other times, a data element was defined to be a complex attribute or record structure consisting of more than one field (e.g., Posture, Affiliation and Identification). A record structure was used when the working group felt that more than one field was needed to describe an attribute fully. In other words, it would not usually be sufficient to send just one value without the other component(s). In other cases, a data element was split into both single attributes and complex attributes (e.g., Physical Appearance). Strings were used when data values for the attributes were expected to be combinations of numbers, letters or special characters. They were also used when data values were expected to vary so widely that enumerating them did not appear practical. Fixed length arrays were suitable for attributes that have a known number of homogenous components (e.g., Position, Orientation, Velocity).  Variable length arrays allowed attributes to be described by one or more data values (e.g., Affiliation, Clothing, Manipulations). Variable length arrays could even be embedded within other variable length arrays (e.g., Clothing Color). Though some of the attributes are complex, the overall structure of the Human Starter SOM is relatively flat. When users subscribe to an attribute, they receive only the information pertaining to that attribute.From the beginning, it was expected that users would extend the Human Starter SOM for their specific needs. Extensions could involve adding new data elements and attributes, adding new attributes to existing data elements, or adding new enumerations. Table 2 lists some example extensions to the Human Starter SOM that may be useful for certain types of human simulation applications.4. Starter SOM FeedbackThe first public presentation of the Human Starter SOM effort was made at the 8th Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation (CGF&BR) Conference in Orlando, FL, May 1999. The working group requested and received valuable feedback during the presentations.  Three of the most notable comments were:There is too much focus on visual application needs.Starting points for modeling other human aspects, such as human behaviors and performance, are needed.More than a common core set of data is needed in order for it to be really useful.The comments were not really surprising given the newness of the Starter SOM concept and difficulty in being to the first develop something that is new and not well understood. During the process of deriving the core set of data attributes, the working group itself was often unsure as to what would be useful as a base to start from and what would be not enough to start from. Some group members were not sure whether a significant common core of data appropriate for most human simulations existed. In addition, the group found it very hard to specify the details of the Human Starter SOM contents without having any simulation context or target application in mind. Because humans are extremely varied and versatile, there did not seem to be general “one size fits all” type of answers for human simulations. The working group agreed that the Starter SOM presented at CGF&BR represented visual aspects of humans in much greater detail than it represented behavioral, psychological, and physiological attributes. The group is working to balance the interests of the group and to accommodate the needs of the under-represented domains.5. Human FOM Starter SetBased on the experiences gained during the development of the Human Starter SOM, DMSO extended the working group effort to cover the development of a Human FOM Starter Set. The purpose of this Human FOM Starter Set is to provide a starting point for federate or federation development teams who want to use HLA but desire or need a well-designed example to help them get started. To make it easier for them to use the HLA, they could download a FOM Starter Set from the Object Model Library and then customize it for their needs. The Human FOM Starter Set would also be in addition to and independent of all other existing object models to include existing reference FOMs.The Human FOM Starter Set will be a set of completed Object Model Template (OMT) tables containing data that covers a logical subset of IC/NC simulations across the live, constructive and virtual domains. During its development, the working group will consider two or three specific domains and populate the Human FOM Starter Set with enough attributes and data descriptions for it to be considered a useful starting place for anyone in those domains.  At the time of this writing, the working group is addressing two distinct domains, visual/virtual simulations and constructive simulations. It is anticipated that some aspects of the FOM Starter Set may need to be decided or completed by the users on a federation specific basis. Like the Human Starter SOM, the Human FOM Starter Set may be extended as needed for specific uses. However, the Human FOM Starter Set will contain much more than a common set of data. It will contain an assortment of data attributes and values to describe humans, some of which may not be useful for all types of human simulations. It will provide specific examples for a couple of different domains. Table 3 provides a side by side comparison of the Human Starter SOM and Human FOM Starter Set characteristics.It is envisioned that FOM Starter Sets, in general, will provide a better means for one to get started using the HLA than what is currently available today. The Human FOM Starter Set is designed specifically to be a starting point for distributed human simulation developers who wish to use the HLA. The working group will present the Human Starter FOM Set to the HLA Architecture Management Group (AMG) in August 1999.  The group anticipates releasing it shortly thereafter.6. Lessons LearnedThis section lists lessons learned thus far during the development the Human Starter SOM and Human FOM Starter Set. Most of the lessons reflect the diversity of human simulations and the resulting difficulty in finding useful, common starting points.6.1 Difficulties grasping starter SOM concept The concept of a Starter SOM is very difficult for most people to grasp. To do so, people need to be aware of the limitations of the currently available HLA object model development resources and the advantages of having a common core set of data elements to start from. They must be willing to accept the fact that it will probably need to be extended in order for it to be useful for a specific purpose or application. This contradicts what many people view as “useful”.6.2 More than a common core is neededPeople need more than just a set of common data to get started using the HLA. They need to see common data that is needed by related types of simulations as well as application or domain specific types of data elements and attributes. They need placeholders for making extensions and examples of how to make such extensions. Generally, it is easier for users to delete what is not needed or modify something similar than to add what is not there at all.6.3 Avoid using generic data structures for passing common dataThe use of generic data structures for passing common data should be avoided. It is tempting to leave some attributes and/or attribute values that are strongly dependent on factors outside a particular simulation incompletely specified as generic data structures. However, people need details and examples to get started using the HLA. If data elements are to be specified at all, their meanings should be specified.  If meanings are not going to be specified, then the attributes should be described only at a high level. To say that some attribute, say Position, is three doubles without saying what those values mean is to pretend to define an object model.6.4 Approaches to developing HLA starting pointsThe working group was directed to use a bottom-up approach to developing the Human Starter SOM. Starter SOM contents were brainstormed without considering a specific human simulation, application or domain. To make a Mechanical Engineering analogy, assume that a SOM is like a part of a mechanism, say a gear. A FOM is then like the whole mechanism.  If someone is building a mechanism and needs a gear, then the person will design a gear to do just what is needed.  If, instead, the person plans to sell gears to mechanism designers, then he might design a whole family of gears that work together. But a person would rarely design a single gear without knowing how it would work in a given mechanism, or how it would fit in with a family of similar gears.Similarly, one might design a SOM as an element of a given FOM.  Or one might design a set of SOMs as building blocks for FOMs. The working group found it very difficult to design a single SOM for human simulations in general. A top-down approach could also have been used whereby different SOMs are created and then scrutinized for common elements. The latter approach is useful for the development of the Human FOM Starter Set because it will contain both common data elements as well as domain or application specific data elements.6.5 FOM examples need to be more focusedOnce something is understood well, one can reason about it using generalizations.  When first trying to understand something, it is much easier to reason about it from specific examples.  The working group doesn’t understand all human simulations well enough to try to make a "general" simulation.  However, the group can probably design some very effective simulations and learn something from the process.  The working group has had trouble getting rolling on the notion of FOM Starter Sets in part because it has so far described them in vague terms such as visual versus behavioral, or as constructive versus  human-in-the-loop.  More progress could be made by focusing further and defining FOMs for a sniper trainer, for a squad versus squad simulation with emphasis on morale, for a combat effectiveness simulator with emphasis on physiological factors, and for a sports analysis system with emphasis on mechanics, for example.7. AcknowledgmentsThe authors wish to acknowledge all of the collaborative and synergistic efforts of the entire working group: Jeff Koechling and Marc Raibert of BDI; Dr. Ruth Willis of DMSO; Dave Macannuco of LMIS ASC, Deb Fullford and Nils Reker of MÄK Technologies; Paul Barham, Shirley Pratt (independent contractor) and Joanne Metzger of RBD; Doug Reece and Matt Kraus of SAIC ASSET Group; and John O’Keefe and Bob Auer of USA SBCCOM Natick Soldier System Center.  Special thanks to Marnie Salisbury and Dr. Judith Dahmann of DMSO for organizing the effort and providing guidance.8. References[1] DMSO: “Object Model Template Specification Version 1.3”. http://www.dmso.mil/hla[2] DMSO: “High Level Architecture Object Model Library (OML)”. http://www.dmso.mil/hla/tools/[3] DMSO: “High Level Architecture Object Model Data Dictionary (OMDD)”. http://www.dmso.mil/hla/tools/[4]	IEEE: “IEEE 1278.1: IEEE Standard for Distributed Interactive Simulation – Application Protocols,” 1995.[5]	IEEE: “IEEE 1278.1A: IEEE Standard for Distributed Interactive Simulation - Application Protocol - Enumeration and Bit-encoded Values for use with IEEE 1278.1-1995, Standard for Distributed Interactive Simulation - Application Protocols,” 1995.[6]	Bolt, Beranek and Newman (BBN), Inc.: “The Simulation Network (SIMNET) Network and Protocols,” BBN, Inc., June 1991.[7]	Barham, P. T., Pratt, S. P., Fullford, D. A.: “The Development of the High Level Architecture (HLA) Human Starter Simulation Object Model (SOM)” Proceedings of the 8th Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation Conference, Orlando, FL, May 11-13, 1999. http://www.sisostds.org/cgf-br/8th/index.htmAuthor BiographiesSHIRLEY M. PRATT is an independent contractor in Orlando, FL, who has developed networked simulations of individual combatants and noncombatants for the Naval Postgraduate School NPSNET project and projects for U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) Analysis Center (TRAC) including Soldier Station developed by TRAC – White Sands Missile Range. Ms. Pratt has a BA in Applied Mathematics from U.C. Berkeley and an MS in Oceanography-Physics from U.C. San Diego. She has served as a member of the SIW Analysis Forum paper review panel since 1997.PAUL T. BARHAM is a Lead Simulation Architect and Principal Investigator at Reality by Design.  Mr. Barham is responsible for new projects and initiatives at RBD.  A large focus of his efforts relates to individual combatant simulation and the High Level Architecture.  Prior to joining RBD, Mr. Barham was the senior architect and lead programmer on the NPSNET-IV Project at the Naval Postgraduate School (NPS).   Preceding his work at NPS, he taught Software Design and 3D Computer Graphics courses at N. C. State University, where he earned his Master and Bachelor degrees in Computer Science.  He is a member of ACM, ACM SIGGRAPH, IEEE, IEEE Computer Society and SID.DEBORAH A. FULLFORD is the Director of Business Development at MäK Technologies.  She has been involved in distributed simulation for the past seven years and is currently on the IEEE ballot resolution committee for the HLA Rules, HLA Interface Specification, and Object Model Template standards.  Ms. Fullford has a M.S. in Aeronautical Engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a B.S. in Aerospace Engineering from Boston University. Ms. Fullford was a General Drafter on the HLA Standards Development Group.JEFF KOECHLING is Chief Engineer at Boston Dynamics Inc.  He received his Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering from Carnegie-Mellon University in 1989.  He was on the faculty at Cornell University from 1989-1993, where he taught courses on system dynamics, robotics, and modeling and simulation of dynamic systems.  His research at Cornell focused on modeling impact of rigid bodies and culminated in a systematic analysis of impact in the presence of coulomb friction.  He also did work on passive dynamic gait stability in legged robots.  In the course of his PhD thesis research on the limits of running speed, Koechling's robot ran 13.1 mph, setting the current world land speed record for legged robots.  See the Acknowledgments Section for a list of the individuals and organizations who participated in the working group.Data ElementDescriptionAttribute  [Components] (if complex)Data Type (Units)PositionLocation of the origin of the human. Coordinate system choice (flat world or round world) is exercise dependent. When on the ground, origin is a point on the ground under the human. When not on the ground, origin is near the bottom or downward side of the human.PositionArray of 3 floats (meters)OrientationDirection a human is facing. Heading indicates the forward direction of the human. Orientation component gives pitch and roll angles.HeadingFloat (radians)OrientationArray of 2 floats (radians)PostureBasic body configuration of a human: Standing, Kneeling, Prone, Supine, Sitting. There is an intuitive definition of forward. Posture transition is specified as a time when the entity will have changed to the associated posture. Examples:Immediate change to sitting posture (Sitting, 0.0)Standing in 3 sec (Standing, 3.0)Posture[Posture, Posture Transition]Record structure (pair):[Posture Enumeration, Float (seconds)]VelocityTime derivative of Position. Used for dead reckoning.VelocityArray of 3 floats (meters/sec)Turn RateTime derivative of Heading. Used for dead reckoning.Turn RateFloat (radians/sec)AffiliationThe organization a human belongs to and the role he/she has within the group.  A human may belong to more than one group and/or have more than one role in a group. Example:{(ABC Co., Safety Officer), (ABC Co., VP), (Boy Scout, Troop Leader)}Affiliation[Organization, Role]Variable length array of record structure pairs:[String, String]IdentificationA unique identifier for a human comprised of two components. Name is not necessarily unique but Number should be. Example:{“Bob Smith”, “123-45-6789”}Identification[Name, Number]Record structure pair:[String, String]Life StateThe general physiological or psychological state of a human. The exact meanings of the four attributes are exercise dependent.Example: Thugs bombarded with tear gas{Alive, Mobile, Unaware, Nonfunctional}Health Boolean Value MobilityBoolean Value  FunctionalityBoolean Value AwarenessBoolean Value  Physical AppearanceWhat a human looks like physically from a truth perspective (i.e., not a guise). Gender is either Male or Female. Race is one of several general characterizations to describe humans based on their inherited physical traits. Age is given in years. Height is given in meters. Mass is given in kilograms. Multiple pieces of clothing may be specified. Example:{Male, White, 30 yrs, 1.9 m, (Pants, Blue, Solid), (Shirt, {White,  Blue}, Stripes)}GenderGender enumerationRaceRace enumerationAgeFloat (years)HeightFloat (meters)MassFloat (kilograms)Clothing[Type, Color, Pattern]Variable length array of record structure triplets:[Clothing Type enumeration, Variable length array of Clothing Color enumerations, Clothing Pattern enumeration]ActionWhat a human is doing while in some basic posture. Motions include locomotion and calisthenics. Only one type of motion can be done at a time. Communications are physical actions used to convey information to others. Manipulations are actions that involve some other piece of equipment, human or simulation object.MotionsMotion enumerationCommunicationsVariable length array of Communication enumerationsManipulations[Manipulation, Equipment]Variable length array of record structure pairs:[Manipulation enumeration, Equipment]Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 1. A snapshot of the Human Starter SOM components.Extension TypeRelated AttributesExtensionNew data element/attributePosition / OrientationAngular VelocityBounding BoxJoint AnglesLink LengthsJoint LocationsNew data element/attributePhysical AppearanceGuiseNew attributes for existing data elementLife StateWoundingAcclimationNew attributes for existing data elementPhysical AppearanceHair DescriptionComplexionEye ColorNew enumerations PostureFree-fallingDivingSwimmingLayoutTuckPikeTable 2. Human Starter SOM example extensionsCharacteristicsHuman Starter SOMHuman FOM Starter SetContentsCommon data or intersection of  the data shared by live, virtual, and constructive human simulationsLogical subset of various types of data shared by live, virtual, and constructive human simulationsTargeted usersFederate developersFederate or federation developersSet of common data used by most human simulationsYesYesDomain/application specific dataNoYes. Some of the attributes and data values will be domain/application specific and are provided as examples.Readily extendibleYesYesExpected useAdditions as neededAdditions, deletions, modifications as neededFormatOMTOMTTable 3. Comparison of the Human Starter SOM and Human FOM Starter Set 