MSRR Interoperability DemonstrationsUsing the ADS-MEL Metadata Template	Jack Sheehan	Gary Garingo	Defense Modeling and Simulation Office	Innotiv Incorporated	1901 N. Beauregard St., Suite 504	8799 Balboa Ave Suite 200	Alexandria, VA 22311	San Diego, CA	(703) 824-3448	(619) 268-1105 	HYPERLINK "mailto:jsheehan@msis.dmso.mil"jsheehan@msis.dmso.mil 	garingo@innotiv.com	Robert Reed	Erik Morris	Institute for Simulation & Training	Acton Burnell, Inc.	University of Central Florida	1500 N. Beauregard Street, Suite 210	3280 Progress Drive	Alexandria, VA 22311-1715	Orlando, FL 32826	(703) 671-0700 x146	(407) 658-5094	emorris@actonb.com	rreed@ist.ucf.edu	David Kendrick	Veridian Engineering	2101 Executive Drive, Tower Box 51	Hampton, VA 23666	(757) 825-0973dkendrick@hamp.veridian.comKeywords:Modeling & Simulation Resource Repository, Master Environmental Library, Authoritative Data Sources, Interoperability, Reuse. ABSTRACT:  The Modeling and Simulation Resource Repository (MSRR) envisions a distributed network of interoperable resource libraries.  Key considerations in this vision are (1) ownership and maintenance of M&S resources is provided by the formal proponents of the resource and (2) end-users locate required resources using a search and browse mechanism that seamlessly spans the distributed resources.  This paper describes a set of MSRR interoperability experiments that are being conducted using the ADS-MEL Metadata Template as an interoperability specification.  In these experiments, an end-user demonstrated the ability to search multiple, distributed libraries with heterogeneous (internal) implementations for standard Authoritative Data Source information using their local search and browse interfaces.1. IntroductionThe value of models and simulations is directly correlated to their representation of real environments and systems.  Locating and acquiring the correct knowledge (data/information) is paramount to that capability.  The Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) initiated the Authoritative Data Source (ADS), Master Environmental Library (MEL), and the Modeling & Simulation Resource Repository (MSRR) projects.  An infrastructure was needed to provide the Department of Defense (DoD) Modeling and Simulation (M&S) community metadata and facilitate access to government and commercial data producers. DMSO’s initiation of these efforts was driven by direction from the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Technology in accordance with DoD Directive 5000.59-P (Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Master Plan) to strengthen the use of M&S in the three functional areas: training; analysis; and acquisition.  2. BackgroundThe effort to satisfy the goals of the M&S Master Plan were encapsulated into these three projects and sponsored by DMSO.The MSRR is a Department of Defense information system that features discovery, registration, cataloging, and access of various types of resource objects for the Modeling and Simulation community.  Participant organizations like the Services (Army, Air Force and Navy) have also developed equivalent systems known as MSRR systems.  The MSRR system deploys a metadata repository with World Wide Web based access to underlying resource objects.  The MSRR project was initiated in 1995 to provide the architecture in which the various MSRR repositories would be accessed.In February 1994, the ADS Working Group (WG) was established.  The ADSWG consists of Service and Agency M&S office representatives, Executive Agent representatives, and other prominent personnel interested in M&S data representations. In August 1994, the MEL efforts were initiated with an memorandum of agreement (MOA) between the Director, Defense Research and Engineering (DDR&E, DMSO) and 11 DoD environmental labs and offices covering the environmental domains of ocean, terrain, air, and space, with oversight by the DoD Modeling and Simulation Executive Agents [Office of the Ocean Executive Agent (OEA, lead), Terrain Modeling Project Office (TMPO), and Air and Space Natural Environment (ASNE) MSEA]. The envisioned architecture was for there to be a single ADS repository that would house the metadata on knowledge sources related to DoD M&S.  The repository would be the single point of entry into the knowledge acquisition process. Where possible, the library would provide linkages to the data via the Internet. The ADS repository would be available on the MSRR.MEL’s goal was to facilitate discovery, access, subscription, and delivery of environmental information, products, and data wherever they are stored via the MSRR.  MEL currently has over 15 major producers participating in the development and population of the repositoryThe development of these resources created a duplication of metadata storage that needed to be addressed.  In addition to these DMSO projects, the various Components and Agencies have been moving forward on development of their specific MSRR nodes.  Many of these contain constructs for the collection and maintenance of metadata on data sources and other types of products, such as models and simulations. It has also been recognized that proponent ownership and maintenance and duplication of effort are at this point valid concerns.The concept of a single library of information is no longer valid.3. Problem StatementThe user community’s need to reduce the resources expended in knowledge acquisition remains. A technical solution, that provides seamless entry into the various repositories from appointed access points, is required.4. GoalProvide the DoD M&S community the means to access and search all of the various data source repositories from each of the MSRR nodes in a way that is transparent to the user.5. BarriersThe first barrier identified was the inconsistency of content, naming, and construct of the metadata in the various libraries.  The resolution of this difficult problem was facilitated by the fact that the majority of the ADSWG members are also the Component or agency representative for MEL, on the DMSO MSRR Board of Directors, and members of the Tri-Service MSRR working group.  The ADSWG was in the midst of enhancing the metadata collected to support VV&A when this issue moved up the scale of concern, so they accepted the additional, more social issue of ensuring all were in total agreement on the content and naming of the new metadata set fields.  Because of the various metadata standards being incorporated in the repositories, this standardization process was not easily accepted. Once the ADSWG agreed on the new metadata set, an additional task was levied on them to have their components and agencies agree to accept the metadata set for their repositories as well.  Note that the construct was not dictated, only the content/naming conventions so that cross walking could be easily conducted to facilitate search routines locating of the data without major structural changes within the various repositories.The second barrier to success was for agreement between the developers of the MSRRs and the specific repositories to support seamless search from one site to another.6. MethodologiesTwo methodologies were selected for investigated.The first was to leverages existent search capabilities at each site.  This methodology required each site to add code to their search software for each repository with which it is to interface.The second was to incorporate an interface tool between the repositories. This solution would allow all sites to submit searches to and receive information from the tool in a standard format. Each repository would only have to write one interface to and from the tool with the result being availability of all its resources to the community.7. Technical Solution OneThe Tri-Service MSRRs have supported cross site search on their operational system. The ADS Working Group desired to evaluate this as a feasible solution for cross-site search for the DMSO ADS library to the Service repositories and MEL.  At the request of DMSO, demonstration of the feasibility of direct repository-to-repository (Tri-Service to ADS) approach was conducted by the Tri-Service MSRR developers.  This approach was found to be successful and easily implemented.  The result was detailed field-level cross search between the nodes. The full ADS data module will provide Tri-Service MSRR system users the capability to perform detailed database searches across Tri-Service and ADS resources as completely and effectively as though searching the databases locally.  In the meantime, visitors to any of the Service MSRR nodes have access to ADS resources via the DMSO ADS Library using the simple variation of the technique described below.The initial version provides access to virtually any remote site by means of a simple text search. The full version will provide detailed query capability to those remote sites where a mapping between the metadata profiles can be established.  That is, searches of detailed fields, such as title or author, will be possible once the sites have matched the corresponding field names.  When the full version is first implemented, only the Tri-Service data holdings will be accessible. As the mappings are made available from other remote systems (e.g., BMDO), this seamless, detailed database search will be possible for a wider range of sites.Both the interim and full versions use the same underlying method.  It is based on the calling of an existing routine on the remote site to conduct the search and then the integration of the results.  Each node of the MSRR currently allows a user viewing the node with a Web browser to search the metadata holdings of that particular node. The most common implementation of this capability is a call to a Common Gateway Interface (CGI) script on the Web server from a simple HTML form. A user performs a search by entering his search criteria on the node’s search form and clicking the submit button. This action initiates a call to the Web server, which invokes the CGI program. The program, running on the server, queries the database that holds the metadata records. The returned records are used to build a results page in HTML, which is passed back the user’s Web browser.The call to the search program and the input parameters it requires are fairly hidden from the user, as the call is built automatically from input to the HTML form. If one knows the format of the search string, however, he can format his own calls to the Web server and search the same metadata holdings without using the HTML form.This approach is the one used in integrating the searches across the Tri-Service nodes and the ADS Library. The node from which the search is initiated must alter its CGI script for searching. The node being searched does not need to change anything; the only requirement is that it uses a CGI call for searching.In practicality, this approach provides for quick implementation with little programming and no need for any additional action at the remote site.  However, the limitation is that the search will span only what the remote site search method allows and results will include only those items of data which the remote site provides (the return may not even include the original search term). In use, it has been found these limitations do not present significant hurdles.  For the Tri-Services, the limitations are easily handled as the underlying software provides for everything required. Using the mapping, visitors will be able to conduct detailed database searches across the Tri-Service MSRRs.In order to implement the remote-site search facility, the remote site's search method must be studied to determine the appropriate syntax for formatting and submitting the HTML "form action." The technique described simply replaces both the remote site’s interface and resultant display.  Once the appropriate form action has been called, the initiating site waits for the remote site to return values.  Typically, these values are in the form of an HTML page, including headings, formatting, actual values, and other information (although MEL does have a Java query that returns XML).  The site initiating the search receives this page and parses it into various pieces, which can be stored in a temporary database, mixed with results from other local and remote sites. The results returned often include only a title and a URL.  Constructing the parsing and display routines is relatively simple.  However, depending upon the initiating site's own structure, integrating them may take significant time.  Within the Tri-Service MSRR system, this time is minimal.  In fact, using the simple variation of the technique, adding an active search from the US Air Force MSRR (AFMSRR) to the DMSO ADS Library required less than an hour, including the time required for evaluation and implementation.  As it turns out, explaining the technique is more difficult than actually doing it.  So perhaps an example from a visitor’s perspective would aid clarification.Assume you are visiting the Air Force MSRR (http://afmsrr.afams.af.mil) and wish to locate all resources having to do with the "Extended Air Defense Simulation (EADSIM)," including any located in the DMSO ADS Library.  Using the "Standard Search" option at the AFMSRR, enter “EADSIM” as the term to search for; choose "ALL" from the resource category types; then select the ADS Library.  (See Figure 7.1)The CGI script on the Air Force server was altered to recognize and act on the ADS option. The script carries out its search of the Air Force holdings, and the results are saved in a temporary database on the AFMSRR server. Finally, the ADS Library is called, and the results it returns are parsed and placed in the same database.  Once all results have been received and stored, the display is constructed with a default arrangement ordered alphabetically by resource title. (Other orderings may be selected at this point as only the local database is manipulated; no additional searches are required.)  The visitor may now review individual resources by selecting the resource title.  Each title is hyperlinked to the detailed description of the resource at its parent node.  In our example, selecting the "Air Tasking Order (ATO) Visualization and Assessment Tool" title (the first resource listed in Figure 7.2) brings up its detailed record within the AFMSRR.   Similarly, selecting "JDS - Extended Air Defense Simulation Databases (EADSIM) (NYD)" (a resource returned by the ADS Library) would take the visitor to the detailed record at the ADS Library. Once the ADS data module software build is online, a visitor may specify not only the search term (EADSIM from the earlier example) but also that the term must be contained in the resource title (which would have eliminated the first resource reported earlier).  The specification of additional terms and conditions will also be supported.  This technique has several strengths. It is totally non-invasive (i.e., a remote site search can be implemented without requiring any changes required on the remote site). It leverages off of the capabilities already inherent in the nodes to be searched. Further, the initiating site requires only currently available tools and protocols.  Any web server supporting Common Gateway Interface (CGI), or equivalent, may be used along with standard programming languages (e.g., Perl, ColdFusion, C, etc) and established methods for invoking HTML forms. Finally, it does not place any restrictions on the metadata storage: The database structure and software used to house the metadata and the software used to search it is not an issue, all being hidden behind the node’s search program.>>Note: the fidelity and accuracy of the search is only as good as the >local site’s search mechanism.  Also, in this current version of cross-node >search, only “string” searching is conducted.  If an external site offers >additional, elaborate methods for searching, they are NOT called. >Depending upon whether the Services feel that is necessary, that >functionality could be added at a later date.MEL has investigated this solution and found that with minimal coding, the interface could be implemented. ADS could leverage off of MEL’s holdings of environmental metadata without having to redirect the user to the MEL site.Because the metadata profiles for ADS and MEL are compatible, advanced searches will be a simple extension. The ADS search form currently allows various type of searches, which can be as detailed as searching text in a particular metadata field (such as Abstract or POC). The MEL allows similarly detailed searches. Therefore, with knowledge of the search string format for MEL, a complex search initiated from the ADS page can be sent to MEL.8. Technical Solution Two Technical Solution 2 of the ADS-MEL Experiment is to demonstrate a distributed search solution which standardizes on a common data format for MEL, ADS Library, Tri-Service MSRRs, and DMSO MSRR systems for ADS resources.  The solution will incorporate an interchange tool to facilitate interoperability among the systems for discovery.  The interchange tool will allow discovery of text within the ADS data elements.  The interchange tool will be derived from an XML based ADS Data Interchange Format. For demonstration of this solution, a sharable data format must be standardized across the tool suite.  XML (extended markup language) will be the enabler for the cross system search.  This solution will incorporate an interchange format that facilitates data distribution over the network.  Extended Markup Language (XML) is a document encoding format for properties of web based information. XML, a standard maintained by the WWW Consortium (W3C), often extends HTML.  XML allows the user to construct tag sets for incorporating structured data within HTML.  These tags are embedded with data in a hierarchical tree.  The inclusion of this tree within a transmitted web message is an XML document.  Adherence to a Document Type Definition (DTD) can be used to validate the XML data being transmitted.  Since XML does not define the actual tag set, a DTD is used to verify completeness and correctness of the XML document.Working with the same system outlined in technical solution one of the paper, XML components will be integrated as the interchange format.  By packaging an XML structure as output of the search engines, added flexibility is made available to the receiving component.  Since we are integrating results from different systems, queries for the search engines are of different format.  For this particular experiment, the ADS metadata model is shared across the Tri-Service and ADS Library implementations.The targeted scenario for this demonstration is use in a integrated search function.  As the user initiates a textual search, the search string is retrieved and searched against the fields provided in the ADS taxonomy.  The ADS taxonomy is represented in a valid DTD which defines the XML structure that must be created and used as the results format.  The results are returned to the web server but must be parsed into a HTML format for display in a web browser like Netscape Navigator or Microsoft Internet Explorer.  The DTD will be used to validate the completeness and correctness of the XML structure.Results from technical solution 2 will not be available for report in this paper because of time constraints.  It is planned that these results be reported in a separate paper for the following SIW conference.  9. ConclusionUse of models and simulations in the operational, acquisition, testing, research and development, and training environments will continue to expand.  DMSO is leading the efforts to provide tools that will contribute to a reduction in the time and resources devoted to Knowledge Acquisition to support those M&S developments and applications.  With the expected expansion in the number of data source repositories on the inter-net and MSRR, it is imperative that the capability to search seamlessly across them  be developed.10. References  [1]	Department of Defense Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Master Plan (DoDD 5000.59-9P, October 1995).Author BiographiesJACK SHEEHAN is the Director for the Data Engineering Division at the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO), and the Technical Director for the Conceptual  Models  of   the   Mission   Space   (CMMS) Program.  As the DMSO Data Engineering, he is responsible for the Modeling and Simulations (M&S) Functional Data Administration Program, data standards development for the High Level Architecture, CMMS, and representations of the environment, systems, and human behavior, discovery and cataloging of DoD Authoritative Data Sources for M&S.  He has over 12 years experience as a Senior Systems Engineer conducting basic research, architecture definition, engineering design, prototype implementation, and at-sea feasibility demonstrations for U.S. Navy combat systems. Mr. Sheehan served four years in the Naval Nuclear Propulsions Directorate under the command of ADM H.G. Rickover.  His active duty experience included design, implementation, and at-sea demonstration of a triple redundant nuclear control system.  He also developed an automated manufacturing line for nuclear fuel element production and designed and fielded an in-service high-temperatures annealing unit to repair damaged reactor vessels.  Mr. Sheehan holds BS degrees in Electrical and Nuclear Engineering and an MS degree in Electrical and Computer Engineering.GARY GARINGO is a Senior Software Engineer at Innotiv Incorporated, San Diego, CA.  At Innotiv, he integrates Internet software to facilitate information access and retrieval.  Mr. Garingo is a System Engineer for the MSRR Technical Support Team.  Mr. Garingo obtained his B. S. in Electrical Engineering at California State Polytechnic University, Pomona and his M. S. in Software Engineering at the Naval Postgraduate School.  Mr. Garingo started off his career at SPAWAR Systems Center, San Diego, working on system integration.  Several of his internet/intranet based projects have been demonstrated in Joint Warrior Interoperability Demonstrations.ROBERT W. REED is the Program Manager for Information Technology at the Institute for Simulation & Training, University of Central Florida.  He holds a Bachelors of Business Administration (BBA) degree in Marketing and a Masters of Science (MS) degree in Systems Science.Mr. Reed is a retired US Army Officer where he served as a Senior Operations Researcher/Systems Analyst, Information Engineer, and other information related positions.  As an Adjutant General ORSA, he had primary involvement in the Casualty Estimation Model, MANPRINT Program, and other personnel related analytic projection systems.  At IST, Mr. Reed established and leads the Information Technology Service Center which is responsible for the Air Force MSRR, the Army MSRR, and the Navy M&S Catalog software system.  He also serves as Senior Systems Analyst, Program Manager, and Principal Investigator for numerous other information technology projects within the Institute.ERIK MORRIS is a programmer and analyst with Acton Burnell, Inc. He is involved primarily with designing and building databases, including metadata standardization, in support of the Office of the Ocean Executive Agent (OEA). He also has experience in process modeling and is assisting the DMSO VV&A program. He has built the Ocean Taxonomy Database, which will enhance the user interface for the MEL, and maintains the OEA Web site.Mr. Morris is completing a Master of Science in Computer Science at George Mason University in Fairfax, VA, and has a B.A. from Harvard University, where he concentrated in Physics. His first job was as copy editor at the research weekly Science.DAVID E. KENDRICK is a senior staff member and Program Manager for Data related projects with Veridian Engineering’s Applied Technology Group.  He holds a Bachelors degree in Civil Engineering and a Master of Science degree in Operations Research and Systems Analysis.  He has been the Veridian Project Manager for the Authoritative Data Sources Project since its initiation in 1996.Mr. Kendrick has over 15 years of experience directly related with Modeling and Simulation in both the acquisition and training fields. He has worked for Veridian for 4 years and previous to that he had 23 years of military experience as an Armor/Aviation/ORSA officer.  He was project manager for the development of the Joint Exercise Support System (JESS) for five years.  He was one of a six-man nucleus that formed the Joint Warfare Center at Hurlburt Field, FL He served as the senior analyst for major armored systems acquisition programs for the Assistant Secretary of the Army for Research, Development and Acquisition. He developed the initial concepts for the Anti-Armor Advanced Technology Demonstration (A2ATD).  He served as liaison officer between HQ TRADOC  and HQ USAEUR focusing on doctrine development and use of simulation to train the force during the period of downsizing.Figure 7.2 – EADSIM Search ResultsFigure 7.1 – AFMSRR Standard Search