RESIDENTDistributed Interactive Simulations Framework for Forces ReadinessLionel KhimecheDélégation Générale pour l’Armement (DGA)SPOTI18, rue du Docteur ZamenhofFort d’Issy les Moulineaux92231 Issy les Moulineaux cedex, FranceTel : +33 (0)141463631, Fax : +33 (0)141463314khimeche@crs.etca.frKey Words :Non HLA, DIS, communications, ISDN, gateway, VTC, terrain, scenario, exercise, C4I, AARABSTRACT : RESIDENT, French acronym for Distributed Interactive Simulations Framework for Forces Readiness, is a multiyear Research Program launched in 1997 by the French Ministry of Defense. RESIDENT is dedicated to multinational combined Army command & staff training. RESIDENT is not a simulation system but a configurable technical architecture. It is designed to federate heterogeneous simulations (Live, Virtual and Constructive) and C4I systems in a multi-echelon environment over local or wide area networks. RESIDENT provides necessary communication, coordination and management services to achieve preparation, execution and analysis of the exercise.RESIDENT program is divided into two generations over a four year period. RESIDENT G1 challenges are first to solve technical issues and second to analyze operational and educational interests of linking heterogeneous simulations. The development is driven according to two separate versions, using DIS protocol, over a two year period. The first version, G1V1 is a technical prototype in which basic functions are set up for heterogeneous simulations interconnection. It is raised to validate concepts and technical choices. The second version, G1V2, is an extension of the previous one putting emphasis on operational aspects. The aim is to evaluate expected operational benefits of RESDIDENT concepts and to go deeper inside technical choices. It is currently on service. RESIDENT G2 is the development second generation which covers quasi operational prototype realization. This stage will lead to analyze different kind of conceivable architectural solutions taking into account state of the art communication technologies and distributed simulation systems interoperability standards, first of them being HLA.This paper introduces RESIDENT program and presents RESIDENT G1 lessons learned based over French military exercises for distributed command & staff training. A special focus is given to interoperability between simulations and C4I systems. This paper addresses also a major stumbling block, the shared data consistency for terrain, weapon systems features and forces organization.IntroductionTraining of commanders and their staffs can be undertaken in a very effective way by using simulation to put the trainee in its actual environment without the drawbacks of a real deployment. However, rigorous methodology must be applied especially in the use of existing models/simulations, in the definition, setting and execution of a federation, and in preparation and presentation of the after action review.RESIDENT (French acronym for Distributed Interactive Simulations Framework for Forces Readiness) is a contribution to this methodology requirement. RESIDENT is a multiyear Research Program launched in 1997 by the French Ministry of Defense to define and develop a configurable technical architecture dedicated to multinational combined Army command & staff training. It is designed to federate heterogeneous simulations (Live, Virtual and Constructive) and C4I systems in a multi-echelon environment over local or wide area networks. It provides necessary communication, coordination and management services to achieve preparation, execution and analysis of the exercise.This paper introduces RESIDENT Research Program with a presentation of the origins, an overview of its content and the lessons learnt after first generation trials and drills.RESIDENT genesisThe operational requirement for RESIDENTThe fundamental operational requirement for RESIDENT is to allow for achieving Command Post Tactical Training based on connection of whatever combinations of Live, Virtual, Constructive simulations. The targeted hierarchical levels are Battalion and Company units fitted with their operational C4I systems, operating in combined and multinational contexts.The technical objectives for RESIDENTAs a preliminary study program, RESIDENT technical objectives related to the above requirement are the following :- Demonstrate feasibility and operate linking of heterogeneous simulations and C4I over wide area networks,- Manage shared data to assume digitized battlefield consistency,- Provide coordination and management facilities for distributed exercises preparation, running and analysis,- Evaluate benefits and technical, operational, educational interests to federate different kind of simulations and C4I- Take into account technological and technical evolutions relating to distributed simulationSchedule of RESIDENTRESIDENT is an incremental development program. Three versions are planned in two generations, the first being DIS, the second being HLA. Each version leads to a six month trials & drills period, with an international UK-FR Drill done in G1V1 (see [1]), and a US-FR drill planned for G2.RESIDENT overviewIntroductionThe Training organization is presented on the chart below. The aim is clearly to put the trainee as close as possible to his actual environment, giving all the participant the tools they need to fulfill their mission in the exercise. From the bottom to the top, the battlefield simulation layer gives the synthetic environment, usually made of heterogeneous simulations. Next comes the Low level animation layer which is in charge of playing the trainee subordinates and managing the simulation operators, making the simulation invisible to him. In parallel, Neighbors, Support and OPFOR animations achieve other significant parts of the synthetic environment, the whole of them being coordinated by the High level animation, top tactical layer of the training organization. Above all these tactical layers, the Exercise Management layers is dedicated to exercise lifecycle management tasks.RESIDENT provides each participant with tools and functions to allow for exercise definition, running and analyses. The Main services are shown in the following diagram and described in the sections below.Reference DataThe mission of this first block is to manage Terrain, Weapon systems and Forces organization data in order to ensure fair play through simulated entities behavioral consistency on all simulations. The Reference Data block provides three workshops. The Terrain workshop takes DLMS, SIF, VMAP formats terrain data to build and export Terrain databases understandable by federates of four types. The Force organization workshop uses GEODE French Army Reference database to build and export exercise reference Order of Battle towards federates of four types. The Weapon system workshop uses GEODE to build and export exercise reference weapon systems characteristics towards federates of four types. All these elements will be part of the scenario.Operational co-ordinationThe mission of this second block is to provide non training operational personals with Exercise Generation, Coordination, Animation and Analysis tools. With respect to the lifecycle of the exercise, these tools are shown on the following diagram and described below.The Exercise generation is the first task after the decision of training has been made. It consists first of collecting data among reference databases to construct the exercise general framework : Terrain, Forces, Weapons and scenario. On this basis, the federation needed to achieve the targeted exercise is build by selecting available simulations and sites (or adding them to the database). Then the units of the scenario are assigned to each simulation to finalize the exercise. All the configuration ready to be used is stored until the date of the training exercise. When the time has come, the exercise is restored, the federation is intialized by making the link between tactical and simulation identification (DIS for G1, declaration for G2 in HLA). The fight is ready to start.The Exercise coordination begins with sending to all simulations the start signal. In G1, DIS SIMAN commands as Start/Stop, Freeze/Resume are available during the exercise. On High Controller RESIDENT station, Real, Perceived and Planned Situations can be displayed on a RASTER map plan view mode with a 30 second refresh period. An electronic mail is available between High Controller and Animators, which allow for coordination messages to be sent. Consistency checking tools to prevent live-virtual or constructive-virtual anomalies are also available. Finally, total, partial, or selective replays will be performed during the exercise on G2.Once the exercise as been technically started, the tactical part has to be managed by all the controllers with Exercise animation tools. RESIDENT provides controllers with animation stations which display on G1 versions Real, Planned Situation. On G2 version, depending on simulations capacity, perceived situation by units under control will be displayed. Trainee C4I “SIR” is interconnected with its subordinate Low controllers’ stations which allow for automatic report messages based on the subordinate unit positions to be sent. Tactical messages can also be exchanged in C4I format between the Trainee and its low controller for instance for intelligence reports. As for High controller, consistency checking tools and coordination mail are available.Exercise analysis can be performed with RESIDENT after action analysis tools. The first part of the analysis consists in preparing the statistics with exercise exploration in time periods, units and time periods, interaction and time periods, … After computation, results are displayed through Curves, graphics, chronographs, arrays. For instance, available metrics can be Amount of devices available for units, Losses per units, Engagement periods, Advance/Delay, Observations assessment, ... Obviously, total, partial, or selective replays can be performed.Technical managementThe mission of the third block is to provide technical team personals with exercise technical features supervision and control tools.The first tool is the Network Supervision tool which allows for configurations, resources, performances and security management. It is bases on well known commercial off the shelf real time network analysis “Netviews”.The second tool is the DIS Supervision tool which allows for PDU detection, analysis and control. Statistical computation (Amount of PDU) and detailed (PDU body monitoring ) can be displayed.The third tool is the Exercise Management tool which allows for exercise technical configuration (Network addresses, filters), exercise synchronization and control (GPS, NTP), and exercise collection, record and replay data.Communication servicesThe mission of the fourth block is to set up connection between federates and RESIDENT. It consists in network devices for local and wide area connections, allowing for transmission of all kind of data involved in the exercise that is to say technical, simulation, co-ordination and operational. If offers high bandwidth (2 Euro ISDN lines - 256Kbits/s) communication with an open architecture based on CISCO or ASCEND gateway.RESIDENT G1 Trials & DrillsObjectivesThe objectives of RESIDENT G1 were clearly divided according to the two versions : RESIDENT G1V1 was to demonstrate the technical feasibility and usability of interconnecting distributed simulations and the necessary tools to achieve and manage the interconnection. Domestic live-constructive trials followed by FR-UK combined drills were planned. Although the goal was mainly technical, operational officers were involved in planning the scenario and running the exercises to give tactical credibility to the drills.Technical feasibility being proved by the previous version, RESIDENT G1V2 was to demonstrate from the operational point of view feasibility and benefits of distributed training using simulations. In order to evaluate the animation and analysis G1V2 new functionalities, a multi-center battalion level training exercise was planned with high involvement of military personals. As a secondary objective: test and experiments on HLA version of constructive simulation SETHI were also planned.G1V1 drills configurationsThree sites were involved in G1V1 drills : CENTAC (Tactical training centre) in Mailly-le-camp, DERA in Fort Halstead (UK), and SPOTI suburb Paris.In accordance with the Organization shown in section  RENV _Ref455213291 \r \h 3.1, the hardware and software architecture includes the following : C4I system (SIR demonstrator) for the Trainee, Simulation tools (virtual and constructive) distributed on both sides to build the synthetic environment, High controller Workstations to operationally prepare and conduct the exercise, Technical Supervisor to technically control the exercise, and finally gateways/pipeline, VTC, ISDN Lines for communications links. In G1V1, animation and analysis tools are not provided by RESIDENT.The diagram below shows as an example the configuration of UK-FR PICTES drill.G1V2 drills configurationsTwo sites were involved in G1V2 drills : EAABC (Armor Amy School) in Saumur, and SPOTI near Paris.In accordance with the Organization shown in section  RENV _Ref455213291 \r \h 3.1, the hardware and software architecture includes the following : C4I system (SIR to be fielded system) for the Trainees on both sides, Simulation tools (virtual and constructive) distributed on both sides to build the synthetic environment, High controller Workstations to operationally prepare, conduct and analyze the exercise, Animation Workstations on both sides to play trainees subordinates, Technical Supervisor to technically control the exercise, and finally gateways/pipeline, VTC, ISDN Lines for communications links (differences with G1V1 are underlined).The diagram below shows the configuration of Saumur Armor Army School - SPOTI drills.G1 drills lessons learntThe work undertaken within G1 has produced the following technical findings, collected under the headings of two trials and drills versions of RESIDENT.Communications : They created a major stumbling block throughout the whole G1V1 version. The choice of using ISDN lines as the simulation link was quickly made, based on availability, a better guarantee of routing and security than the Internet, and a better price, although lower output, than a dedicated line. However, the use of an interconnection using two service providers and two manufacturers of gateways, did not provide for  automatic interoperability and did not make things easier. Since the subject is so specialized, the identification and solving of problems could only be undertaken with sizeable help from experts in the field from Industry. Finally, key communication aspects have become perfectly under control for G1V2, despite changing of site from Mailly to Saumur.Terrain : Like communications, terrain constituted a major stumbling block. However, unlike communications, it was not possible to resolve problems with the use of in house expertise. In fact, even use of a common terrain database would not guarantee interoperability. The problem of correlation, corresponding to the use of the terrain database by the simulation (resolution of the simulation), will always occur. It is possible that problems can be minimized by setting up a database from identical source material, perhaps via SEDRIS, but the interpretation of this material by a conversion tool to the simulation  specific format will inevitably lead to discrepancies. Nevertheless, the lesson learnt in G1V1 is that the search for a common (UK and France) terrain area, and its use in heterogeneous simulations, requires a great deal of preliminary work, and must be undertaken and resolved very early on in the program. For G1V2 franco-french experiments, the search of common terrain was not a problem, but the compatibility between different simulations remained. From the previous objective of coupling through RESIDENT heterogeneous simulation as JANUS, ITEMS (CAE) and SETHI (TT&S), it was finally decided to stay homogeneous and SETHI was used on both sides and both camps.Weapon System / Force Structure databases : In G1V2 as well as in G1V1, the choice of structures, systems and weapons was a difficult task. In ITEMS (G1V1) and SETHI (G1V2), the very flexible Weapon system database allows to define globally the systems or to define specific systems for a specific scenario. Anyway, consistency between different system is not easy to ensure. Differences of models implementation and/or attributes configuration in heterogeneous simulations conducted to unpredictable or unrealistic behavior of entities in certain cases. That is why in G1V2 choice of SETHI on each site (and fine verification of databases content) was made minimizing risks and optimizing tactical consistency.Standards : It is a well-known phenomenon in the open system interconnection (OSI) domain, that defining the use of standards is often not enough to guarantee interoperability between the systems. In fact there is always variability in interpreting the standards which can lead to incompatibility, and long-term problems.With G1V1, the first problem in relation to a standard was identified in the MPP (Multi Point to Point) protocol used by the two gateways. This made it impossible to use the associated functionality (router working and data compression) and led to the two systems being configured as a bridge in order to have all stations on the same network. Since the communications bandwidth was large enough on this occasion not to have to compress data, the problem was not severe. However coming to this conclusion used up a lot of time.In application layer, differences in behavior of the different simulations or DIS tools were noted in connection with the PDUs : Whilst acting as supervisor of the federation, RESIDENT would ideally have liked defined DIS numbers for all entities being simulated, giving the platforms enumerations. This was not a problem for ITEMS in G1V1 or SETHI in G1V2 as they allocated the same DIS numbers to entities which were consistent for each run. However, ModSAF in G1V1 randomly selects the DIS numbers for the entities at each run. This lead to RESIDENT needing to be reconfigured for each simulation run undertaken.In simulation management, the simulation reactions to a SIMAN PDU Start/Resume or Stop/Freeze was very variable, ranging from complete indifference (ITEMS) to causing a system crash (ModSAF), including good reaction (SETHI and SSTH).At the level of individual platform definition, differences in ways of setting up of a simulation meant you had to be extremely precise at the enumeration level. For example, ModSAF is equipped with a fixed list of usable platforms and therefore a corresponding list of defined enumerations. In ITEMS or SETHI, since each platform is configured individually, it is necessary to define the enumeration which will be used in a particular scenario. These observations show the need for extreme care in setting up a network of simulations; what is right for one is not totally and immediately transposable to another, even if the use of standards might seem to indicate it should be.Operational realism : In addition to the technical feasibility of RESIDENT, the credibility of the system implied the early and deep involvement of military personals in the trials and drills. The aim was first to facilitate the entry of the system in two main French army training centers, Mailly and Saumur, and second to obtain live feed back on the positive and negative aspects of the system so as to be able to specify necessary evolutions for next versions. The result was very positive, in G1V1 with a very instructive multinational drill as well as in G1V2 with the new tactical tools. It gave the opportunity to the personals, from DGA specification team or Industry development team, to realize from the inside and in depth the specific needs of an operational training exercise. This will dramatically help for instance the refinement of future version G2 tactical tools and Man Machine interface definition, with a level of detail that hours of classical mock-up teamwork would not have obtained. A specific lessons learnt domain addressed during G1V2 was the After Action Review, and great improvement for G2 is expected in this domain.Exercise preparation and execution : Order of battle setting is a very demanding task in terms of time and was alternatively an help and a charge. The tools for distribution on every workstations has to be improved. One of the most satisfying element linked to  distributed property of the training was the VTC. The exact requirement in this domain appears clearly to be a perfect quality of sound as a priority, the image quality being secondary, as soon as the other side person can be identified.After Action Review : The implication of military personals in the trials, and especially in this AAR Phase, conduct to realize that the AAR tools, introduced in the G1V2 version, were not yet mature for operational use. Anyway, a significant and productive work has been done to improve the specifications, in time for introduction in RESIDENT G2.HLA : RESIDENT G1V2 provides the opportunity to execute HLA experimentation based over a new release of SETHI simulation. This product made by TT&S runs with InterSim 3.0 license using RTI 1.03. Two SETHI simulations using the RPR-FOM FED RELIABLE mode are connected over ISDN lines trough CISCO Gateway. These tests are set up to make some measurements in order to size RESIDENT G2. Two kind of features are analysed, one concerning the CPU rate and second the network flow. Even if this version of RTI is old, some significant results have been obtained and are showed below in comparison with DIS.The consumption of CPU is almost the same with HLA and DIS.In the communication field, HLA generates fewer packets over the network than DIS. As a counter part, these packets are larger, and finally more bandwidth is required with HLA than with DIS.Towards RESIDENT G2As shown on RESIDENT schedule of section  RENV _Ref454879494 \r \h 2.3, G2 is starting during G1V2 Drills. It is based on user statement of need mainly based on lessons learnt from G1V1 Drills. The specifications are submitted to preliminary studies divided first on Requirement Analysis and second on Technical Architecture Analysis. Those preliminary studies are followed by specific studies on Terrain, Weapon systems and Operational Supervision. Associated with the lessons learnt in G1V2, RESIDENT G2 System Specification will be used as entry for development.ConclusionsIn the end of first generation drills, RESIDENT has on balance been constructive from both technical and operational points of view, thus fulfilling its objectives as a preliminary study program. Given the diversity in the DIS compliance level, in terrain database formats, and in functionalities of available simulations, it can be said that RESIDENT has taken the best of every federate. Adding its preferential link with C4I “SIR” , this has resulted since first generation in a workable architecture for distributed simulation training at reenforced company level.The second generation of RESIDENT to come is under specification phase. It will be HLA & SEDRIS compliant and will take benefit of G1 lessons learnt. It will feature three workshops in the field of Weapon systems, Force Structure and Terrain. RESIDENT G2 will put emphasis on reuse capability with introduction of FEDEP methodology.Nevertheless, it will have to deal with the same major trouble than RESIDENT G1 : availability in time of HLA compliant simulations, in order to be able to put together relevant models to build a synthetic environment tactically significant to military personals. However, given the great attraction demonstrated during G1V1 and G1V2 drills, there is no doubt that solutions will be found to take best benefit of new available tools, event if at first DIS-HLA gateways have to be introduced.AcknowledgmentsThe work presented in this paper was done under the sponsorship of the French Ministry of Defense.Special thanks to all the participants for their practical support in this research and demonstration :For French Ministry of Defense side : CROSAT: LCL MelletEAABC: LCL Bouard and CES MaurelSPOTI: Melle Favre Petit Mermet, M. Gougeat, M. BonnavaudFor the Industry side:Matra Système & InformationThomson DETEXISThomson Training and SimulationReferences“PICTES : A UK-France Technology Demonstration of a combined distributed training exercise using national simulations” 98F-SIW-126Author BiographiesLIONEL KHIMECHE is head of the constructive simulation team of SPOTI (one of the Defense program services of French MoD). He holds a DEA in Electronic from INSTN and an Engineer diploma in Computer science from Orsay University. He is currently responsible for RESIDENT evaluation in operational conditions. He is involved, as a technical expert supporting French army C4I & simulations Program Directors, in the use of the simulation for training Army Systems. PAGE 5/ NBPAGES 7 PAGE 1/ NBPAGES 7 PAGE 1/ NBPAGES 7200220012000199919981997US - FR TrialUK – FR TrialDrills 1RESIDENT G2Drills 2Drills 3RESIDENT G1 v2 RESIDENT G1 v1DefinitionMilestonesRESIDENTTechnicalManagementOperationalCoordinationReferenceDataCOMMUNICATION SERVICESTRAINEESHigh level AnimationNeighborsAnimationOPFORAnimationSupportAnimationLow levelAnimationBattlefield SimulationExercise AfterAction reviewExerciseAnalysisExercise HighControlExercise GenerationDLMS, SIF, VMAPVIRTUALLIVECabinCabinCabinC4IConstructiveVirtualLiveC4IExportCONSTRUCTIVETerrainWeaponSystemsForcesOrganizationScenariosGEODEExerciseAnimationExerciseAnalysisExerciseCoordinationExerciseGenerationLONDRESUKFRANCEDERADrills G1 V2Drills G1 V1User Needs SpecificationRESIDENT G2OperationalSupervisionAnalysisLONDRESRESIDENT G2 System Specification WeaponSystemsAnalysisTerrainAnalysisSpecific StudiesTechnical Architecture AnalysisRequirements Analysis - OrganizationNANTESSPOTICANNESMARSEILLELYONBORDEAUXRENNESBRESTMAILLY LE CAMPPARISCENTACNetworkSupervisionSPOTIPreliminary StudiesSAUMURPARISMAILLY LE CAMPBRESTRENNESBORDEAUXLYONMARSEILLECANNESSPOTINANTESLONDRESFRANCEIBMDISSupervisionSUNNetworkSupervisionIBMDatabasesTraineeConstructivefVirtualConstructive(VR Link Stealth)(ModSAF)(SSTH)ISDN LineGATEWAYDERAHighControllerSUNIBMSPOTIGATEWAYSIRDemonstrator(ITEMS)ISDN LineDataCollectionSILICONVTC LineDISSupervisionSUNAnimationGATEWAYAnimationVirtualConstructivefConstructiveConstructive(SETHI)(ROMULUS)(SSTH)GATEWAYEAABCHighControllerSUNNetworkSupervisionIBMSPOTI(JANUS)ISDN LineDataCollectionSILICONTraineeSIRJukeboxStorageDatabasesTraineeSIRINCORPORER Excel.Sheet.8INCORPORER Excel.Sheet.8INCORPORER Excel.Sheet.8JukeboxStorageVirtual