An Experimental HLA Interface to the Strike Warfare Collaborative Environment (SWCE)Bret R. GivensNoel CoxDave O’QuinnVeridian Engineering5200 Springfield Pike, Suite 200Dayton, OH 45431937-253-4770Bret.Givens@he.wpafb.af.mil Noel.Cox@he.wpafb.af.mil Dave.OQuinn@he.wpafb.af.mil Keywords:HLA, DMT, JEFX-99ABSTRACT: The Experimental Strike Warfare Collaborative Environment (E-SWCE) Federation was developed to examine the usability and validity of an HLA Interface in the concept exploration phase and determine applicability across all phases of a weapon system acquisition.   Two interface approaches were explored to provide this interoperability to a single target Federation Object Model (FOM).  In one approach a legacy federate was modified to use the data representations in the target FOM.  In the second approach, an architecture called the Agile FOM Framework (AFF), was used to transform a model’s Simulation Object Model (SOM) data representations into those of the target FOM.  This development is a combination of the RDE Forum’s “Complex Model” Use Case with large numbers of objects (100’s) that require real-time performance.  This paper describes the development in terms of metrics and the tools and techniques used as the Federation Execution and Development Process (FEDEP) was applied to the establishment of a federation in support of E-SWCE.1. IntroductionThe cornerstone of the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Program is affordability -- reducing the development cost, the production cost, and the cost of ownership.  The program was structured from the beginning to be a model of acquisition reform, with an emphasis on jointness, advanced technology maturation, concept demonstrations, and early cost-performance trades integral to the weapon system requirement definition process. A sizable technology maturation effort is underway to reduce risk and life cycle cost (LCC) through technology maturation and demonstration.  The primary emphasis is on technologies, which have been identified as high payoff contributors to affordability, supportability, survivability and lethality. Numerous experiments have been accomplished and others are in process to validate performance and life cycle cost impact to component, subsystem, and the total system [1].Virtual simulations have and will continue to be used to examine areas that are particularly sensitive to human interactions and/or highly accurate systems representations.  The need to examine contractor Preferred Weapon System Concepts (PWSCs) in a system-of-systems (SoS) environment to optimize total system performance and minimize costs has provided the motivation to establish the JSF Strike Warfare Collaborative Environment (SWCE).  The JSF SWCE is a combination of M&S resources and disciplined systems engineering processes that provide quantitative and qualitative data for analysis, allow for the demonstration of concepts, and will be used to augment the T&E of the weapon system.  Additionally, the JSF SWCE will lay the ground work for training and mission rehearsal capabilities that will be required for Production, Fielding/Deployment, and Operational Support (PF/DOS) of this new weapon system.The next experiment is being held in conjunction with Joint Expeditionary Force Experiment (JEFX) 1999.  JEFX 99 is focused on examining C2 systems scheduled to be fielded in the 2003-5 timeframe.  JSF will comprise over 65% of the future fighter force, and will be a key element of future C4ISR and SoS environments.  As such, JSF will participate in the JEFX air campaign. The JSF SWCE will demonstrate the use of advanced avionics and advanced weapons employment to acquire the target, avoid threats, and destroy the target.  The JSF SWCE will receive all off-board information from virtual and constructive participants in JEFX via a real-world JTIDS (Link 16) connection and virtual AWACS controllers.The development of an Experimental-Strike Warfare Collaborative Environment (E-SWCE) Federation is the goal of this Internal Research and Development (IR&D) program.  The primary objective is to develop a capability for JSF’s SWCE to be interoperable with the Distributed Mission Training (DMT) environment.  The JEFX 99 Scenario is being used to provide the mission context for this federation. There are two interface approaches that are being explored to provide this interoperability to a single target Federation Object Model (FOM).  In one approach a legacy federate is being modified to use the data representations in the target FOM.  In the second approach, an architecture called the Agile FOM Framework (AFF), is being used to transform a model’s Simulation Object Model (SOM) data representations into those of the target FOM.  This development is a combination of the RDE Forum’s “Complex Model” Use Case with large numbers of objects (100’s) that require real-time performance [2].2. E-SWCE DevelopmentThis IR&D began back in January 99 with the intent of basing our experiment on a UCAV SEAD Mission Scenario.  After developing an hypothesis, objectives, Measures of Effectiveness (MOEs) and a conceptual model; it was decided that the mission scenario must be changed to achieve the desired number of entities to investigate.  The following sub-sections detail our progress to date.2.1 Requirements DefinitionThis task identifies the problem domain through the identification of the JSF critical operational objects and identification of the measures of merit for the federation execution.  The “ilities” in Table 1 are being evaluated during this experiment.  This information is being captured in the Federation Execution Planning Workbook (FEPW).ApplicabilityDid we use HLA in the way it was designed to be used? ReliabilityWere we constantly restarting, rebooting, debugging, etc?AcceptabilityDoes the M&S community endorse E-SWCE?UsabilityAimed at HLA usability...Software availabilityTrainingDocumentationDiagnosticsValidityAre selected federates credible?Does federation implementation maintain credibility?RepeatabilityDoes input lead to output?Extractability of ResultsCan we collect and correlate data about critical events that occur across federates?Table 1 – Evaluation Criteria2.2 Conceptual Model DevelopmentDuring this task, we elaborated the specific operational context requirements and developed problem domain specific reference requirements.  The products of this task are the Federation Scenario and Conceptual Model.  We captured the mission context, schedule, manpower, simulation/simulation facilities, latency limits, realism threshold, etc.  Much of the data needed for this task was retrieved from JEFX 99 and is being captured in the FEPW.2.3 Federation DesignEach reference requirement was cross-referenced with an already developed Simulation Object Model (SOM) (i.e. from the MSRR) new objects were developed.  During this task, the FEPW was populated with an implementation plan and schedule.  We obtained the necessary HLA tools, secured the platforms, acquired the federates and completed the object models.  Section 4 describes each of the federates in Figure 1.Figure 1 – Desired Test Federation2.4 Federation IntegrationEach of the individual SOMs are being finalized and transited into a final Federation Object Model (FOM).  The SOMs and FOM are being developed in accordance with the HLA Object Model Template (OMT) format.  We are developing HLA interfaces to the necessary federates and obtaining the Agile FOM Interface mapping as part of a Beta Site test.  The experiment results will be documented and presented at the Fall SIW.2.5 Federation ExecutionDuring the month of August each federate will be tested according to the HLA specification.  All of the federates will be executed to verify their compliance with the requirements.  A demonstration of the federates interacting with the RTI Initialization Data (RID) and Federation Execution Details (FED) files will be provided and “ilities” evaluated.3. Joint Expeditionary Force eXperimentThe Joint Expeditionary Force eXperiment (JEFX) mission is to conduct an annual Air Force Chief of Staff-sponsored experiment that combines live-fly forces, simulations and technology insertions into a seamless warfighting environment. The overarching hypothesis for JEFX is "Advanced Air and Space” warfighting concepts enhance the nation’s ability to rapidly halt an invading force anywhere in the world even with limited warning.The Expeditionary Force eXperiment (EFX) for 1998 was the first in the series of revolutionary experiments designed to "advance air and space warfighting concepts that enhance the nation’s ability to rapidly halt an invading force anywhere in the world even with limited warning." JEFX 99 expands lessons learned in EFX 98 and will include a more complete integration of space-based capabilities and space-derived information into aerospace operations as well as joint participation where appropriate.Along with increased space-based resources, two full Air Expeditionary Force (AEF) deployments along with virtual and constructive simulations will form the bases of the JEFX operational laboratory for 1999. In the notional wartime scenario, this AEF will help defend one of America’s trusted allies against the military aggression of a neighboring country. JEFX provides the services with an annual vehicle for experimentation with operational concepts and attendant technologies for enhancing capabilities of the 21st century. The experimentation will lead to new ways of accomplishing missions, while motivating leading-edge thought and encouraging operational activities that will significantly advance our Core Competencies as the services prepare to fight the nation’s conflicts. The JEFX program provides mechanisms for transitioning proven initiatives, to serve as operational leave-behinds or as candidates for incorporation into the formal acquisition cycle.3.1 JEFX conceptThe overall JEFX concept calls for the deployment and employment of an Air Expeditionary Force as part of a large asymmetric force-on-force simulated combat scenario. This serves as the experiment’s laboratory to effectively integrate new and immerging warfighting technologies with robust world-wide communications capabilities. The results will leverage improvements in AEF requirements and Air Force Core Competencies.3.2  JEFX missionWith Full Dimensional Protection as this year’s theme, a full Air Expeditionary Force (AEF) will be deployed, along with virtual and constructive simulations, to form the basis of the JEFX operational laboratory. In JEFX99’s notional wartime scenario, this AEF will help defend one of America’s trusted allies against the military aggression of a neighboring country. While deployed, AEF forces will be subjected to air-to-air and air-to-ground attacks, standard penetration threats (small terrorists groups to special operation forces), standoff (mortar, rockets, sniper, man-portable Surface to Air Missiles, truck-bomb, and/or chemical and biological attacks. The challenge will be to train the "right-sized" AEF force package to counter the threats, transport it to the Area of Responsibility and provide it with the most current and accurate intelligence information necessary to execute their mission. Results of this experiment will clearly provide relevance and context to the new type of warfare envisioned in Joint Vision 2010. 3.3  JEFX objectivesJEFX objectives guide the general arrangement of experiment activities, the establishment of criteria for acceptance of conceptual and technology initiatives for experimentation, and the definition of planning limits for experimentation. JEFX will institute and continuously employ a spiral technology development process to expeditiously introduce new technologies and operational concepts spanning development, experimentation, and integration of enhanced capabilities into the active inventory. JEFX will explore AEF capabilities, baseline C2 capabilities and provide insights for C2 Roadmap plans, and evaluate and recommend changes to current doctrinal procedures for contingency response operations and Core Competencies. Finally, it will establish the JEFX process as the mechanism to introduce and evaluate technologies and operational concepts for enhanced applications of Air and Space power.3.5  JEFX-99 scenarioThe JEFX-99 employs a notional scenario [3] based upon a potential adversary called the people’s Republic of Califon (PERCAL) and their threat to an U.S. ally called the Republic of Nevidah (REPNEV).  These two nations are located on the large continental island of Pacifica as seen in Figure 2.  Also co-located on this island is the neutral nation of the Confederation of Washorgon States.  In this scenario, both PERCAL and REPNEV economies are dependent on the extremely rich and pure mineral fields that lie across the borders of both nations. Most of the mineral fields lie within REPNEV, but most of the extracted ores are shipped through the PERCAL port of San Francisco.The prime minister of REPNEV announces his nation’s plans to develop and build its own modern, deep water commercial port at Salt Lake City for the purpose of exporting REPNEV’s share of the vital strategic mineral products.  As work progresses in REPNEV to build its new port facilities, the PERCAL government begins to realize the economic impacts and diverted revenues if REPNEV uses its own ports rather than those in PERCAL to ship the minerals.  It could put PERCAL in a position of a deteriorating economy matched up with the heavy debt caused by the procurement and sustainment of their large military force structure.  REPNEV’s decision to develop its own port facilities led to a breakup of the government and widespread unrest.  Individual REPNEV states distrusted the motives of the central government officials, who could use the national treasury to enrich one specific region.Figure 2 – Island of PacificaThe internal security problems have begun to strain the capability of REPNEV’s police and paramilitary forces.  There is evidence that PERCAL has already initiated covert operations to exploit this instability in vital portions of REPNEV to include the mineral fields.  REPNEV officials also believe that PERCAL has developed military plans to follow up on the instability and occupy REPNEV’s portion of the mineral fields.  REPNEV has already requested a UN peacekeeping force to restore law and order in those areas where civil war threatens.  In an apparent move to exert additional pressure on the now fragmented government of REPNEV, PERCAL has initiated its largest military exercise ever along the border with REPNEV. The Prime Minister of REPNEV submits an emergency request to the UN and the US for assistance to protect and defend his country’s sovereignty from external threats while they cope with their internal problems.  REPNEV is specifically requesting assistance from the US Government to introduce US and Coalition Forces into the region to counter and halt PERCAL forces if they cross the borders into REPNEV and attempt to “annex” the mineral fields from REPNEV.  REPNEV has agreed to assist US and Coalition forces by furnishing bases, facilities and host-nation support.During July and August of 2003, US Forces arrive in the Pacifica Theater of operations and a battle ensues.  The JEFX-99 Scenario employs about 1500 entities during the height of the war.  There are approximately 1000 fixed and rotary wing vehicles, 100 ships, 200 SAMs and 15 divisions on the ground.  In less than two weeks, the PERCAL President requests a cease fire and a UN supervision of cessation of hostilities.4. E-SWCE FederationKey components of JEFX-99 Modeling and Simulation (M&S) architecture come from the Aggregate-Level Simulation Protocol (ALSP) constructive models, Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) virtual simulators and simulations, and live-fly aircraft.  The E-SWCE Federation is HLA-based, but will use the scenario from JEFX-99.  The following paragraphs provide a short description of each federate used within E-SWCE:FRED: Fighter Requirements Evaluation Development (FRED) is a real-time, reconfigurable, human-in-the-loop (HITL) simulator.  FRED is a highly capable flight simulator. FRED ensures that flight crew development and/or validation of new cockpit configurations may be performed under realistic, adverse, and/or high workload conditions. FRED simulates a real-world environment built from Defense Mapping Agency (DMA) Digital Terrain Elevation Data (DTED), covered in a shaded terrain skin. You can increase the realism of the environment by adding cultural features such as buildings, roads, rivers, and forests. Tactical mission environments expose the simulated aircraft to realistic threat stimuli while performing a mission. The threat stimuli are generated via SWEG/JIMM. These threats are in the form of surface-to-air, air-to-surface, and air-to-air engagements. MIL-AASPEM: The purpose of the Advanced Air-to-Air System Performance Evaluation Model (AASPEM) is to provide a comprehensive tool to perform air combat analysis in a realistic few-on-few engagement environment. Aircraft and missiles are explicitly flown incorporating Air Force specified missile guidance laws and missile propulsion characteristics. AASPEM flies its vehicles using a pseudo five Degree-of-Freedom (DOF) mathematical model and can control mixed environments of aircraft and missile types with different load-outs of missiles on the aircraft. A total of 75 aircraft and missiles combinations comprising six different aircraft types and six different missile types can be simulated at one time.  AASPEM has been used extensively for studies of the effectiveness of new aircraft, missiles, countermeasure system designs, and concept development. SWEG/JIMM: SWEG is a general-purpose conflict simulation, currently used for analyzing mission level conflicts. As a standalone tool, SWEG is useful for performing sensitivity analysis on varying force structures/mixes/HW capabilities. When interfaced with other HW/SW, SWEG is generally used to provide a realistic, complete scenario "backdrop" for other simulations/simulators in an integrated conflict. SWEG is built from and very similar to the Suppressor simulation.  JIMM is a merger of the SWEG and Suppressor modelsJointSAF: Joint Semi Automated Forces (JointSAF) is an extensively developed, highly used, state-of-the-art computer generated forces (CGF) software application capable of representing performance aspects of synthetic battlefield entities.  It has found great use in the training community for allowing force-on-force battles to be played with a minimal number of live or human-in-the-loop (HITL) simulators. JointSAF can autonomously represent the functionality of an entity or weapon system on the virtual battlefield. Entities maneuver, engage other entities (either HITL simulators or other CGFs), communicate, and perform various other functions.  In essence, JointSAF provides basic representation of entities in most domains of interest for distributed simulation.JointSAF is the product of an Agile FOM Framework that was developed and integrated with ModSAF.  A FOM agile federate is one that can participate in a variety of federations using different Federation Object Models with minimal impact to the federate software.  FOM agility will increase the reusability of the federate in different federations while reducing the non-recurring engineering costs.5. SummaryThis IR&D Program seeks to develop the E-SWCE Federation to be interoperable with DMT environment.  It can also be used as a Use Case of the RDE Forum’s “Complex Model” with large numbers of objects that require real-time performance. The JEFX-99 scenario, with its 1500 entities, is being used to provide the mission context for this federation. Three of the five steps of the Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) have been completed to date.  The Federation Integration has been ongoing and the Agile FOM mappings arrived in mid-July. During the month of August each federate will be tested according to the HLA specification. Several issues have surfaced during the development of the E-SWCE.  The Joint Advanced Distributed Simulation (JADS) Program is providing several useful tools.  These tools along with the DMSO-sponsored tools are essential elements of an HLA developer’s toolbox.   Multi-level security became a limiting issue during the federation design.  These issues as well as those surfaced during the federation execution will be documented and presented at the Fall SIW.6. References[1]  Joint Strike Fighter Program Whitepaper, 14 June 1999.[2]  HLA Use Case Evaluation Experimental Results, RD&E Users Forum, Spring SIW 1999.[3]  EFX 99 Scenario, Capt. Matt Carpenter, Nov 1998.Author BiographiesBRET GIVENS received his BS degree in Computer Engineering from Wright State University (WSU) in 1985 and his MS degree in Computer Engineering from WSU in 1990.  Mr. Givens works for Veridian and has more than thirteen years of technical experience in software engineering and is currently supporting the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Project at AFRL/VACD.  Mr. Givens is also the secretary of the Research, Development & Engineering (RDE) Forum for the Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW). DAVE O’QUINN received a BS Degree in Computer Science in 1989.  Mr. O’Quinn works for Veridian and has more than ten years of technical experience in software engineering.  He is currently supporting the JSF Project at AFRL/VACD.NOEL COX received his BS degree in….