ISG-C4I Preliminary ReportJoseph LaceteraMonmouth Science and Technology, Inc.PMB 180, 328 South Main StreetBel Air,  MD  21014 HYPERLINK mailto:lacetera@msti-b.com lacetera@msti-b.com(443) 253-9060Keywords: SISO Implementation Study Group, C4I-to-simulation interfaces, C4I Interface Technical Reference Model, C4I Interface TRM, ISG-C4IAbstractOne of the purposes of the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) is to promote the interface standardization of interoperable simulations across the Modeling and Simulation (M&S) community.  Through the Simulation Interoperability Workshops (SIW), SISO provides forums for the interchange of new ideas, concepts, and technology across a broad M&S community and lays the groundwork for subsequent standards development.  As an intermediate step between the presentations and working group meetings at the workshops and actual standards development, SISO also charters Implementation Study Groups (ISG) to study specific M&S issues that may ultimately bear on the development of standards.  It is for such a purpose that SISO has commissioned the ISG for C4I-to-Simulation Interfaces (ISG-C4I).  This paper is a preliminary report of the ISG-C4I.  In particular, it will discuss startup actions of the ISG-C4I and its proposed key task of the consideration and study of a proposed C4ISR Interface Technical Reference Model.  The paper will also provide a review of related SIW papers providing some background on general issues of standardization of the interfacing of real C4ISR equipment to simulations, including relationships between the HLA and the JTA, and NATO aspects of C4I-to- simulation interfaces issues1.0  IntroductionOne of the purposes of the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) is to promote the interface standardization of interoperable simulations across the Modeling and Simulation (M&S) community.  Through the Simulation Interoperability Workshops (SIW), SISO provides a forum for the interchange of new ideas, concepts, and technology across a broad M&S community and lays the groundwork for subsequent standards development.  As an intermediate step between the presentations and working group meetings at the workshops and actual standards development, SISO charters Implementation Study Groups (ISG) to study specific M&S issues that may ultimately bear on the development of standards.  A key issue for the Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I), community is the interfacing of real C4I equipment with simulations.  To help address this issue, SISO has commissioned the ISG for C4I-to-Simulation Interfaces (ISG-C4I).  This paper is a preliminary report of the activities of the ISG-C4I.  It provides information on the structure of the ISG-C4I, its goals and proposed tasks, and gives some background on proposed approaches to standardizing C4I-to-Simulation Interfaces.2.0  C4I-to-Simulation Interface IssuesMotivation for interfacing real C4I equipment to simulations includes the need to use real C4I and Surveillance and Reconaissance (C4ISR) systems to train warfighters as they fight and the need to use real C4ISR systems for realism in military operations research and analyses.  However, while the M&S community is moving on a path towards standardizing interfaces on emerging High Level Architecture (HLA) approaches, the DoD C4I community is moving to standardize on the Joint Technical Architecture (JTA), [1] and the Defense Information Infrastructure Common Operating Environment (DII COE) [2].  This subject has been discussed in papers by Hieb, et al [3], and Flournoy [4], in which they note that standards for C4ISR interfaces to simulations are being developed separately by both the C4I and M&S communities.  Flournoy discusses the implications of these efforts on Command and Control (C2)-to-simulation interoperability, and notes that standardization, occurring within both communities, raises hopes that the number of C2-to-simulation interface needs can be reduced to a handful of connection solutions at the infrastructure level between the COE and HLA-compliant Runtime Infrastructures (RTIs).  Clearly, there is a need to develop processes for aligning the standards being developed for the HLA which govern simulations and those of the JTA which govern real systems.  Such efforts can facilitate interfacing simulations to C4ISR systems, if approaches that relate these two domains are developed.  Accordingly, there is a need for a unified approach for development of C4I–to-simulation interfaces, and a need for such an approach to be available to developers who are following and applying the Federation Development Process (FEDEP) to the development of C4ISR federations. From this point of view, it is reasonable to conclude that an ISG for C4I interface development can help to avoid the following of disparate approaches.  On a broader front [5, 6], there has been significant investment by the international community, including efforts of working groups, panels and various NATO institutions , in developing information modeling methodologies.  This work, conducted under the umbrella of general interoperability of information systems for integrating C4I systems across national boundaries,  must be considered as potentially impacting any standards which might be proposed by the ISG-C4I.3.0  ISG-C4I3.1  ISG-C4I StructureThe interim chair for the ISG-C4I is Joe Lacetera and the interim vice-chair is Don Timian.  The ISG-C4I also has liaisons assigned from both the Conference Committee and the Standards Activity Committee and various interested forums.  ISG-C4I membership and participation is open to all who wish to contribute to the ISG-C4I endeavor.  A reflector (SIW-ISG-C4I) has been established for the ISG-C4I at the SIW website.  All interested are welcome to join.3.2  ISG-C4I Tasks The ISG-C4I has as its primary consideration, study of a proposed C4I Interface Technical Reference Model (TRM) [3].  Related considerations that may also be addressed include:Migration concepts for legacy systemsTechnical standards for migrationDevelopment of related Reference FOMsDevelopment of a C4ISR CMMSRelationships between the HLA and JTAInformation Modeling concepts to support 	the FEDEP for C4ISR federationsData standards which can link systems to 	simulations (e.g., impacts of CCSIL)Transfer/authentication of data/metadataData coherence issuesEffects of the environment, including 	communications effects, on C4I systemsIn addition to the proposed C4I Interface TRM, the ISG-C4I will be considering the development of supporting databases as discussed by Timian, et al [7] and Tolk [8] and related Federation Object Models (FOM) such as the C4I FOM discussed in a paper by Sudnikovich, et al [9].3.3  ISG-C4I Products In general, it will be the practice of the ISG-C4I to make available, to SISO and other interested communities, intermediate products as soon as they are available. These products may be in the form of SIW papers authored by members or subgroups of the ISG, or other materials or products which will  be made available on C4ISR web site.  The study group will also make available other material for comment and review when to do so would further the goals of the ISG-C4I and the SISO community.  Most of the work of the ISG-C4I is expected to be performed by ISG-C4I participants interacting via the ISG-C4I reflector, at the ISG-C4I meetings during the SIWs, and interim meetings as required.The ISG-C4I will produce an interim summary report at the Spring 2000 SIW and a Final Product Report (FPR) at the Fall 2000 SIW.  The FPR will include:Recommendations toward development of 	simulation-to-C4I interface standardsA C4ISR Data and Interface Lexicon 	BibliographyA Rationale and bibliography of references 	that support the findings of the ISGThe products listed above should be considered as steps toward development of material which may be useful to a Standards Development Group in the creation of SISO standards or other SISO products. ISG-C4I products are not expected to have the stature of a formal SISO product (such as a SISO standard) themselves, but ISG-C4I products and reports are expected to identify areas for further study and discussion and/or may contribute directly to the development of one or more Standards Nomination submissions.4.0  The C4I Interface Technical Reference ModelHieb and Staver [3] first introduced the concept of the C4I Interface TRM in a paper at the Fall 1998 Simulation Interoperability Workshop.  In that paper they discussed the information that an ideal interface must handle and  the different types of information that need to be standardized, including the use of  Data Interchange Formats (DIFs).  Figures 1 and 2, shown below, are taken from that paper.Figure 1. depicts the bi-directional flow of data between a simulation and a C4I Interface.  The function of the interface is to 1) control the information flow between the C4I system and the Simulations and 2) to align the information among the systems so that the information is received in a system’s native format.  C4I-to-simulationinterfaces are limited in functionality for three basic reasons:  1) simulations and C4I systems do not contain the same data elements;  2) they represent data differently, and  3) they lack interface standards.Figure 1 indentifies three broad classes of data  that are necessary to meet the requirements that would result in full interoperability:Exercise Control InteractionsNon-Persistent DataPersistent DataExercise Control Interactions are a type of Execution Control that is passed during a training exercise to control the conduct of the exercise.  Non-persistent data is the type of data that would be represented as interactions in an object model, and would include C2 data, Situation Awareness (SA) data,  tracks (sensor data, and physical interactions between objects such as weapon effects).  Translation of the C2 class of information is especially difficult to achieve with current interfaces because C4ISR systems currently do not have a standard approach for the generation and maintenance of C2 information.  Persistent Data covers a wide variety of information including Order-of-Battle information, specification of  terrain to be used, etc.5.0  Data Alignment5.1  Data InterchangeOne approach to interface design, shown in Figure 2,  is the use of a Data Interchange Format (DIF) that aligns the real-system (JTA) and simulations (HLA) standards architectures.  The HLA standard for representation is the Federation Object Model.  The C4I standards architecture is the DII COE.  The standard for representation is either message formats (VMF, USMTF, etc.) or data models (using data exchange mechanisms). The HLA has a specific communications mechanism, the RTI, and the DII COE also has specific Communication segments.  The DIF would provide the interface between the architectures.   EMBED Word.Picture.8   Figure 2:  Relationship of C4I/Simulation Interface StandardsAnother approach could involve hosting the HLA environment on C4I platforms, possibly as a DII COE segment, however, C4I developers have traditionally not accepted this approach wherein an M&S requirement would impact a real system. Perhaps the simplest choice to avoid interface translation would be the populating of the simulations with real-system databases.5.2  Common DatabasesIn the Joint Technical Architecture – Army (JTA-Army) [10], the Army’s C4I community has defined a set of overarching standards that facilitate reuse and interoperability.  The  (JTA-Army) mandates use of specific data models for tactical C4I systems.  According to Timian et al [7], both the JTA and the JTA-Army have three mutually supporting objectives:Provide the foundation for a seamless flow of information and interoperability among all tactical, strategic, and sustaining base systems that produce, use or exchange information electronicallyProvide guidelines and standards for system development and acquisition that will dramatically reduce cost, development time, and fielding time for improved systemsInfluence the direction of the information industry’s technology development and research & development investment so that it can be more readily leveraged in Army systemsIn accordance with these objectives, both Timian [7] and Hieb and Blaylock [11] have suggested that the simulation world adopt the Joint Common Data Base (JCDB), which the Army is using as a common data base in the Army Battle Command Systems (ABCS), as a data standard. In fact, Timian maintains that the goals of C4I-to-simulation interoperability can only be achieved by defining a set of standards that apply to both the Army’s C4I systems and to its simulations, and that the key to common, reusable M&S C4I interfaces is the JCDB.  The JCDB conforms to the Department of Defense (DoD) C2 Core Data Model (C2CDM) standards and focuses on data which is shared by two or more Army Battle Command Systems (ABCS).  The JCDB is comprised of several different components, including:JCDB Transformation Data ModelJoint Data DictionaryJoint Common DatabaseSubscribe and ReceiveJCDB to CMP InterfaceJCDB APIsThe vision of ABCS system interoperability, is that all C4I systems share a common data base, and exchange data to keep their data bases synchronized.  Each system will have unique data in it’s local data base but this data is not shared, or common data.  Similarly, the JCDB could be used as the starting point for identifying the data exchange requirements for interfaces between Army tactical C4I systems and simulations.  However, most existing C4I-to-simulation interfaces handle only a small subset of the messages or data necessary for interoperability.  For this approach to be effective, simulation Object Models (SOM) must represent, with reasonable fidelity, the critical data elements that are 1) used to initialize the JCDB; and 2) sent between the simulations and C4I systems.  So, in addition to defining a C4I Interface TRM., it would be necessary to define a set of standards that apply to both the Army’s C4I systems and simulations.  This could be achieved by having the simulation community adopt the Joint Common Data Base (JCDB).6.0 Summary and ConclusionsA key issue for the C4I community is the interfacing of real C4I equipment with simulations.  Up until now, standards for C4ISR interfaces to simulations have been developed separately by both the C4I and M&S communities.  However, recent work promises the cooperation of these communities in develping a unified approach to interfacing real C4I to simulations.  A C4I Interface TRM has been proposed as a potential standard for linking real C4I eqipment to simulations, and a common database approach to align internal data has also been proposed.  In order for data alignment to be meaningful, simulations must improve their functional representations and their reporting capabilities and C4I systems must adopt some simulation constructs, e.g. exercise control.Clearly, there is a need to bring the C4I and M&S communities together to address these approaches in a unified way.   The ISG-C4I can provide the forum in which this can be done.  In particular, the SISO ISG-C4I should work closely with the Army Modeling and Simulation Office to ensure that the Army Interface Standards that are proposed are consistent with the larger M&S community, and that SISO Interface Standards that are proposed are consistent with the JTA-Army.  On the broader front the ISG-C4I should work with DoD and NATO standards organizations to address any issues which will impact C4I interface standards and other factors impacting full and seamless interoperability.One of the results of the ISG-C4I efforts will be a recommendation on whether the C4I Interface TRM should be recommended as a candidate for standards development.  If such is the case, it is expected that specific members of the ISG-C4I will be recommended to be participants in the Standards Development Group for C4I Interfaces along with other interested SISO members whose expertise lies in standards development.  To support its findings and recommendations, the ISG-C4I will produce a C4I Interface Rationale including a bibliography of relevant reference material.  Fimally, the ISG-C4I will produce a C4ISR Data and Interface Lexicon document to support the standards development and interfacing processes.7.0  References[1]  Joint Technical Architecture, Version 2.0, Defense Information System Agency, http://www-jta.itsi.disa.mil, 26 May 1998.[2]  Defense Information Infrastructure (DII COE) Architecture Oversight Charter, Office of the Defense Information Systems Agency, http://spider.osfl.disa.mil/dii/aog_twg/aog/970122_charter.html, January, 1997.[3] Hieb,M.,  Staver, M., The Army’s Approach to Modeling and Simulation Standards For C4I Interfaces, , Simulation Interoperability Workshop paper 98F-SIW-259[4]  Flournoy, D., Reconciling Emerging Infrastructure Standards to Promote C2-to-Simulation Interoperability, 98F-SIW-027[5] Proceedings of the NATO STUDIES, ANALYSIS AND SIMULATION PANEL (SAS) Symposium on Modelling and Analysis of Command and Control, Paris, France, January 1999[6] ATCCIS Working Paper 5-5 Draft 1.0: ATCCIS Battlefield Generic Hub 3Data Model Specification, ATCCIS Permanent Working Group, SHAPE, Belgien,30. November 1996[7] Timian, D., et al, Using Standard Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I) Components to Interface to Simulations,Simulation Interoperability Workshop paper 99S-SIW-035[8] Tolk, A., Common Shared Data Environment for C4ISR and Simulation Systems,Simulation Interoperability Workshop non-paper presentation, 99S[9] Sudnikovich, W., et al., Implementation of a Prototype C4I FOM, Simulation Interoperability Workshop paper 99S-SIW-061[10]  Joint Technical Architecture – Army, Version 5.0, Office of the Director, Information Systems for Command, Control, Communications and Computers, http://www.hqda.army.mil/techarch, September, 1997[11] Hieb, M. and Blalock, J., Data Alignment between Army C4I Databases and Army simulations, Simulation Interoperability Workshop paper 99S-SIW-03.