Verification, Validation, and Accreditation Plan for a Distributed Interactive Simulation Demonstration SystemZhang BingYang MingWang ZicaiSimulation CenterHarbin Inst. of Technology, P.O.Box 126Xi Dazhi Street No. 92, 150001Harbin, Hei Longjiang Province, P.R.China86-451-6416571,6416570sim@hope.hit.edu.cnKeywords:Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS); Verification, Validation and Accreditation (VV&A); Simulation CredibilityABSTRACT: This paper discussed the design of Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) plan for a Distributed Interactive Simulation System – Demonstration Stage (DISSDEMOS). A brief overview of the DISSDEMOS was given. The concepts of verification, validation, and accreditation for simulation system were introduced. The DIS 9 Step VV&A Process Model was used as the baseline to design the VV&A plan for DISSDEMOS. The major VV&A activities list of the VV&A plan for DISSDEMOS was present. Some practical problems in designing VV&A plan were also discussed.1. InstructionThe basic architecture concepts of DIS are an extension of the Simulator Networking (SIMNET) program developed by the Advanced Research Project Agency (ARPA) and Army from 1983. The basic architecture concepts for DIS are: No central computer controls the entire simulation exercise.Autonomous simulation applications are responsible for maintaining the state of one of more simulation entities.A standard protocol is used for communicating ground truth data.Changes in the state of an entity are communicated by its controlling simulation application.Perception of events or other entities is determined by the receiving application.Dead reckoning algorithms are used to reduce communications processing.The IEEE Standard for Distributed Interactive Simulation – Application Protocols (1278.1) defines 27 Protocol Data Units (PDU) that enable simulation application interoperable.The Verification, Validation, and Accreditation for DIS is an important work throughout the life-cycle of DIS system. DIS system is composed of tens or hundreds simulation sites distributed geographically over a large area that include thousands simulation entities. The credibility of DIS system can only be gained through effective VV&A work in the developing process of the system. IEEE Recommended Practice for Distributed Interactive Simulation – Verification, Validation and Accreditation (1278.4) provides guidelines for planning and conducting DIS system VV&A.VV&A must be well planned in order to maximize VV&A effectiveness and reduce the unnecessary work to save money and time of VV&A. This paper is about the VV&A plan design for a Distributed Interactive Simulation System - Demonstration Stage (DISSDEMOS).2. DISSDEMOS2.1 DISSDEMOS OverviewThe DISSDEMOS contains eight simulation subsystems, each of which is autonomous. The simulation subsystems are designed and implemented to be able to run either individually or interoperably through DIS PDUs. The system is on the demonstration stage and the objective is to demonstrated and test the usefulness and effectiveness of DIS technology.2.2 Requirement of VV&A for DISSDEMOSVV&A for DISSDEMOS is critical for the achievement of the objective of the DISSDEMOS. Although in its demonstration stage, the DISSDEMOS has the most functions of the real DIS system and is the prototype used to make decision of the feasibility of developing larger DIS system. So the DISSDEMOS requires VV&A to Increase users and decision makers’ confidence the DISSDEMOS use;Reduce the risks of DISSDEMOS use;Increase reusability of the DISSDEMOS for future application;Contain the cost of DISSDEMOS development and;Make better analysis in the developing and test process of DISSDEMOS.2.3 DISSDEMOS Life CycleSimilar to the other DIS systems, the DISSDEMOS life cycle has 7 phases, those are:Application objective and requirement definition: The application objective of the DISSDEMOS is determined by the system sponsor and the top-level function requirements of the DISSDEMOS are defined by the sponsor and developers.Preliminary Design: The architecture of the DISSDEMOS is constructed and the top-level function requirements of DISSDEMOS are mapped to the architecture of subsystems. The subsystem’s capability profiles are definedDetailed Design: The preliminary design is expended to more detailed level. The subsystem’s capability profiles are decomposed to the simulation entities’ attribute and operation which are used to design model and implement software of subsystem.Software Implementation: The detailed design of DISSDEMOS is implemented by the programmer of the subsystems. The model and software design is coded and tested in the unit level.Subsystem Integration: The components of subsystem are integrated as detailed design requirements. The subsystem’s functions as a individual system are tested against the subsystem capability profile. Errors and faults found should be corrected and tested again.System Integration: All the subsystems of DISSDEMOS are linked via high-speed communication networks. The subsystem capability as part of the DISSDEMOS is tested against the subsystem capability profile and the top level function requirement of DISSDEMOS.System Demonstrate and Accreditation: The DISSDEMOS is run and demonstrated to the users and sponsors. The usefulness and effectiveness of the DISSDEMOS are evaluated by the users and sponsors. The acceptability of the DISSDEMOS is determined finally.3.VV&A for Distributed Interactive Simulation3.1 ConceptsAccording to the IEEE Std 1278.4, the concepts of Verification, Validation, and Accreditation are:Verification: The process of determining that an implementation of a distributed simulation accurately represents the developer’s conceptual description and specifications.Validation: The process of determining the degree to which a distributed simulation is an accurate representation of the real world from the perspective of the intended use(s) as defined by the requirements. Validation also refers to the process of determining the confidence that should be placed on this assessment.Accreditation: (1) Distributed simulation accreditation is the official certification that a distributed simulation is acceptable for use for a specific purpose. (2) Model/simulation accreditation is the official certification that a model or simulation is acceptable for use for a specific purpose..DIS credibility is measured by verification and Validation and formally approved as adequate for use in a particular application by accreditation. There is difference between “verification” and “validation”. Verification focuses on the simulation capability and answers the question “Is the simulation built right. Validation, on the other hand, focuses on the simulation credibility and answers the question “Is the right simulation built?”. Attention should be paid to the use of terms verification and validation to avoid misunderstanding. The Verification and Validation (V&V) provides data and evidences for accreditation process. The evidence and data collected by V&V process provide the accreditation authority necessary information for officially certification of DIS. The relationship among the VV&A can be shown as Figure3.1. EMBED Visio.Drawing.5  Figure 3.1 Relationship between VV&A and DIS Credibility3.2 DIS 9 Step VV&A Process ModelSimone Youngblood of Illgen Simulation Technologies Inc. et al developed the DIS 9 Step VV&A process model which provides procedures and guidelines for planning and conducting DIS VV&A. The DIS 9 Step VV&A Process Model is depicted in Figure 3.2. EMBED Visio.Drawing.5  Figure 3.2  DIS 9 Step VV&A Process Model4. VV&A Plan for DISSDEMOS4.1 ApproachThe DIS 9 Step VV&A Process Model is used as starting point for the design of VV&A plan for DISSDEMOS. The DISSDEMOS developing process is compared with that of DIS Exercise to determine the major phases of the VV&A plan for DISSDEMOS (Fig. 3). EMBED Visio.Drawing.5  Figure 4.1  Life Cycle of DISSDEMOS vs. Life Cycle of DIS Exercise (IEEE 1278.4)It can be seen from Figure 4.1 that the DISSDEMOS life cycle is similar to that of DIS Exercise as defined by IEEE 1278.4. This greatly reduces the efforts needed to plan the VV&A plan for the DISSDEMOS. The VV&A process for the DISSDEMOS can be derived directly from the DIS 9 Step VV&A Process Model with slightly modification to fit the characteristics of DISSDEMOS development. The VV&A steps and related activities is list below.4.2 VV&A Activities List of VV&A Plan for DISSDEMOS(1) VV&A planningVV&A Objective and Requirements DefinitionV&V Plan DesignV&V team FormationAccreditation Plan DesignAccreditation Team FormationVV&A Resources and Tools Determination(2) Preliminary Design Verification and ValidationApplication Domain Definition ValidationArchitectural Design VerificationSubsystem Function Requirements design VerificationDetailed Design Requirements Verification(3) Detailed Design VerificationScenario Design VerificationModel Design VerificationRun Time Software Infrastructure Design VerificationHardware Configuration VerificationNetwork Topology Design VerificationSubsystem Information Interface Design VerificationDatabase Design VerificationData/Database Verification, Validation and Certification (VV&C)(4) Software Implementation VerificationDesk CheckingStatic TestingDynamic TestingFunction Testing and VerificationInterface Testing and VerificationDebuggingSpecial Input TestingData/Database Verification, Validation and Certification(5) Subsystem Verification and ValidationTest Suite Analysis and CertificationSubsystem Integration TestingSubsystem Performance TestingSubsystem Compatibility VerificationSubsystem Result Validation(6) System Integration Verification and ValidationTest Suite Analysis and CertificationSubsystem DIS Standard Compliance VerificationSpace-time Consistence VerificationSystem Function TestingSystem Performance TestingSystem Sensitivity TestingSystem Robustness TestingSystem Security TestingSystem Fidelity EvaluationSystem Result ValidationEffectiveness EvaluationData/Database Verification, Validation and CertificationV&V Report Documentation(7) System Demonstration and AccreditationSystem Demonstration to the V&V Work and Results ReviewsSystem Effectiveness EvaluationDISSDEMOS Acceptability AssessmentAccreditation Report Documentation4.3 Practical Considerations(1) V&V for both components, subsystem and systemThe DISSDEMOS is composed of 8 subsystem, and each subsystem includes a number of simulation components. V&V for the components (subsystems) can not guarantee the credibility of the whole subsystem (system). The V&V must be conducted in component level, subsystem level, and system level to assess the credibility of the DISSDEMOS.(2) DocumentationVV&A process should be recorded faithfully, thoroughly, consistently. Good VV&A documentation has two advantage over the bad one:Provide necessary evidence for accreditation decision of DISSDEMOS;Increase the reusability of today’s work for future applications.(3) Cost-effectiveThe VV&A p must take cost-effective problem in mind. Some levels of VV&A efforts should be defined to represent the different VV&A requirements. The higher risks may exist, the higher level VV&A effort should be.5. ConclusionVV&A is an important work in the life cycle of DISSDEMOS. DIS 9 Step VV&A Process Model is a powerful tool in designing the VV&A plan. VV&A plan should couple with the DISSDEMOS development process and cover from component level to system level. VV&A process should have good documentation and be cost-effective.6. References[1] IEEE Computer Society. 1997. IEEE Std 1278.4: Recommended Practice for Distributed Interactive Simulation - Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A)[2] Osman Balci. 1997. Principles of Simulation Model Validation, Verification, and Testing. Transactions of the Society for Computer Simulation International, Vol.14(1),1997 March, pp.3-12[3] P.R. Muessig and D.R. Laack. 1996. Cost Effective VV&A: Five Prerequisites. Proceedings of the SCSC'96, pp. 409-414[4] Peggy D. Gravitz, William Jordan. 1995. An IDEF0 Process Model of the DIS VV&A Process Model. Proceedings of the SCSC'95, 627-632[5] Robert G. Sargent. 1994. Verification and Validation of Simulation Models. Proceedings of the 1994 Winter Simulation Conference, pp.77-87[6] William Jordan, Dr. Dusty et al. 1995. Planning, Optimizing, and Costing Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) for Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS). Proceedings of the SCSC'95, pp.597-602[7] Yang Ming, Zhang Bing, Wang Zicai. The VV&A and Credibility Evaluation of Distributed Interactive Simulation System (DISS). Journal of Harbin Institute of Technology. 1999, No.10 (in Chinese)