M&S/C4ISR Conceptual Reference ModelRichard L. Ressler, Ph.D.BoozAllen & Hamilton, Inc.4301 Fairfax DriveArlington, VA 22203(703) 908-4300ressler_richard@bah.comMichael R. Hieb, Ph.D.AB Technologies, Inc.1901 N. Beauregard St.Alexandria, VA  22311-1705(703) 575-2800mhieb@abtechnologies.comWilliam SudnikovichUS Army Communications Electronics CommandFort Monmouth, NJ(732) 427-4093sudnikow@mail1.monmouth.army.milKeywords:C4ISR, Stimulation, Linkages, Interoperability, Reference Model, StandardsABSTRACT: The paper describes a conceptual reference model for interoperability among models and simulations (M&S) and Command, Control, Communications, Computer, Intelligence, Reconnaissance, and Surveillance (C4ISR) systems. The reference model establishes a framework for discussing the uses, requirements, technical approaches, and standards for meeting emerging requirements for exchanging information between M&S and C4ISR systems. The Services have traditionally developed their simulation systems independently from their C4ISR systems. Requirements, programmatic, and technical separation have occurred because the systems were built to meet different needs for different customers. Over the last several years the Services have developed multiple tools or interfaces for using their simulations to stimulate their C4ISR systems. The use of these tools has spurred the identification of long-term requirements for interoperability among M&S and C4ISR systems. Meeting these requirements in a cost effective manner will require coordination and cooperation across the simulation and C4ISR communities. A proven strategy for increasing interoperability among heterogeneous systems is the sharing and alignment of technical standards for development.Conceptual reference models provide a framework for discussing shared requirements and technical approaches by establishing common terms, concepts, and relationships for use by people from different communities and technical cultures. A conceptual reference model does not prescribe a technical approach, a specific standard, or even a high level design for meeting a given requirement. However, it does serve as a framework for analyzing requirements and solutions. The M&S/C4ISR reference model is based on a functional decomposition of a generic process for exchanging information between simulations and C4ISR systems. The reference model identifies four information categories: Command and Control, Communications, Environment, and Event Control. This decomposition enables the identification of areas for standards (horizontal view) and the analysis of status of standards development within each area (vertical view). The Army’s M&S Standards Category for C4I Integration is using this model to identify areas for standards development1.	IntroductionThe Department of Defense (DoD) has a long history of developing Models and Simulations (M&S) to support its missions. The DoD continues to invest resources in systems for supporting Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) systems. These M&S and C4ISR system developments have occurred in different professional communities because the Services have traditionally developed their simulation systems independently from their C4ISR systems. Requirements, programmatic, and technical separation have occurred because the systems were built to meet different needs for different customers.Over the past few years there has been considerable energy spent in both communities devising methods and tools for exchanging information between computer based M&S and C4ISR systems. The term exchanging information is used to connote that users of the two (or more) systems should have the same conceptual or semantic understanding of what is exchanged in addition to agreeing on the structure and content of the exchange. Work has begun on sharing standards that were once specific to a particular community. This work has been hampered however by cultural differences in the communities’ approaches to the shared requirements and technologies. The conceptual reference model provides a common framework for describing the exchange of information between M&S and C4ISR systems. The Army M&S Office has used this framework for guiding and assessing the development of shared standards for information exchange between M&S and C4ISR systems.The paper begins with background on the development of standards for exchanging information between M&S and C4ISR systems and related reference models. The next section provides context for the reference model by providing some common definitions and discussing significant use cases for M&S and C4ISR information exchange. Section 4 describes the M&S/C4ISR Conceptual Reference Model. Section 5 discusses an initial assessment of the standards available for the activities and information types in the model. The last section contains a summary followed by references.2.	Background2.1.	M&S and C4ISR and Standards DevelopmentThe DoD has mandated the use of the High Level Architecture as “the standard technical architecture for all DoD simulations” [1]. The DOD has also mandated the use of the Joint Technical Architecture for information systems, a category that includes C4ISR systems [2]. Efforts to connect systems falling under these standards date back as far as the Modular Reconfigurable Command and Control Interface (MRCI) [3]. The MRCI effort identified and highlighted the difficulties of exchanging information between M&S and C4ISR systems in the absence of shared or common standards between the systems.Work is progressing in several areas to address the development of shared technical standards. Hieb and Staver describe the overall approach of the Army to M&S to C4I Interoperability, addressing the DII COE and HLA Architectures [4]. Hieb and Blalock investigate the alignment between the a specific C4I tactical database, the Joint Common Data Base, and the Army Unit Object Model Standard [5]. Timian et al describe the use of DII COE standard components in interfaces to improve interoperability [6]. Each of these efforts is attacking part of the technical challenge of exchanging information between systems. Efforts are also undergoing to attack the requirements and management challenges of exchanging information between these systems. The Army is drafting a Capstone Requirements Document for a Simulation to C4I Interface to define the “ high level interface requirements for simulations (tactical, training, analytical, and test) that interact with C4I systems of the future”. The US Army STRICOM has established a Product Manager, C4I Simulation Systems (C4ISS) to address the acquisition management of, and integrate approaches for, exchanging information between M&S and C4ISR systems. To have the greatest impact, the individual technical approaches, requirements refinements and management solutions should interact within a common framework for describing the problems they are trying to solve. A conceptual reference model provides such a framework for discussing shared requirements and technical approaches by establishing common terms, concepts, and relationships for use by people from different communities and technical cultures. A conceptual reference model does not prescribe a technical approach, a specific standard, or even a high level design for meeting a given requirement. However, it does serve as a framework for analyzing requirements and solutions.2.2.	Related Reference ModelsThe idea of a conceptual reference model is not new. Several models have been presented for describing the relationship between M&S and C4ISR systems in specific application areas. Layman et. al. gives a model of an interface for multi-level team training [7]. This model divides information into C2, Tactical Communications, Combat Systems, and Sensors classes.Carr and Hieb describe a Technical Reference Model that has three classes of information for which standards must be developed: Persistent Data, Non-Persistent Data, and Execution Control [8]. That model was extended in Hieb and Staver and Timian et. al. Respectively [9]. That model is similar to the one described here, but the current model does not use the distinction between persistent and non-persistent data. That temporal distinction depends upon the applications utilized. This distinction is not used in the current model. Paola and Ressler extended portions of this model by describing the concepts and details that need to be considered for creating a realistic information exchange plan for stimulation [10]. Birkel has described a Synthetic Natural Environment (SNE) Conceptual Reference Model that supports the goal of achieving “semantic interoperability” among the various representations of the synthetic environment found in simulations. It includes interoperability between the military models present or implied on both M&S and C4ISR systems [11]. The SNE model provides an overarching standard system (or process) model as a common point of reference against which different technical discussions can be mapped. The M&S/C4ISR model presented in this paper has a similar intent of providing a common framework for discussing uses, requirements, technical approaches, and standards for meeting emerging requirements for exchanging information between M&S and C4ISR system. It builds off of the related reference models to provide a common point of reference for addressing the exchange of information between M&S and C4I systems on a variety of contexts.3.	Context for M&S/C4ISR Information ExchangePart of the challenge in developing technical standards to be shared among diverse communities is the multitude of terms and constructs for describing the problem that the standards are meant to solve. (The Simulation Interoperability Workshop Implementation Study Group on a C4I Interface Model is attacking this challenge.) Thus prior to discussing the conceptual reference model, several terms are defined for use in relation to this model and several use cases are described to establish the context in which the model could apply. 3.1.	Terms and DefinitionsSome of the following terms are defined in the DoD M&S Glossary [12] while others are not. However each is commonly used when describing the relationship between M&S and C4ISR systems. There are listed here to define them in relationship to each other as regards to the conceptual reference model.There are at least three different levels of relationships between M&S and C4ISR systems. Link: “In communications, a general term used to indicate the existence of communications facilities between two points [12].” Thus the use of the phrase “to link M&S to C4ISR systems” only implies a physical connectivity between the two. The connectivity may be in the form of both using compatible physical media devices and does not imply a dynamic flow of electrons between the systems.Interface: “A boundary or point common to two or more similar or dissimilar command and control systems, sub-systems, or other entities against which or at which necessary information flow takes place [12].” Commonly defined as a verb as “to interconnect two or more entities at a common point or shared boundary.” Thus discussion about an interface is limited to what occurs at the shared boundary. Creating a interface means that two systems can be linked and can exchange data across that link. It does not imply that the data that is sent means to same to the receiver as it does to the sender.Interoperability: The DoD M&S Glossary [13] defines Interoperability in terms of M&S as “The ability of a model or simulation to provide services to and accept services from other models and simulations, and to use the services so exchanged to enable them to operate effectively together.” This definition is a special case of a generic system interoperability that includes M&S and C4ISR systems. The key here is that when discussing interoperability among M&S and C4ISR systems, the terms “operating effectively together” must be defined from the perspective of the users. Thus standards for interoperability must address the meaning (definitions and relationships) of what is exchanged based on the user’s domain.Part of the challenge in developing technical standards for M&S interoperability is the wide variety of uses that can occur. The following section addresses several common uses to highlight their similarities and their differences.3.2.	Use CasesEach M&S domain has cause to employ M&S and C4ISR systems in concert. Use cases are described in each of the three domains of Training, Analysis, and Acquisition. The flexibility of M&S and C4ISR users ensures that there will be uses that overlap the domains.Training: The Services are fielding C4ISR systems at all levels of their force structure. These systems begin at the lowest tactical level and will eventually interconnect at the strategic level. The purpose of using M&S for stimulating training with C4ISR systems is to provide realistic conditions for training that can not be achieved as effectively through other means for some reason be it cost, safety, or realism. Thus the effectiveness portion of interoperability brings in the requirement for realistic emulation. Realistic communications transmission is an important aspect to realistic emulation. The relationship is not just between an M&S and a specific C4ISR node, it is between a simulated C4ISR system and a live system. All factors that affect the information exchange must be considered. The required level of realism demands dynamic interoperability between the M&S and C4ISR systems. The information exchange must occur in real time in response to unpredictable changes in the simulated environment and the live decision makers actions. In fact, the presence of a simulation should be undetectable by the training audience based on their interactions with the C4ISR system. While the simulation is implicit, the time relationship between the C4ISR system and the M&S is explicit. There is no time for human in the loop manipulation of data. The correct information must flow at the correct time to the correct node and in the right format as if it were from another C4ISR system.Analysis: Several different types of analysis can involve the use of M&S and C4ISR systems. In Operational Analysis and Planning a C4ISR system operator uses his device to initialize, operate, and obtain feedback from a simulation to support his or her decision making process. In C4ISR System analysis, an M&S operator extracts data from a C4ISR system (or system of systems) to analyze the performance of the system. In both cases while time may be of the essence, it is not necessary to maintain real time interactions. In fact the term does not mean much in this setting as there is no time relationship between interactions in the M&S and their affect on perceptions about the data in the C4ISR system. While there is a need for agreement on what and how the data is exchanged, there is no need to emulate another system for the exchange. In Human In The Lop (HITL) analysis, the actions of live operators and decision makers are being probed. These settings share many of the same requirements for realistic emulation as in the training use cases. Timing and flow requirements may be adjusted to create a variety of conditions for analyzing alternatives. In the HITL analysis as well as in the C4ISR system, realistic communications effects are a requirement Acquisition: There are two major use cases in acquisition, C4ISR system testing and sensor system testing. In technical or developmental testing some of the requirements for realism may be relaxed to enable stress testing. However operational testing users share many of the requirements from training for ensuring that the stimuli realistically emulate the presence of other systems or SNE phenomena in terms of accuracy, structure, timing, and flow.4.	The M&S/C4ISR Conceptual Reference ModelThe M&S/C4ISR conceptual reference model began during a quest to identify areas that the M&S community should address to achieve interoperability between M&S and C4ISR systems in support of the wide variety of Use Cases. The intent was to identify areas where standards existed in one or the other community that could be shared without conflict, where standards existed in both communities that were in conflict, and areas where no standard existed. The conceptual model is based on a straightforward decomposition of the process for exchanging information between M&S and C4ISR systems. The model describes of the activities that need to occur to achieve interoperability between M&S and C4ISR systems. The model also describes four types of information to be exchanged. One can then identify potential standards that can be used for the activities and information types or areas where no standards exist.4.1.	Information Exchange Activity ModelThe Information Exchange Activity Model is pictured in Figure 1. The right and left sides of the model (outside the vertical lines) contain the inputs and the outputs for the model. The center of the model (between the lines) contains the activities that need to occur.On the right side of the model are the two systems that drive the activities in the model: the M&S and the C4ISR system architectures. Depending upon the use case the M&S may be simulating the C4ISR system architecture. On the left side of the model is the output of all the activities: Consistent Perception. This is the goal of M&S and C4ISR system interoperability. For true interoperability, the users’ perception of the “real world,” as is visible from within the scope of the models/abstractions represented in the M&S and C4ISR systems, must match in terms of scope and fidelity. Fidelity addresses issues such as accuracy, resolution, and timeliness. Where there is a gap between the abstractions in the M&S and C4ISR systems, it should be identified during a priori validation so that it does not lead to false conclusions from the interoperability event.At some point, an operator/system in one architecture makes a decision to exchange information with an operator/system in the other architecture. The process then moves from right to left. The information must be aligned so that the content from the senders perspective (data model) is matched to be consistent with the receiver’s perspective (data model). This may require any number of transformations aligning different attributes such as identification, location, or status. Alignment is completed when the information has been aligned at the data element level so that it can be properly understood when received.Once the data alignment is complete, the data must be formatted to match the desired interface. Interface formats can be text or bit-oriented messages, calls to an Application Programming Interface, or some other format. Once the data is formatted it is ready for transmission and exchange. Depending upon the use case there may be the addition of communications effects that mediate the exchange. At this point the flow reverses. The data is received. The receiver parses the format to extract the data. The receiver may do some further alignment activities if it has unique information that is required to complete the alignment. Then the receiving architecture uses the data for its own purposes.One can also traverse the model from left to right by asking the question what enables the activity on the left to occur.Figure 1.  Information Exchange Activity ModelInformation exchange does not take place in a vacuum but during some event for some purpose. There are supporting activities at the top and bottom of the model that enable the information exchange to occur. At the bottom of Figure 1, the Manage Networks activity keeps the links in place. At the top of the figure the Event Control activity addresses issues such as how and when to synchronize the architectures so that they have a consistent set of initial conditions. Event Control also maintains consistency at the macro level by managing the starting, pausing, restarting and stopping of the event.In several uses cases there is a requirement for Data Collection to support After Action Reviews (AARs) or other analyses. This can be an ongoing activity that spans each activity in the model depending upon the focus of the application.4.2.	Information TypesThe semantic content of information is separate from its syntactic content. In our reference model, we clearly delineate this distinction since there are many different formats that correspond to the syntax of information as opposed to the semantic content. Figure 2 shows our model of how information is “layered” in different formats. Initially, there is a syntax imposed upon the information that corresponds to a well specified ordering. An example would be information that constitutes a report that is formatted as a US Message Text Format (USMTF) or Joint Variable Message Format (JVMF) message. Another layer is then imposed by the need to specify the syntax of transmission across a network. An example would be a network protocol such as TCP/IP. Exercise Control is shown separately as this is special type of information, due to its ability to process the other types of information.There are four basic types of information that are exchanged in our model as shown in Figure 3: Command and Control (C2), Communications, Environment, and Exercise Control/Data Collection.Figure 2.  Information LayersC2 information: (Table 1)This includes the basic subclasses of Templates, Task Organizations, Status, Equipment, Graphics, and Processes. A change from the previous Technical Reference Model [8] is that terrain is now in its own class, the “Environment” Class. C2 information includes data that describes the organizations involved, their materiel, and their preplanned or ongoing actions. In the following Organization may be also taken to mean Unit.Figure 3.  Types of Information1.1 Templates – These are commonly used structures in the C4I world that relate action (orders), status (reports), intended actions (plans) or graphical constructs (overlays) to organizations. Examples are OPORD structures or SITREP structures.1.2 Task Organizations – Organizational descriptions include their identification, their relationships to other organizations in a number of different dimensions e.g., location, operational activity, materiel, and personnel status. As an example, the Unit Task Organization (UTO) identifies units and their command relationships. Other structures identify fire support or logistics support relationships. 1.3 Status – A special type of Organizational descriptions is Status, especially location.1.4 Equipment – Equipment or organizational materiel may include a number of different attributes such as name, description, identification number (at various levels of aggregation), and status e.g., owner, or operational condition.1.6 Graphics C2 information is not just limited to text. Current systems use a multitude of symbols that get combined to create large graphical depictions of the plans or orders. In some cases, these overlays replace the text order. Finally, as computer power and available bandwidth increases, more and more C2 information is being exchanged via 3D visualization or imagery.1.6 Processes  – The preplanned and ongoing actions include the organization’s Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), and tailored applications of the SOP in its plans and orders that describe how it intends to execute a mission. The SOPs are often critical to training use cases because they establish the information exchange plan for the organization. This plan defines which nodes in the simulated C4ISR architecture should convey what information with what other nodes, by what format, at what time or event. Communications Information: (Table 2) This information describes the logical and physical communications networks that implement the M&S and C4ISR architectures. Not all of this information needs to be exchanged in most use cases. At a minimum, sufficient information has to be exchanged to enable the links to be established and managed. However, during future information-based operations the C4ISR architectures will be dynamic. Calculating realistic communications effects will require an equally dynamic exchange of descriptive information between the C4ISR and M&S architectures. Environmental Information: (Table 3) This includes the data described by Birkel [11]. He lists the following six categories for ground truth data: terrain, atmosphere, ocean, and space, as well as the civilian and military. Note that the civilian and military refer to the product of the engineering in the natural environment e.g., roads, buildings, or ditches.Exercise Control/Data Collection Information: This information includes the data needed to identify, start, pause, restart, and stop an interoperability event. Several uses cases include both live and simulated organizations e.g., airplanes, or they involve the mixture of real world and simulation event data flowing over common networks. In these cases there are often safety or security reasons for knowing what is live and what is simulated.As information protection measures expand, it will be critical for data collection systems to have a standard means for identifying themselves across multiple C4ISR system architectures.5.	 Assessment of Standards for M&S and C4ISR InteroperabilityThe M&S/C4ISR Conceptual Reference Model can be used to assess the presence of standards for interoperability. One can look horizontally across the model to see if each activity is covered and vertically within activities to assess the depth of standards within a given activity or information type. 5.1.	Transmit/Receive and Format ActivitiesThese activities are a good news and bad news situation. The good news is that there a many well established standards in the C4ISR community that define how to transmit/receive data across networks and how to format text and bit oriented messages. That bad news is that there are many standards that compete with each other and there are areas where no standard has emerged as dominant. Some standards overlap, some are redundant. Different C4ISR systems use different standards so there exist major challenges in picking “the” standard. From the M&S community perspective, the bottom line for these activities is that regardless of the presence or absence of M&S, the C4ISR community has to solve these standards issues to achieve its internal interoperability. The good news is that they are working in it.5.2.	C2 InformationThere are few standards for C2 information. The emerging Joint Common Data Base [5] provides a starting point across the C4ISR systems for defining a common data model for data that is common to two or more systems. In the simulation community there are some common approaches for describing organizations and materiel e.g., the real time platform reference federation object model. There are even fewer common methods for describing plans, orders, and actions and only system specific attempts at defining information exchange plans. 5.3.	CommunicationsThe Army C4ISR community has some de facto standards for describing their C4ISR architectures. These can be seen in systems such as the Information System Control System (ISYSCON) or in the Fort Hood Common Technical Support Facility Address Book. The simulation community is working on a Reference Federation Object Model for Communications Effects as described in [14,15]. 5.4.	Environmental InformationThe M&S community has been developing the Synthetic Environment Data Representation and Interchange Specification (SEDRIS). “The SEDRIS project was conceived and implemented to capture and provide a complete (terrain, ocean, atmosphere, and space) data model of the physical environment, access methods to that data model, and an associated interchange format [16]. However, no C4ISR systems currently use the SEDRIS terrain standard for terrain interoperability. Future Army C4I systems have been directed to use the Joint Mapping Tool Kit (JMTK). Army C4I Systems also use many different terrain formats such as Digital Terrain Elevation Data or Vector Product Format.5.5.	Exercise Control/Data Collection InformationThe C4ISR community has few standards for exercise control other than synchronizing time. The Simulation Management protocol data unit standards for Distributed Interactive Simulation are an early attempt to create a standard for exercise control for the M&S community. On the data collection side the Open database connectivity (ODBC) is a multi database application programming interface (API) that has evolved into a multi-platform API that exhibits performance comparable to native structure Query Language Application Programming Interfaces [17]. Since different C4ISR systems used different database systems, ODBC may become a de facto standard for querying data from the C4ISR systems.6.	SummaryA conceptual reference model provides a common framework for discussing the exchange of information between M&S and C4ISR systems. The model presented in this paper assumes that the goal of information exchange is interoperability. By defining the activities involved in making an exchange of information between the systems, once can identify both the direct activities (align, format, transmit. receive, exchange with communications effects) as well as the supporting activities (manage networks, control the event, and AAR/Data collection). The model also defines four types of information that must be exchanged to have the systems operate together effectively across a number of different use cases. A horizontal and vertical analysis of the standards in each activity and information class shows that in some areas there are too many standards while in others there are few to no standards. The Army Standards Category Coordinator for C4ISR Interoperability has used this model as part of its analysis guiding the prioritization of effort for future standards development. 7.	References[1]	Memorandum, Office of the Undersecretary of Defense, Acquisition and Technology, Subject: DoD High Level Architecture (HLA) for Simulations. 10 September 1996.[2]	Joint Technical Architecture – Army, Version 5.0, Office of the Director, Information Systems for Command, Control, Communications, and Computers, http://www.hqda.army.mil/techarch/, September, 1997.[3]	Hieb, M.R., Cosby, M., Griggs, L., McKenzie, F., Tiernan, T., and Zeswitz, S.: “MRCI: Transcending Barriers between Live Systems and Simulations”, Paper 97S-SIW-197, 1997 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1997.[4] 	Hieb, M.R. and Staver, M.J.: “The Army’s Approach to Modeling and Simulation Standards For C4I Interfaces”, Paper 98F-SIW-259, 1998 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1998.[5]	Hieb, M.R. and Blalock, James: “Data Alignment between Army C4I Databases and Army Simulations”, Paper 99S-SIW-034, 1999 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1999.[6]	Hieb, M.R. and Timian, D.: “Using Army Force on Force Simulations to Stimulate C4I systems for Testing and Experimentation,” 1999 Command and Control Research Symposium, June 1999.[7]	Layman, G.E., Conover, J., Kunkel, P. & Robins, D.: “JMCIS/GCCS Interoperability with External Simulations,” Paper 97S-SIW-132, 1997 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1997.[8]	Carr, F.H. and Hieb, M.R.: “Issues and Requirements for Future C4ISR and M&S Interoperability”, 7th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation, 1998.[9] 	Timian, D., Hieb, M.R., Glass, J., and Staver, M.J.: “Using Standard C4I Components to Interface to Simulations”, Paper 98F-SIW-035, 1999 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1999.[10]	Paola, A.R. and Ressler, R.L.: “Stimulating the Army Tactical Command and Control System Using the Run Time Manager: Concepts and Implications,” Paper 98S-SIW-162 1999 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1999.[11] 	Birkel, P.: “SNE Conceptual Reference Model”, Paper 98F-SIW-018, 1998 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1998.[12]	Joint Pub 1-02: DoD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms, http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/jel /new_pubs/ jp1_02.pdf, 23 March 1994 (as amended through 6 April 1999)[13]	The DoD Modeling and Simulation Glossary, http://www.dmso.mil/dmso/docslib/mspolicy /glossary/, January 1998.[14]	Sudnikovich, W. and Roberts, J.D.: “Implementation of a Prototype C4I FOM: Continued Progress”, Paper 99F-SIW-077, 1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1999.[15]	Roberts, J.D., Sudnikovich, W. and Lacetera, J.: “Implementation of a prototype C4I FOM”, Paper 99F-SIW-61, 1999 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1999.[16]	SEDRIS Web Site: http://www.sedris.org/.[17]	North, K.: “ODBC Branches Out: A DBMS ODBC Special Report”, DBMS Online, http:// www.dbmsmag.com/9604d52.html, April 1996.8.	AcknowledgmentsThe authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the work in this paper by the US Army National Simulation Center, the Office of the Director of Information Systems for Command, Control, Communications, and Computers, the Army Modeling and Simulation Office, and the US Army Communications Electronics Command.. We thank Frank Carr for his work on the initial Reference Model. The model presented in this paper was first developed at a STRICOM Value Engineering workshop by a team consisting of the authors, Dave Coughran, George Harris, Jonathan Glass, Randy Kubik, Bob Leath and Mary Logvin.9.	Author BiographiesRICHARD L. RESSLER Ph.D. is a Senior Associate at BoozAllen & Hamilton, Inc. He has been involved with the development of requirements and solutions for M&S to C4ISR interoperability since 1991 with his service at the US Army National Simulation Center and subsequently at the Army Model and Simulation Office. He is currently the Technical Director for the BA&H Advanced Distributed Simulations team and leads the development of the Run Time Manager.MICHAEL HIEB Ph.D. is a senior scientist at AB Technologies. Dr. Hieb was the architect of the Modular Reconfigurable C4I Interface (MRCI) interface project while at SAIC. He received his Ph.D. in Information Technology at George Mason University in 1996, developing an instructable ModSAF agent. He performed his doctoral research at the Center for Excellence in Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence at GMU. He has published over 30 papers in the areas of learning agents, knowledge acquisition, interface technology and multistrategy learning. When working for IntelliTek, Dr. Hieb implemented a distributed problem-solving testbed at the Goddard Space Flight Center. Previously, he worked as a Nuclear Engineer for General Electric.WILLIAM SUDNIKOVICH is the Technical Advisor for the Modeling and Simulation Division in the Command and Control Directorate of the US Army Communications-Electronics Command. He is the current chair of the C4I Forum of the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization. His recent work has focused on the development and integration of communications and network models into Army training and testing simulation environments. His research interests include distributed object technology, distributed simulation and simulation interoperability and standards.(footnote continued)1.0 C2 Information Classes1.1  Templates1.1.1  Orders1.1.2  Reports1.1.3  Overlays1.1.4  Plans1.2  Task Organizations1.2.1  Friendly Task Organization1.2.2  Enemy Task Organization1.3  Status1.3.1  Organization Status1.3.2  Coordinate System1.4   Equipment1.4.1 Equipment Characteristics1.5  Graphics1.5.1  2D Graphics1.5.1  3D Graphics1.6  Processes1.6.1  Information Exchange Plan1.6.2 TriggersTable 1. C2 Information Sub Classes2.0  Communications Information Classes2.1  Physical network description2.2  Logical network description2.3  Effects (SNE/EW/IW)2.4  Network management infoTable 2. Communications Information Sub Classes3.0  Environment Information Classes3.1  Terrain3.2  Air3.3  Ocean3.4  Space3.5  Man-made Artifacts3.6  Weather3.7  Multi-spectral EmissionsTable 3. Environment Information Sub Classes4.0  Execution Control4.1  Control (Start/Stop/Pause/ 	Resume/Resynch)4.2  Time management4.3  Identify exercise4.4  Sim/Live status4.5  Troubleshooting4.6  Data CollectionTable 4. Execution Control Sub Classes