Human Factors in Staff Level Decision Making Uwe K.J. DompkeIABGEinsteinstr. 2085521 OttobrunnGermanyTel.: x49-89-6088-3061FAX: x49-89-6088-4029E-mail: udompke@iabg.deAlexander von Baeyer IABGEinsteinstr. 2085521 OttobrunnGermanyTel.: x49-89-6088-3061FAX: x49-89-6088-4029 E-mail: baeyer@iabg.deTorsten HeinbokelInst. f. Cognitive ResearchUniversity of Federal Armed Forces 22043  HamburgGermanyTel.: x49- 040-6541-2533FAX: x49-040-6541-2863 E-mail: torsten.heinbokel@unibw-hamburg.deEdgar HeinekenGerhard-Mercator University DuisburgDepartment of Psychology47048 DuisburgGermany Tel.: x49-203-379-2541FAX: x49-203-379-3333E-Mail: heineken@uni-duisburg.deJohann FoyseFederal Armed Forces Office on Studies and Exercises Einsteinstr. 2085521 OttobrunnGermanyTel. : x49-89-6088-2466FAX : x49-89-6088-4073Keywords:Human Behaviour Modelling, Human Factors, Staff Level Decision Making ABSTRACT: The paper will give an overview on the relevance of Human Factors Modelling in Staff Level Decision Making in simulation environments. This overview includes: an analysis of the use of human factors modelling in the different application fields of simulation (exercise, training and education, analysis, and procurement), the level of detail of the simulations, and the scenarios (e.g. conflict or peace supporting scenarios). Two approaches to model Human Factors in Staff Level Decision Making are appropriate for the relevant applications: Performance models, if the outcome of the process is relevant (e. g. CAX) and Behaviour modelling, if the process itself is relevant for the application (e.g. analysis of processes or training and education).Human Factors can be modelled in a state-transition-approach. This approach is based on the assumption that specific human behaviour in this context could not be described by a general model, but is based on the specific application area of human knowledge and behaviour in a specific field like information collection and situation awareness, planning, controlling.  Another main assumption is that it is, at least with our momentary knowledge, impossible to describe all state changing functions in such a context. The approach chosen here is based on the specification of possible errors in the decision process in regard of specific circumstances. An outlook on the validation of such model will conclude the paper.1.	IntroductionThe main simulation based tools in military applications were and still are attrition based constructive and virtual simulations. The influence of human factors on the individual or group level in these simulation systems designed for high intensity combat warfare could be neglected in regard to the validity of such a modelling approach in an highly stochastic environment. On the commander and staff level starting from the battalion and more effective from the brigade level up these human factors have more influence on the outcome of the simulation than on the individual level and are therefore a basic prerequisite for the modelling process. Therefore new ways must be found to represent these human factors on the staff level in the attrition based simulations.Wargames are still needed in the context of high intensity complex scenarios, but most of today scenarios in the area of peace supporting operations differ from that in regard of the use of forces, the effects of their usage, and in the impact of human factors. Human factors play a major role in a world of a non-combatant multicultural environment. The simulation of this environment must include the effects of human factors in the behaviour of individuals, small teams, and staffs on the level from battalion to the highest military and political decision instances. This paper is based on an ongoing study for the German MOD. This study with the title “Human Factors” will set with the results of the first working package a framework for the simulation of human factors on the unit and staff level decision processes. This includes an analysis of approaches already taken, a new process model, a definition of key terms with an analysis how these elements contribute to the whole process and a survey on the availability of respective data. A validation concept concludes the first working package. Starting from these basic findings a demonstration prototype will be build next year.This paper will highlight human factors modelling in the different applications of simulation (exercise, training and education, decision support tools, analysis, and procurement) in chapter 2. Chapter 3 will deal with two different approaches to model human factors in staff level decision making: Performance models, if the outcome of the process is relevant and Behaviour modelling, if the process itself is relevant for the application (e.g. analysis of processes or training and education).Chapter 4 will give an overview on an approach to model human factors in a state-transition-approach. Further we assume that specific human behaviour in this context could not be described by a general model. Instead, we have to devide the whole area of human factors in a variety of specific models which are interconnected, such as planning or situation awareness. Another main assumption is that, at least with our momentary knowledge, it is impossible to describe all state changing functions in such a context. The approach chosen here is based on the specification of possible errors in the decision process in regard of specific circumstances. Chapter 5 will deal with the validation of human factors modelling. It will only discuss the first steps in regard to this essential topic.Use of Human Factors Modelling in Different Applications of Simulation Classical applications of  simulation in the military context are:exercise, training and education, decision support tools,analysis, and procurement.In the area of exercising human factors are an essential prerequisite for the fidelity of the training environment. The dynamic influences (e.g. stress, motivation, fatigue, etc.) as well as the personality of the opponent (e.g. creativity, risk-behaviour) and the persons and organisations put in charge are an integral part of the own decision making process and therefore a basic for a realistic simulation. This comes true especially for Operations Other Than War (OOTW) scenarios and for information warfare aspects in all scenarios.Training and education get a new dimension for military leaders when done in an computerised environment which include a number of strong influences by human factors. Such an environment could be built up to train military leaders stand alone. This training could be based on systems that are already available for commercial use for higher level management personal. These systems allows to get feedback from own decisions and behaviours regarding motivation of employees and staff members. The use of such systems for training the behaviour of decision makers and staff members and even assessment of management skills is a new field of application of simulation tools.A main prerequisite for the usefulness of decision support tools on higher levels of command in the operational context is that they take the human behaviour of all engaged parties including all human factors into account. In the area of analysis, the implementation of human factors are an essential part in the improvement of the validity of the underlying models. Specific decision making processes could be modelled and a better basis for the underlying courses of action could be achieved. This includes also support for the use of such simulation models as decision support tools. As we know already, human factors play a major role in information warfare issues especially regarding parallel processing and dealing with information overload.In the procurement area all issues regarding C3I-systems are essential in the context of human factors. A detailed implementation of these impacts is essential for the analysis of the impact of different system design options. This short overview shows that human behaviour and human factors modelling has a great impact on the use of simulation models in all application areas. Approaches to Model Human Factors in Staff Level Decision MakingIn general two different approaches to model Human Factors in Staff Level Decision Making are appropriate for the relevant applications: Performance models, if the outcome of the process is relevant (e. g. CAX) and Behaviour modelling, if the process itself is relevant for the application (e.g. analysis of processes or training and education).Performance modelsPerformance models are more or less a “black box” approach. The outcome of the process is relevant and not the way to get the results. Using this approach a lot of different implementation techniques are possible. They have all in common that they are input/output oriented and operate on a higher abstraction level. An advantage of this approach is that in general the implementation is more effective regarding runtime and implementation effort. Up to now performance models work with rather simple assumptions and algorithm such as decision support tables, which are not based on behavioural research. In order to improve the validity of performance models detailed behavioural research must be carried out, focussing e. g. on possible courses of action caused by personality trades and leadership styles. In addition to the behavioural research issues the performance models should be further developed into the direction of  learning models, i. e. models that change their outputs according to past experience.Behaviour modellingIn the behaviour modelling approach the process itself is modelled in a way that is relevant for the application. This means that on a lower abstraction level all factors with their influences on the whole process and the process itself must be modelled in a more detailed way. This leads normally to a higher modelling and implementation effort that is based on psychological expertise and is always an interdisciplinary approach. Examples are  analysis of staff interactions in the decision process or the layout of C3I systems with regard to human information processing procedures. At the moment there is little behaviour research on models of this level that could be used in military simulations. Nevertheless, our study tries to advance the relevant basic research by focusing on the psychology of military leadership.State-Transition-ApproachIn our study on “Human Factors” a psychological process model of the military decision maker will be build. This approach is based on a normative model of the type “What is leadership, command and control?”.Information collection (including situation awareness)Planning with the outcome of different alternativesDecision (evaluation of the different alternatives)ControllingIt is not intended to create an all embracing “world model”, but to restrict the efforts to a few decisive leadership situations . The model will be of the type “state-event-transition-model”, without however attributing causalities to the outcomes, only stochastic effects.The model will comprise alternative courses of action in decisive transitions from some states to other states. The model will also include important leadership, command and control errors and the conditions under which those errors will have an impact on the military operations.Typical errors in this context are errors depending on parallel processing (more than one process with different levels of attention), errors based on missing knowledge, initiation, or de-activation errors and errors regarding the efficient use of own resources. The model is divided into submodels of the different processes in the decision cycle:Probable alternatives of human behaviour in leadership will be dealt with, but the models are not generic but typical for curtain military operations, namely leading a unit in OOTW, leading a brigade in a defined combat situation.Outlook on the Validation The validation of human behaviour and human factors models is very essential for the use of such models in a very sensitive area like decision support in an operational environment or in leadership training and even leadership assessment. The validation is very hard to do and no general approaches to do this exist today. First findings show that is at least at the moment impossible to test every modelled human behaviour based on human factors against possible outcomes in a structured way. So the intermediate approach to validate such models should be based on a pragmatic approach. Test scenarios are defined and described by experts in the field with their  possible outcomes that should be reached by the models. This process should be supported by specific tools.5.	ReferencesU. Dompke, A. v. Baeyer: Terms of  Reference Long Term Scientific Study on Human Behaviour Representation, NATO RTA/TSC(98)492, Brussels, U. Dompke, A. v. Baeyer: Prospectus Long Term Scientific Study on Human Behaviour Representation, Ottobrunn, 1998Richard W. Pew, Anne S. Mavor: Modeling Human and Organizational Behavior, National Acedemy Press, Washington D.C. 1998E. Heineken, H. Ollesch: Advantages and Limitations of Computer-based Scenarios as Learning Tools. Paper presented in CIP98, York (UK), 1998Authors' BiographyUWE K.J. DOMPKE is a systems analyst and department leader at the IABG Command, Control, Communications & Intelligence Division in Ottobrunn, Germany. He is the Study Director for NATO SAS-017 on Human Behaviour Representation, LTTS/48 on CGF and NATO LTSS/40 on CAX. He gives lectures at the computer science department of the University of Federal Armed Forces in Munich.ALEXANDER VON BAEYER is system analyst and program manager for human factors research at the IABG Land Systems Branch in Ottobrunn, Germany. He was and is member of various NATO Research Groups and EUCLID programs. He is Deputy Study Director for NATO SAS-017 on Human Behaviour Representation.TORSTEN HEINBOKEL is research assistant at the Institute for Cognitive Science at the University of Federal Armed Forces Hamburg. He is working on his thesis on the topic of interface design. EDGAR HEINEKEN is full professor of psychology at the Gerhard-Mercator Universität in Duisburg, Germany.  His main fields of research are: Computer simulations in Leadership Training, Virtual Reality in Psychological Research, Psychology of Memory and Cognition.JOHANN FOYSE is LTC in the German Air Force Medical Corps as physician and general practitioner. He has been a study project officer with the Federal Armed Forces Office for Studies and Exercises since April 1997. He is the German PoC for the NATO SAS-017 on Human Behaviour Representation. Human factors are in this context all influences on human behaviour in regard to the specific environment (like fatigue, stress, publicity, etc.) and the personal or organisational conditions (e.g. personality, organisational behaviour). This could be referred to as Computer Based Behaviour Training (CBBT).