Unit Order of Battle ToolsetFurman Haddix, Ph.D. and Roy ScrudderApplied Research LaboratoriesThe University of Texas at AustinP.O. Box 8029Austin, TX 78713-8029(512) 835-3500 and 2857 HYPERLINK mailto:lanceo@arlut.utexas.edu furman@arlut.utexas.edu and  HYPERLINK mailto:scrudder@arlut.utexas.edu scrudder@arlut.utexas.eduMike HopkinsDefense Modeling and Simulation Office1901 N. Beauregard St., Suite 504Alexandria, VA 22311(703) 824-3431 HYPERLINK mailto:mhopkins@msis.dmso.mil mhopkins@msis.dmso.milABSTRACT: A critical step in the planning and execution of a simulation of military operations is the identification and structuring of the friendly and enemy forces. The Unit Order of Battle (UOB) Toolset provides data sources and tools to automate this process, thereby providing substantial time and cost savings. Foremost, the UOB Toolset provides a library of authoritative data from several producers of UOB data including the Defense Intelligence Agency, National Ground Intelligence Center, and Office of the Secretary of Defense, Program Analysis and Evaluation.  To foster the use of authoritative UOB data, a common data interchange format (DIF) has been published. This UOB DIF facilitates use of UOB data, independent of the source or producer's original format. UOB Data Access Tools (DATs) have been developed for a variety of computing platforms, making effective use of this data a simple matter. Current UOB DAT capabilities include browsing UOB data in a graphical format, constructing and saving task forces from this data, and exporting the resulting data using the DIF. The Toolset is available in both unclassified and classified versions. Distributed computing in the UOB Toolset allows users to access authoritative UOB data from multiple producers across the public or classified Internet, without having to provide local storage of the original UOB data. New capabilities under development for the UOB Toolset include access to additional authoritative UOB data sources including out-year data projections, readiness data, and characteristics and performance data. New DAT capabilities include representations for multiple types of unit relationships, alternative displays of unit relationships, and the ability to assign time phases to task force laydowns. The UOB Toolset program is sponsored by the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) Data Engineering program as part of a continuing effort to provide data technology and resources to the M&S community.Need for Unit Order of Battle DataRegardless of the domain in which modeling and simulation (M&S) is employed, access to authoritative, timely, and accurate unit order of battle (UOB) data is critical. To conduct a meaningful coarse of action analysis, the simulation(s) employed must have an accurate representation of both friendly and opposing forces. For a logistical simulation, the information about equipment and personnel associated with military units must be available. Likewise, simulations to support research, development, and engineering must accurately represent the aircraft and equipment utilized by friendly and opposing forces. Training, from the individual combatant through senior staff level, must have accurate information about units and their associated personnel, equipment, and aircraft. The High Level Architecture (HLA) Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) [1] acknowledges this common need for UOB information. The FEDEP describes the use of UOB information, from defining federation objectives, to identifying major entities of concern in scenario development and conceptual modeling, through creating a federation scenario instance. The utilization of UOB data in these activities is common across most M&S application domains.The challenge for those employing M&S is identifying the sources for UOB data and obtaining that data at a classification level and in a format suitable and usable by the component simulations. UOB data is available from numerous sources, but there is no common format across the sources. Nor is there any standard for the documentation describing this UOB data. In the past, it has been up to the UOB data user to develop an understanding of the semantics and syntax of the UOB data from these multiple sources and translate the data into a form usable by simulation. Access to UOB data in its original form is often not sufficient. The M&S user often needs to extract portions of the data from one or more sources and reorganize the data. This reorganization can include changing the relationships between units, adding new units, or replicating existing units. The M&S user will often need data at a different level of aggregation (e.g., battalion level versus raw data at a company level), based on the scenario requirements or the capabilities of a simulation. Finally, the UOB data user may need to modify the equipment, personnel, or aircraft in a set of UOB data to address a specific application.The UOB Toolset SolutionTo address the M&S community's UOB data requirements, the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) Data Engineering program developed the UOB Toolset. This Toolset addresses each of the major requirements listed above by 1) identifying and providing access to authoritative UOB data, 2) establishing a common, well-documented data interchange format (DIF) for UOB data, and 3) providing a data access tool to allow users to customize UOB data sets to their applications.To establish the scope of the UOB Toolset effort, a definition of UOB was adopted: data about military organization units, their organizational relationships, and their associated personnel, aircraft, and equipment. This definition of UOB does not include characteristics and performance information about equipment, nor does it cover the linking or operating characteristics of electronic equipment (commonly referred to as electronic order of battle). That is not to imply that these additional information areas are not critical to the successful utilization of M&S. The UOB was gauged to be the highest priority information area, common the largest number of M&S users.UOB Data SourcesAs was mentioned earlier, UOB data is available from a variety of sources. This includes both U.S. and non-U.S. forces at UNCLASSIFIED and SECRET classification levels. DMSO's Authoritative Data Sources project [2] identified the sources of UOB data. Currently, the UOB Toolset provides access to a significant number of these data sources. To address the need for authoritative classified UOB data, the Toolset provides access to:Conventional Forces Database (CFDB) - CFDB was created by USCENTCOM under the sponsorship of JCS/J8 and contains current data about US unit, personnel, and equipment from many sources.  CFDB is updated three times a year, and is now distributed by the Office of Defense (OD) Program, Analysis, & Evaluation (PA&E).  This database is classified SECRET.Modernized Integrated Database (MIDB) - MIDB was created by DIA and contains general military intelligence data on foreign facilities, units, personnel, equipment, & targets.  The MIDB database is classified SECRET.To address the need for unclassified UOB data, the Toolset provides access to:An extract from the Force Tracking Information System (FORTRIS) - Non-U.S. forces, maintained by the National Ground Intelligence CenterGeneric U.S. units - an extract from the Global Command and Control System (GCCS) Unit Type Data.In the future, DMSO plans to expand the UOB data available via the Toolset by including future year projected data from for non-U.S. units from FORTRIS and the National Futures Database (NFDB).UOB Data Interchange FormatThe UOB DIF is the second, critical component of the UOB Toolset established by DMSO. By utilizing this single format, M&S developers have access to data from a variety of UOB data sources. This precludes the need to develop an understanding of each UOB data source's format and the need write interfaces unique to each data source. The UOB DIF is based data elements standards submitted to the DoD Data Standardization Program [3], and encompasses the key information elements common the authoritative data sources enumerated above. Logically, the UOB DIF is comprised of four interrelated sets of information: 1) identification of units and their organizational hierarchy, 2) aircraft associated with units, 3) personnel associated with units, and 4) equipment associated with units. The UOB DIF is currently implemented as a set of four tabular ASCII files. In the future, an Extensible Markup Language (XML) format will also be supported. Details on the UOB DIF can be found through the UOB links at the DMSO Projects Web site [4].UOB Data Access ToolThe final component of the UOB Toolset is a Data Access Tool (DAT). The UOB DAT provides access to the UOB data sources identified above and the ability to manipulate UOB data to serve specification application requirements. The DAT is the client tool in a virtual data warehouse architecture. Only the DAT tool and any UOB data the user chooses to save locally are resident at the user's site. The authoritative UOB data is resident at the data producer's location and is accessed by the DAT across the public Internet (for unclassified data) or the SIPRNET (for classified data). This architecture ensures that UOB DAT users are accessing the most currently available data from the authoritative sources. It also alleviates the need to replicate UOB data storage at each user's site.Two versions of the UOB DAT are available through the DMSO Project page [4] under the UOB link. One version is implemented as a Java client and can be run on any system that supports the version 1.1 Java Runtime Environment. The other version of the UOB DAT is a compiled application that runs in the Microsoft Windows 95/98/NT environment.The major functionality of both tools is the same--providing the user with the ability to browse UOB data from authoritative sources, reorganize and edit UOB data into custom task forces, and extract the resulting task force information in UOB DIF files. The figures in the remainder of this paper are from the Java-client version of the UOB DAT.Browsing UOB DataA user's interaction with the UOB DAT will typically start with browsing UOB data, either from the authoritative UOB data sources, or from a previously defined task force. The process of creating task forces will be covered later. Figure 1 shows the main user interface for browsing unit information. Units are displayed in a hierarchical fashion using the familiar folder interface. Clicking on them "+" beside a folder expands the unit to show its subordinate units. Likewise the "-" beside a unit will collapse the portion of the hierarchy. The reporting relationships shown for UOB data sources are the peacetime reporting relationships.By using the Unit, Equipment, Aircraft, and Personnel tabs at the top of the screen, the user can view detailed information about the unit. Figure 2 shows the results from viewing the unit details for a generic Marine Wing Support Squadron. Since this is unclassified generic data, the location information is missing and the Unit Name does not reference an actual Marine Corps unit. This data would be filled in for classified UOB data and specific units would be display. Figure 3 shows the personnel details for the same Marine Wing Support Squadron. Grade and Military Occupation Specialty for each type of personnel are displayed along with the number of personnel required, authorized, and assigned (for classified data) to that unit.Creating Custom Task ForcesAs was mentioned earlier, most users need the ability to customize the UOB data for their specific application. Figure 4 shows the UOB DAT screen for task organizing units and editing unit information. The left-hand panel retains the unit hierarchy from the previous browse screen. By selecting units from this hierarchy and specifying their target location in the right-hand panel, copies of the unit information can be included in the user-specified task force. Using the Copy buttons at the bottom of this panel, a unit or a unit along with all of its subordinate units can be placed in the task force. Using the Up, Down, Left, and Right buttons, the order of units can be rearranged and units can be placed at higher or lower echelons in the task force hierarchy. The Aggregate button allows the user to "roll up" all equipment, aircraft, and personnel from lower echelon units into a higher level unit. This provides support for simulations which can not model detailed (e.g., company-level) units. Finally, the Edit button allows the user to add, delete, and modify equipment, personnel, and aircraft in a unit. This combination of features lets the user create any conceivable task-organized unit hierarchy.Once a task force has been created, it can be saved for future use.  Task forces are saved in a central repository of UOB information. Using the Extract tab, a UOB DAT user can also generate output files from a saved task force.Future Directions UOB Toolset as it stands today provides powerful capabilities to the M&S community and other enhancements are being evaluated. In addition to the additional UOB data sources mentioned earlier, extensions to the UOB DIF are planned which will allow the UOB datasets to address altitude (for both aircraft and land-based objects) and timestamps. Timestamps can be used to specify the applicability of set of UOB data to phases of a scenario (e.g., H hour + 10) or to future year's projections of friendly or opposing forces.Future capabilities for the DAT include the ability to display and edit the altitude and time information described above along with alternative graphical displays of unit hierarchies, (e.g., "wiring diagrams" using standard military organization symbology) and the ability to capture and display multiple types of relationships between units.ConclusionThe UOB Toolset provides a valuable resource to the M&S community, with the combination of access to authoritative data, a standard DIF for exchanging that data, and the DAT to view and manipulate the data. Early experiences are demonstrating the types of savings in time and effort that were anticipated. The Air Combat Environment Test and Evaluation Facility at Patuxent River has been an early user of the UOB DAT. Their experience has shown that the Toolset cut the time to prepare UOB data for their simulations by more that one half. Similar and even more impressive savings are expected for those users that rely heavily on UOB data as inputs to their simulations.References[1]	Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, "HLA Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) Model, Version 1.4, 23 April 1999.[2] DMSO Authoritative Data Sources project Web site,  HYPERLINK http://ads.msrr.dmso.mil http://ads.msrr.dmso.mil.[3]	DoD Data Administration Web site,  HYPERLINK http://www-datadmn.itsi.disa.mil http://www-datadmn.itsi.disa.mil.[4]	DMSO Projects Web site, http://www.dmso.mil/projects/.Author BiographiesFURMAN HADDIX is a Project Manager at the Applied Research Laboratories, a branch of The University of Texas at Austin.  He is the technical lead for the UOB and Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS) project.ROY SCRUDDER is program manager for modeling and simulation information management activities at ARL:UT. He has over 20 years experience in systems analysis and software engineering. Mr. Scrudder led data support efforts for the HLA including the development of the HLA Object Model Data Dictionary System.MIKE HOPKINS is the Deputy Director, Data Engineering Division, Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) and co-chair of the ADS Working Group.  He is also the DMSO program manager for the UOB Toolset and ADS projects.  He has over 10 years experience in wargaming theory, development, and applications with more than 9 of those years in recent management positions determining program requirements and objectives, and organizing and scheduling DBMS programs and projects in support of models and simulations.His M&S responsibilities included Database Administrator (DBA) for USCENTCOM’s Combat Analysis Group, project manager of USCENTCOM’s Conventional Forces DataBase (CFDB), and development of Data Quality Engineering Tools (DQE).  These  tools were tested in Operation DESERT STORM and commended by General Swartzkopf as invaluable.Mr. Hopkins retired from the US Army after 23 years of active duty.  His active duty experience included over 10 years experience in Special Operations including two years in combat.  He developed command, control, and communications (C3) requirements for a Unified Command Forward Headquarters in the Middle East, authored the first Theater Army war plans for Southwest Asia (SWA), and task-organized a newly formed Theater Army.  His last military assignments were as Chief of Current Operations and Chief of the Plans Branch for USARCENT, J3 of Special Operations Command USCENTCOM, and Chief of USCENTCOM Compartmented Plans Branch. Figure 1. Main UOB DAT Browser ScreenFigure 2. UOB DAT Unit Details Screen EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure 3. UOB DAT Unit Personnel Details ScreenFigure 4. UOB DAT Force Structure Editor Screen