Threat Environments in Modeling and Simulation: Quo Vadis?Michael R. OakesBMH Associates, Inc.Senior Systems Engineer(757) 857-5670, ext 249moakes@bmh.comKeywords:HLA, Distributed Mission Training, DIS, Modeling and Simulation, DMT, STOW, Threat ModelsABSTRACT:	It would be an understatement to say Modeling and Simulation (M&S) technology is both a changing and expanding field.  The transition to High Level Architecture (HLA) will allow additional fidelity and the ability to conduct unit training and theater mission level rehearsals.  Honing combat planning, execution and analysis skills must be accomplished against a viable and realistic threat model, but where do the threat models come from and where is their development going, hence the title's basic question: Quo Vadis?  Where are we going?  Perhaps a double-edged sword since we must also remember where we've been if we are to determine where we are going.This paper will discuss various requirements and considerations for threat environments.  The discussion will examine threat model characteristics for land, sea, air and space domains as well as the fidelity needed to meet users needs.  Most importantly, this paper will discuss paths for the USAF Distributed Mission Training (DMT) program to evaluate threat systems.  This evaluation will examine current (and when applicable, future) threat model availability, affordability, reliability, and realism for conducting unit level training.  DMT training must encompass all training levels using common threat models whether paired against F-15C fighter aircraft in the initial phases or for all the aircraft types destined to be networked in the DMT architecture.To succeed, DMT threat environment attributes rest with entity-level fidelity, real-time resolution, and cognitive models with adaptable defenses and how these system models can be integrated to support both the warfighters and combat planners with a viable joint synthetic battlespace for training in their wartime roles.  Modeling and simulation users must establish realistic threat environment requirements.  These requirements must be met in order to provide the best system possible to enhance the warfighter DMT and hone combat skills to increase survivability.  These requirements are a tall order for both users and developers.  However, any program still starts with Quo Vadis?1.	IntroductionToday's combat training is extremely complex with the many sensors, communication links and multi-mode fire control systems among the numerous participants in a combat arena.  Mastering one's weapon system is only one part of the equation for survival in battle.  Warriors today must counter a sophisticated threat also capable of processing enormous amounts of information for targeting them.  As warriors maneuver through the battlespace they must use the skills and reflexes learned in training.  USAF training has entered an exciting phase where virtual and live can be combined with constructive simulation. Distributive Mission Training (DMT) is simply the newest simulation capability adopted by the Air Force and is already under review by the Navy.  DMT's wide applications for U.S. Armed Services and nationalities cover areas from unit to theater level mission team training.  Though the USAF beddown focuses initially on fighter and C2 platforms, its applications touch all warfare disciplines including service component combat planners, intelligence specialists, and those responsible for operational level warfare execution.  All quarters will benefit from the added flexibility and realism DMT will provide.  It is the interaction among numerous participants worldwide which makes this an exciting training prospect.  Networking manned cockpits worldwide and providing the necessary connectivity for reporting up and down the chain of command takes training to a new level.  No longer is it just the excitement of putting manned simulators in “life-threatening” situations, but networking with the individuals who put them in these situations and extend the playing field to theater mission rehearsals is a great benefit.  The best recipe to produce superior military leaders, staffs and unit combatants has three basic ingredients: training, experience and education.  Education comes from a variety of areas including formalized training.  The formal training and day-to-day proficiency makes up the bulk of non-combat experience.  Certainly, each of these areas overlap and it is easy to see that they cannot be mutually exclusive.  In fact they all drive the goal to provide multitudes of situational experiences to develop warfighting skills.  Experience develops maturity through constant testing and evaluation.  But how is experience gained without being on the battlefield?  With the advances in computer technology the answer should lead us to M&S and its ability to provide multiple events in a given time period to reinforce skill training and added experience.  However, the dilemma with networking each of these combat disciplines is their differing training requirements.  Each separate discipline (or domain) may require different fidelity levels.  What seems to be the only common denominator are the threats they oppose.  Unfortunately, each discipline may encounter different threats or even the Information Warfare (IW) focus may be entirely different from a fighter cockpit to a M1A1 Battle Tank.  Or is it?  Certainly, the military as well as our society is in a major transition from industrial/energy centric to an information-centric society.  The information for warfare is needed to continually increase weapons accuracy through sensor cueing, platform placement, weapon guidance, and even weapon fuzing and detonation.  The military paradigm for massing firepower has made a transition to use precision weapons instead of mass numbers.  Precision warfare requires information.  The DMT networking provides the forum to build better understanding and team training among the varying combat disciplines.  However, each separate discipline must work in a common framework and threat environment to ensure learning outcomes are valid. DMT threat environment architecture had been left up to the individual contractors as the simulators were being developed.  Each of these separate threat models were developed in their own company microcosms.  If left alone, that type of developement can carry  a lot of unnecessary baggage in the form of fidelity, latency and battlespace effects to name just a few.  Not until recently has the USAF formed an Integrated Product Team (IPT) specifically designed to oversee the threat environment.  What is still unknown is where is the threat environment going, hence the title's question: Quo Vadis?  This paper will focus on the basic areas needed for a common threat environment and possible solutions as DMT evolves and makes its transition to the DoD High Level Architecture (HLA).  The threat representation will need to have established requirements for each use and the functionality in a common environmental baseline.  2.	Networking and the Transition to HLAIn September 1996, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a directive that any simulations that have not achieved, or are in the process of achieving compliance with the High Level Architecture (HLA) by the first day of fiscal year 1999 shall cease further development or modification.  In addition, any non-compliant simulations by the first day of fiscal year 2001 shall be retired.  A tall order and one being met with the escalation of HLA compliant models as well as the development of Distributed Interactive System (DIS) protocols interfaces with HLA.  The DIS to HLA interface allows legacy simulation systems the ability to network with HLA models and share information in the battlespace.  Also in response to this directive, a process for the development and execution of HLA Federations suggested in the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) document entitled “High Level Architecture Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) Model was developed.  With the rules set, it would seem easy to "pick" a common battlespace for establishing a threat environment.  However, it appears that many of the individual cockpit designs are looking for the battlespace to be developed after the Operations and Integration (ONI) contract is awarded.  This cart before the horse method may cause interaction problems among the DMT participants and not be cost efficient.  Using an existing battlespace capable of setting common ground rules would be a good approach and provide the common network for DMT.  The Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) battlespace provides an HLA environment for networking the DMT virtual cockpits.  2.1		HLA and Synthetic Theater of War (STOW)Currently, DARPA’s Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) is still the only demonstrated large-scale HLA simulation using both large aggregates (for visualization) and entity resolution (for interaction arbitration).  Since the October 1997 Advanced Concept Technology Demonstration (ACTD), STOW has continued to improve its capability executing constructive simulations.  STOW's distributive entity-level simulation using HLA compliant Runtime Infrastructure (RTI) exceeds 10,000+ entities.  The entity The STOW HLA environment provides a common “boiler-plate” to support reuse and simulation inter-operation across the Department of Defense (DoD).  Conventional wisdom dictates that no one simulation can meet the diverse demands or requirements for all Service and Joint Components.  Though the common STOW architecture allows all users to tie-in for a greater interaction among federates, the simulation federates must meet the rules established in the HLA baseline definitions for both time management and data distribution management.  This requirement is not impossible, but it can be initially time consuming.  STOW was the first exercise to use routing spaces and Data Distribution Management (DDM).  The HLA DDM is used to specify which federates receive messages for each update and interaction.  The RTI uses information provided in publish/subscribe calls to set up filters that direct data among federates that need them (Dahmann).  The RTI used in the STOW ACTD provided the mutual communications link used by all of the STOW players and ran quite smoothly.  The DIS broadcast approach for data distribution would have overwhelmed the network interfaces for the STOW computers. (Ceranowicz).  Subscription to the amount of information needed to do the job reduced traffic over the lines and allowed for more players to be present in the battlespace without impacting the resolution capability.  A key result of DDM is the ability to employ PC-class workstations with no decrease in interaction validity. (Oakes)2.2		HLA and Legacy SystemsHLA development is designed to be the architecture to support DoD simulation systems and the various requirements set by each user.  DIS systems may feel left out as the time nears for the complete HLA transition.  However in 1998, STOW successfully demonstrated DIS-to-HLA interfaces with the capability of connecting DIS compliant virtual cockpit simulators on a DIS LAN to an HLA/RTI based STOW simulation on a separate LAN.  Since that October 1998 demonstration at AFRL, STOW has connected to numerous DIS Compliant systems including the Pentagon's Theater Battle Arena (TBA) simulators and live C2 play during the Fleet Battle Experiment (FBE) ECHO in March 1999.  The TBA simulator network was connected in an hour and provided STOW HLA constructive simulation to their various fighter and C2 simulators.There are two approaches for the interfaces based on simulator capabilities and user needs.  First a “native” interface (interface connecting directly to the HLA network) converts FOM objects and attributes information into the data formats suitable for processing by the virtual simulator by the virtual simulator host CPU.  The “native” interface with a Silicon Graphics Image Generator (IG) is able to “see” the STOW synthetic environment in the out-the-window visuals.  The second approach is the DIS-HLA gateway to network individual DIS-compliant virtual simulators on the STOW network.  A “native” interface (no DIS layers) is required for a virtual simulator to take advantage of the synthetic environment information (terrain and weather) on the HLA network.  DIS does not currently support synthetic environment interactions.  2.3	ScalabilitySimulations range in capabilities from honing individual and team tactical skills to conducting warfare at the operational level.  It is the resolution of these simulations that provide the benefit to reinforce learning outcomes.  There is little use to conduct an exercise that is not quantifiable in meeting objectives.  Some simulations leave the outcomes to the chance by rolling dice.  However, scaleable battles with entity-on-entity resolution coupled with high-fidelity battlespace provide the best methodology for positive learning reinforcement.The scalability (or sometimes coined the "Mine is Bigger than Yours!!") debate drives discussions revolving around a modeling and simulation systems ability to meet the users requirements.  What will tomorrow's battles resemble?  Will it be mass attacks of small unit insertions?  How it applies to the unit level makes the difference.  In fact it is more important to build form the unit level and scale upwards vice doing the reverse.  Remember a difference is a difference only if it makes a difference.So, does STOW scalability meet user requirements?  YES!  STOW was built with entity level resolution as its foundation.  Its ability to scale up to large theater scenarios and still maintain entity level resolution is a major advantage over current (and even future) M&S systems.  STOW is the perfect entity-level joint battlespace for DMT and a perfect augmentation to supplement the JSIMS and NASM aggregate only resolution capability.  STOW's entity and aggregate level resolution over the HLA network provides the necessary bridge for the HLA transition and the battlespace architecture for threat environments.  The quantitative insight STOW affords with its entity level resolution facilitates the understanding of qualitative problems associated with theater warfare with no loss of training opportunities for combat units.3.	The Synthetic EnvironmentIf a synthetic environment is the model of the world where all simulated objects exist and interact, then it must include data and models representing the elements of the environment (e.g. atmospheric properties, physical characteristics). For an environment to be successful in a combat training arena such as DMT, it must be interactive with the sensors, combatants and the weapons as they affect the battlespace.  It is hard to conceive building separate virtual simulators and networking without a common supporting battlespace in the architecture.  Battlestaffs and tactical units training for combat need real-time interactions.  The fog of war is sometimes generated by the communications between different levels of warfare and their separate analysis based on available information.  "Passing white-force input cards" does not accurately simulate battles.  The C2 decision cycle that interacts with the "sensors and shooters" drives the need for live interactions with real-world C4ISR systems.  STOW's battlespace connects directly with live, virtual or constructive entities.  The environment networks real world C4ISR sensors for the needed fidelity in combat evaluations.  M&S captures actions for playback.  The STOW battlespace fidelity supports the necessary environment to train not only the warriors but the intelligence personnel so critical to operational analysis and planning.  In war, you can only attack and do what intelligence tells you.  If intelligence personnel are not trained properly, then you invite failure.  Critical in this training is the requirement to maximize the exploitation of modern intelligence surveillance and reconnaissance sensors to truly take advantage of their capabilities for lethal air operations.  All environmental factors such as the topography, vegetation, soils, water, wind, rain, etc. should be modeled.  By itself, this would be a complex simulation just to get all the factors working in a realistic and integrated fashion.  The purpose of this simulation is to allow us to inject objects or agents into the system and study the effects of the environment on the object through sensors.  The requirement is that the inputs and output of the environment and the object we have placed in the environment are consistent with what would be found in the real world.  There are several underlying assumptions that need to be considered.  First we are assume we know how all outputs from the natural environment can be translated into the proper inputs for the object.  Second, the model of the sensor is assumed to mimic all the characteristics of the real system. Third, and most important, the total interaction within the simulation does not generate unknown or undetectable properties, and that emergent behavior does not produce chaotic fluctuations.  Meeting all these assumptions is hard in most simulations, but for synthetic environments, it is critical.  (Ball)3.1	STOW Dynamic Terrain Data BaseSTOW uses a large-scale dynamic synthetic natural environment with a pre-distributed terrain database (TDB) and the real-time distribution of the battlefield environmental effects and dynamic changes to the terrain and cultural features.  Digital features included 3-D representation of cities and other manmade objects such as bridges, pipelines, and roads based on comprehensive mapping and analysis of the urban areas to intermingle with cultural features of military significance.  Source data for the TDB is the National Imagery and Mapping Agency that includes: digital elevation models for terrain surface and ocean bathymetrics, 10 meter resolution satellite imagery, numerous digital feature data sets, digitized and paper maps with scales as large as 1:12,500.  (Miller) Weather effects allow warriors to assess real-time target ID and targeting constraints.  Behavior consistent with the real world must include the elements of the environmental space in which the behavior would be exhibited.  The environment needs to be modeled in as much detail as the sensors we want to use is.  STOW is capable of networking real-world sensors and have their capabilities affected by the weather, tidal and diurnal variables.  STOW's large curved earth dynamic terrain database and its dynamic weather is a great foundation towards increased realism in virtual and constructive simulation.  These features coupled with Bomb Damage Assessments (BDA) allow interplay with Intelligence and Combat Plans communities.  This environment sets the stage for building interactive threat surroundings to support DMT.4.	Leveling the Playing FieldWith each new technological advance it seems to take a long time to overcome the inertia set up due to habit patterns and the methodologies of “old” systems.  This inertia must be overcome before new tactics and methods are embraced and employed.  This adage applies to new weapons platforms and it certainly applies to simulation training.  The acceptance in M&S centers around realism in both the visual displays and of course the threat environment.  The threat environment must replicate the platforms, weapons, sensors and the tactics employed.  Threat execution needs a capability to adapt to the battlefield situation as it develops.  Weapons fidelity and scoring must be an accepted form in order to have credibility.  It cannot depend on varying models being introduced from different sites or sources.  Air Combat Maneuvering Instrumentation (ACMI) flyout models are accepted in the training arena and are used in the STOW Ordnance Server (OS).  The OS uses the ACMI flyout models for air-to-air, air-to-ground, and surface-to-air weapons for both Blue Air and Opposing Forces (OPFOR).  Whenever a SF agent shoots a weapon, the ordnance server creates the weapon flyout and displays/scores it for engagement resolution.  The weapons flyouts still require user requirements above the "accepted" parameters used over time but verified and validated to ensure it meets the user's expectations.   A careful consideration for flyout integration should be examined to avoid any processing slow-downs or lock-ups using the flyout for all ordnance.  For example, the flyout for each bullet fired from a fighter aircraft may exceed processing capability if combined with visual systems and not run as a separate sever.  This is most evident in a DIS environment.  However, in HLA, both the subscription and interest management will alleviate these problems.Latency must be solved for the visual system in order to provide the best "picture" for the cockpits as well as the Common Operation Picture (COP) for the mission planners.  Weapons latency can be tracked and smoothed to ensure weapons effects are properly displayed.  The greatest challenge for DMT will be the eventual modeling and long-haul networking for electronic warfare effects.  Millimeter wave technology in applied threat suppression will require a great deal of operator and M&S developer interaction.5.	Cognitive ThreatsIn the early years of computers, people quickly jumped on the bandwagon of creating an intelligent machine.  Place the computer "brain" in a body and you have an android right out of Star Trek.  A lot of current modeling effort is still directed at the development of machine intelligence and the cognitive synthetic agent is the current example of this long standing idea.  The ability to use programming skills to represent behaviors in a representative wartime environment still rests with an solid understanding on the conduct and art of warfare beginning with the initial stages of the Knowledge Acquisition Engineering (KAE) process.5.1 Entity Behavioral Model FidelityWarfare is as much an art as it is a science.  Experience is important . . . Constructive simulation should have cognitive models which perform autonomously and conform to their particular tactical doctrine.  There is also a need for cognitive models above and beyond aircraft simulation.  Cognitive threat models and adaptable defenses can be used to counter not only manned cockpits, but provide an array of capabilities to C4I units/nodes and other training centers. These cognitive agents allow for training to be stepped-up once proficiency is established and become reactive and NOT predictive.  The “thinking” models reduce manpower levels required for executing exercise simulations, but some capability should exist to allow for man-in-the-loop threats.  With intelligent agents running on the PCs, it is still beneficial to have manned cockpits available as “smart” bandits.  Knowledge acquisition engineering (KAE) for combat tactics is not at the point where it can replace a manned cockpit and the experience that comes with it. STOW, through the TacAir Soar program, uses Artificial Intelligence (AI) in constructive agents.  These Soar agents, using approximately 6000 rule-based architecture, fly formation, engage targets and return home at appropriate times for mission execution all the while responding to the battlefield dynamics.  The rule sets in SOAR follow current tactics and service doctrine.  The SOAR agents fly their missions without any intervention from operators behind the scenes greatly reducing the numbers of operators needed for the exercise execution.  However, what's important to realize is teaching operators how to analyze the differences between capabilities and intentions in battle.  Certainly many can respond by rote the enemy weapons capabilities, but can they tell you if and how they will use their weapons?  Enemy intentions or courses of action are determined by compiling information from various sensors and fusing the data.  Once fused, careful data analysis drives calculations and experience directs counter moves.  Once again, M&S systems using cognitive agents adapting to battlefield dynamics is a great laboratory to gain experience in combat operations and the synergy of using wartime sensors in a synthetic battlespace adds to the experience levels. One of the greatest values of artificial intelligence (AI) cognitive models to intelligence staffs is their "adaptability to the battles.  This cognition comes in the form of KAE rule-based architecture giving the constructive agents goals to achieve during their mission.  STOW uses cognitive agents in the air domain of Joint SAF.Understanding the battlespace and enemy reactions increases our knowledge and ability to assess risks.  One cannot anticipate what one does not perceive.  For example, a frog in boiling water will immediately jump out, but place it in cool water and slowly raise the temperature, it will stay in the water and cook.  My intent is not to compare warriors with frogs, but the point is to increase the "heat" in the battlespace and learn through experience when to attack and when to extract yourself (jump out of the water) from the battle.Currently in M&S training exercises, intelligence play is "scripted" and input cards advise training audiences of enemy movement/actions and even missile attacks.  This type of exercise is predictive NOT reactive to enemy courses of action.  Sometimes, it is the unpredictability of an enemy that creates the fog of war and complexity changes with scale.  Careful analysis from intelligence staffs using real-world sensors interfaced with the M&S battlespace provides an environment to observe, learn and gain experience from repeated exercises and attacks.  Modeling and simulation users must establish realistic threat environment requirements.  These requirements must be met in order to provide the best system possible to enhance warfighter training honing combat skills to increase survivability.  Absolute certainty is based on gathered (combined) knowledge.  The more I am familiar with or use a system (s), the more I learn about it and can improve my performance and increase my experience.6.	Integrated Air DefensesFrom the time of the STOW ACTD in October 1997, the Integrated Air Defense Systems (IADS) have been improved.  Once the Air Force Information Warfare Center (AFIWC) Digital IADS models arrived, STOW ground threat to Blue Air was greatly enhanced.  Currently, the AFIWC DIADS is being evaluated as a possible separate federate by modifying and adding to the federate ambassador portions of code in each of the prototype federates to define the complex attribute types specified in the FOM.  It is important to note that the DIADS source code combined into a single source file will provide the best capability for STOW.  Building an IADS Federation from legacy code may prove very beneficial in implementation as well as the testing phase of development.  The federation results should be verifiable when compared to the legacy results whether it's a sensor or weapon platform.  Configuration control is a must with any development project.  Clear and easy to follow control procedures for multiple development teams help ensure the procedures are followed. The Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) model is the recognized processes by which the Distributed Modeling and Simulation Organization (DMSO) recommends in the design, development and execution of a HLA Federation.  The FEDEP decomposes the HLA Federation life cycle into five component steps.  These five steps are:Step 1.	Define and Document ObjectivesStep 2.	Define Real World DomainStep 3	Construct FOMStep 4.	Plan Execution and Integration FederationStep 5.	Execute and Analysis OutputSteps 1 and 2 are usually done by the Federation Managers and Federation Execution Sponsor. These two steps identify and provide the necessary ingredients to construct the FOM that is the heart and soul of the Federation.  Next, execution planning is done and Federation participants are identified to provide services during the integration. The last step, involves the execution and analysis of the Federation execution - this analysis can then be reviewed and used in Step 1 of the FEDEP model, and starts another FEDEP iteration. 6.1	Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR) and Finding the ThreatsUnderstanding what information is the most critical in this sensor-to-shooter environment rests with intelligence staffs.  The intelligence staff training must begin at the unit level to gain understanding and experience. Once achieved, that experience will pay great dividends at the component and joint levels of operation. The intelligence staff as an integral part of combat planning informs the commander of his opponent’s likely point of view, including his probable courses of action.  The increase in speed and volume of information collection has not changed that role, but they have changed the focus of the intelligence officer from an intuitive tactician, to a technical manager of data. The ability to attack numbers of widely dispersed, fixed and mobile, targets, has assigned a new role to intelligence; to apply ISR assets to sites where friendly elements have applied force and attacked, then measure and assess the effectiveness of those attacks.  The need for Bomb Damage Assessment (BDA) is a major intelligence effort.  BDA is feedback to the unit and up to the overall commander too. It not only assesses a target's destruction level, but also determines whether (and when and by whom) additional force will be applied against that target.  DMT mission rehearsals networked on a supporting battlespace will provide an excellent forum for a complete lash-up of real-world C2ISR assets with their virtual and live cockpits and training devices.  Appropriate battlespace population with accredited constructive threat models truly creates endless possibilities for instruction in the art of war.The move from industrial to information age processes is a driving force behind sensor integration and the ability to seek ways to provide up to date collaborative data to the warfighters.  In fact, today's expeditionary environment with lean mission planning staffs in forward operating areas, additional logistical burdens in support equipment and footprint are not needed.  Collaborative sensor integration must not be limited to a single operating system while still providing C2ISR products which come in the form of text, imagery, audio, and electronic signals.  A tall order to say the least but still well within reach.  Today, that technology exists and is expanding each day.The increasing motivation for DMT is derived from the characteristics of contemporary warfare where the battlefield is extremely lethal and complex and the need to interact among the many players is critical to the overall mission success.  On-board and off-board sensor management requires greater coordination among platforms to foster mission execution teamwork.  Cueing long range sensors to effectively identify and target threats is a difficult task considering the unknowns of a target’s behavior and overcoming their associated defenses.  The synergy needed to overcome these odds demands better training systems to prepare our warriors both in mission planning and execution.Traditionally, ISR input to simulations and battle command trainers has been fragmented coming from many different sources without players’ inputs.  The combat commanders have made little input to and had even less control over the ISR elements.  What the intelligence commanders received was without benefit of their direction, intent or judgement. Thus, commanders could never determine the impact of decisions they made and directions they gave to the ISR assets available.  To date, intelligence from simulations has been insufficient for the needs of the exercise staff because there are information gaps between the simulation and the scenario that must be filled.  It is inadequate for intelligence participants, because it omits details of concern to them.  For participants, the fundamental design flaw in simulation driven intelligence is that it omits the quality of doubt.  In the real world, the enemy masks his location and intentions within a mass of potentially meaningful, but superfluous data.  No existing simulation contains intentionally superfluous data.  Thus, the “Fog of War” is missing from the reports emanating from the simulation.    Those who understand the workings of a simulation database know that the simulation will not report false unit names or inaccurate locations.  The simulation knows nothing but game truth.  Real collection assets usually report equipment and activity, not unit names as typical simulated collectors do. (Frazier, Blenberg)  Figure 1 provides an example of using photo intelligence and adding synthetic entities for a UAV ISR input to the commander or engaged units.  Figure 1: UAVSim Pre-Strike ImageryAdditionally, simulations do not usually portray combat at a sufficient level of deaggregation to adequately represent the ISR systems contribution to the digitized battlefield.  ISR sensors don’t track aggregated units, only specific entities.  The processing that takes place to combine the entities back into units and determine their intentions must play or the combat leader ‘sees’ perfect intelligence and the potential for combat realism is lost.Once the "targets" are attacked in the joint synthetic battlespace and threat environment, then the appropriate response can be portrayed for analysis as in Figure 2.  It is this threat model representation and their interactions in the joint synthetic battlespace that provide a vast capacity to not only solve warfighter and combat planner integration shortfalls, but it is also a prime example of an ISR piece available in STOW.  Figure 2: UAVSim Post Strike Imagery6.2.	Virtual/Constructive Training and Networking with Live PlayersSomewhere during the various verification and validation phases of DMT, there should be an establishment of Figures of Merit to evaluate threat capabilities based on user requirements.  A per cent error for weapons flyout, detonation and EW effects fidelity may be needed in order to accredit the models. Once the models are accredited, then including live sensor integration will become easier for operators.  Combining live, virtual, and constructive entities on one network will assist the development and use of the Common Operational Picture (COP).  The COP is merely taking the concept of sensor integration for the fighter pilot or tank driver and incorporating those functions for presentation to the battlestaffs.  The question becomes how to get this data to the right person and how to convert the data into information that allows a person (or persons) to make the best decision.  Of course, best can mean different things at different times.  Also, individuals are just that – individual.  Each of us responds to information stimuli in different ways.  Add stress due to fatigue or a combat situation and you may have to use a 2 x 4 to gain someone's attention to critical data.  Whatever COP becomes, must be adaptable to individual presentations or needs of the mission.  For example, a Medical Team in Somalia will not need to know the same information as a CVBG or an EAF poised for attack.  However, each does share common information about logistics, local threats, and various C2ISR networks.  M&S must provide the same adaptable COP as warfighters use in battle.  Information must flow across the network and be up to date information for all consumers.  For the COP to work and increase battlespace situation awareness, it must be instantaneous.  Since the human is still in control loop and must correlate, fuse and understand information for decision making, it must be presentable and compatible to the cognitive processing.  It becomes broken down into three basic categories: sensory processing, pattern recognition, and decision/response selection.  The ability for human information processing depends on one's knowledge state or mental model of a task.  Perception (or pattern recognition) is a dynamic, cyclic process and underlies the dynamic nature of human information processing.  7.	ConclusionsThere are a number of skills needed to prosecute warfare.  The repetition and practice that occurs in simulation events provides the opportunity to build experience with each and every scenario.  Ability and reflex are only two of the essentials needed to fight.  “Seeing” the overall picture combined with that special ingredient called luck produces winners.  Some may make their own luck, but once again, the coup d'oeil in the battlespace is gained through experience and the knowledge of what information is needed and is provided in a threat environment.  This threat environment is intended to show new methods for improving warrior skills, reflexes as well as teaching how to “see” the overall picture through a comprehensive combat training program using all of the tricks in a constructive, virtual and live battlespace.  The inevitable transition to use more simulation for combat training is steeped in the knowledge of how simulators have evolved, their future capabilities and a desire to reduce costs.  Certainly one cannot be without the other, however it is less of vision than of necessity which brings new technology to the field.  Information security and the expense of follow-on weapons platforms further dictate the need for DMT.  Classification levels for low observable and very-low observable radar cross-sections may necessitate these platforms (F-22, B-2, Joint Strike Fighter, etc.) use more simulation training in order to master the highest performance level commensurate with their aircraft’s capabilities.  The emerging technologies in visual presentation along with computer processing capabilities will assist these ends to be met and must keep up with changing user requirements.  DMT will offer the method to train and work necessary Blue-Air coordination techniques in a dynamic environment, given that security concerns may limit full-up inflight training opportunities for the advanced weapons platforms.  The need for a multi-level security system is paramount to the successful integration of these weapons into the DMT architecture.  This system should be in-place early on in the DMT program to ensure its operation. (Oakes)As with the development of any new technology, what will come along in the future is anybody's guess.  The only consistent factor will be the need to test whatever it is before it can be used.  If a system is developed in which full up testing is not practical until the system is constructed, what does that mean in terms of money invested, and lives put at risk?  How do we assure ourselves that someone will not be injured by making decisions based on minimal understanding of complex interrelationships?  The next generation of fighter aircraft are capable of maneuvers that are beyond the pilot's physical abilities.  We know this through simulating the environment of the new aircraft and measuring the physical forces.  What we don't know are the psychological effects of working in this environment.  This would require behavioral models linked into the aircraft simulation.  New sensors will require a battlespace in which to operate and evaluate its effect in the overall outcome.  Use in live training may be limited by its current ISR mission or security classification.  The proper balance for virtual simulation in combat training will be driven by the training needs and the level technology can meet those needs.  Combining HLA with legacy systems for exercise execution requires careful considerations for the level of automation required as well as the type.  Some hard questions regarding threat environments must still be answered before full DMT operations and integration get into full swing.  Those questions deal what type of synthetic environment will become the standard and will it drive visual displays needed for not only tactical employment but for the C2ISR to be networked correctly.  How much bandwidth capacity is needed to network with other players?  Where is the next trouble spot and who will determine what the validated (and accredited) threat will look like in the battlespace.  Training against too strong a threat will drive weapons procurement and tactics to wrong conclusions; training against too easy of a threat may drive complacency and become the harbinger of disaster.Realism is still the driving goal for any training environment.  Efficiency in setting up the simulation and how to best “work behind the curtain” for the training audience is required to ensure the most training possible without losing realism.  As sensors improve and weapons models increase in their capabilities, there will be a greater need to monitor the performance of each computer to ensure the exercise continues to “simulate reality” and the customer gets more bang for the buck.  We are just at the fringes for defining a system.  It should be defined in such a manner as to allow improvements to occur without major modifications to the simulators and of course be produced concurrently with fielded systems for fear that the training will be futile.The general approach is to use the best knowledge we have and then over-engineer the result.  This always adds additional cost, but never guarantees that the result will be acceptable.  Or, perhaps we want to know how well a person might be expected to perform under very unusual circumstances.  If the scenario envisioned is truly unusual, we might never get a chance to perform the tests for real.  STOW provides DMT a robust threat environment to build and execute team training events.  The "ground" training events increases the level of learning prior to the live events for both the warriors and of course the combat planners.  After all would you want to be the first to go to war and only been trained in a computer "game?"  A mix of virtual and live enhanced with constructive simulation is a must in order to increase warfighter experience.  The better the experience, the better the warfighter.  The more one knows about combat before entering actual warfare will only enhance their chances survival and success in the battlespace.DMT's future is destined to be the training linchpin for the USAF and other services for increasing combat survivability.  Establishing and carefully monitoring the threat environment requirements lays the necessary groundwork for sound program development.  Implementation and validation will lend credibility to the threats and subsequent training realism.  In the beginning of the paper the question was Quo Vadis?  To answer that it is apparent we must build a solid threat environment with existing adaptable system models capable of entity-level resolution to remain viable.  There is only one joint synthetic battlespace that fits the bill now and for the foreseeable future.  Using STOW and improving it to meet new warfighter training and mission rehearsal requirements will ensure we know always know where we are going.  ReferencesAronson, Jesse, Radgowski, Tom, (1997), Lessons Learned in Developing the STOW AAR System.Ball, George Dr., Zeigler, Bernard, Dr. (1999) University of Arizona.  Synthetic Environments as Dynamic, Interactive, Multi-resolution Simulations.  Budge, Larry D. MG (Ret) (1997), Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) 97 Overview.Ceranowicz, Andy, PhD  (1997), STOW 97-99.  Dahmann, J.S. (1997), The Department of Defense High Level Architecture.  Proceedings of the 1997 Winter Simulation Conference, 142-149.Frazier, Gerald T., Blenberg, Paul J. (1999).  99S-SIW-194.  Intelligence Cells in Large Scale Exercises.HQ ACC/DOOS, Langley AFB (1998),  Distributed Mission Training - Background Concepts (Draft).  Laird, John. E., PhD, Coulter, Karen J., Jones, Randolph M., Kenny, Patrick G., Koss, Frank, Nielsen, Paul E. (1997), Integrating Intelligent Computer Generated Forces in Distributive Simulations:  TacAir Soar in STOW-97.  Miller, D., Miller, T., Cornish, C., Rourke J., and Cauble, K.  (1998), STOW Southwest Asia Terrain Data Base, 98-SIW-165.Oakes, Michael R.  (1998), Augmenting Air and Space Dominance: The Future of Combat Training, 98F-SIW-128.Author’s BiographyMICHAEL OAKES is a senior systems engineer with BMH Associates, Inc.  He holds a B.S. in Aeronautical Engineering, M.S. in Aeronautical Sciences, and an M.A. in National Security and Strategic Studies.  He was responsible for the evolution, bed-down, and deployment of high priority classified special access required programs.  He is a retired USAF fighter pilot with over 20 years of experience in the Pacific, European, and Southwest Asia theaters of operations and is a USAF F-15 Fighter Weapons School Graduate.  Mr. Oakes was the WISSARD Lab Test Director for the STOW-97 ACTD.  He maintains domain expertise as a commercial airline pilot and continues to provide modeling and military domain expertise for Air Synthetic Force development used in STOW technologies.