Consilience: The Unity of SimulationPete MullerKES, Inc., 1221 Shaker Drive, Herndon, Virginia  20170-2415, (703) 967-1651, Fax: (703) 430-5695, muller@kes.comKeywords:STOW, Advanced Distributed Simulation, Joint Training, Joint Experimentation, Synthetic Forces, Synthetic Environment, Joint Synthetic Battlespace. ABSTRACT: Over the past sixteen years, DoD has made significant progress in achieving the vision of a single Joint Synthetic Battlespace where diverse live, virtual, and constructive simulations can meaningfully interact. While there are still significant technical challenges in achieving the vision, these pale in comparison to the management, interoperability, and VV&A challenges.  The HLA is a necessary first step in moving towards a Joint Synthetic Battlespace, but many new standards and services need to be developed. This paper suggests some concepts to begin to address some of the challenges in developing and using a Joint Synthetic Battlespace..1. ConsilienceThe progress that has been made in DoD simulation since the beginning of SIMNET in 1993 is phenomenal [1]. Many people discuss the "Joint Synthetic Battlespace" as if it existed today and share a vision of live, virtual, and constructive simulations working together seamlessly.  Making the common Joint Synthetic Battlespace a reality has been compared to the quest for the Holy Grail [2].DoD simulation has begun a journey towards consilience.  I borrow the concept of consilience from Edward O. Wilson's book, Consilience: the Unity of Knowledge. Professor Wilson is one of the world's leading scientists, and he describes the fundamental unity of all knowledge. Consilience is "literally a 'jumping together' of knowledge by the linking of facts and fact-based theory across disciplines to create a common groundwork of explanation."[3] Consilience is the search for a small number of fundamental natural laws that comprise the principles underlying every branch of learning.  It is the search for what we have in common across a variety of disciplines to bring us to a deeper overall understanding.  Searching for consilience in DoD simulation is the challenge we now face.1.1 Joint Synthetic Battlespace VisionThe vision has been described many times before much more eloquently than I can describe here. The DoD Modeling and Simulation Master Plan states the DoD M&S vision as follows:a. Defense modeling and simulation will provide readily available, operationally valid environments for use by the DoD Components: (1) To train jointly, develop doctrine and tactics, formulate operational plans, and assess warfighting situations. (2) To support technology assessment, system upgrade, prototype and full-scale development, and force structuring. b. Furthermore, common use of these environments will promote a closer interaction between the operations and acquisition communities in carrying out their respective responsibilities. To allow maximum utility and flexibility, these modeling and simulation environments will be constructed from affordable, reusable components interoperating through an open systems architecture[4]. Described another way, it is the ability to rapidly and effortlessly link together geographically dispersed live military units, virtual simulators, and constructive simulations to provide effective training, joint experimentation, and analysis. It should be low-cost, multi-fidelity, and multi-resolution.  Interactions between entities as well as between the entities and the environment should be realistic, verifiable, and appropriate.  While these are all noble goals, they have not been achieved and will not be without a concerted effort.2. Requirements of a Joint Synthetic Battlespace Although many of us share the grand vision of how simulations should work together, how to "get there from here" is not so clear.  The simulation community is large and diverse with many conflicting goals and agendas.  One of the strengths of this community is the willingness to come together in forums such as SIW to examine ways that we can work together to solve critical problems.One of the first things that should be done in any simulation is to establish the rules and characteristics of the simulated world.  Generally speaking, most simulations define their own unique simulation world which significantly differs from everyone else's that has gone before. There are lots of good reasons for this, but it is obviously not conducive to the  interoperability and cost savings alluded to in the DoD M&S Master Plan. The requirements of the simulated worlds are very different for each of the Services and different applications within the Services.  When we put "Joint" into the acronym, however, the requirements become much more focused. If you wish to exist in the Joint Synthetic Battlespace, you have to be able to realistically interact with all types of entities, including red (enemy), blue (friend), and white (neutral). While there can be several levels of a Joint Synthetic Battlespace, in at least one level, you should be able to interact with the environment including changing weather and lighting conditions.  I could discuss in detail the requirements of some notional  Joint Synthetic Battlespaces, and one of them would end up being a description of the DARPA STOW program.  This does not mean that the STOW program is the definitive Joint Synthetic Battlespace, but rather most of the concepts and prototypes are there.  There is room for several levels of Joint Synthetic Battlespace, but they should be standardized and logically related to each other. 2.1 The Requirements TrapOne of the reasons that Advanced Distributed Simulation (ADS) has made such tremendous progress is that the major advances have been accomplished outside of the traditional procurement process.  Long before Acquisition Reform became a part of the vocabulary, DARPA practiced the concepts.  Most simulations should not be developed under traditional acquisition rules.  The technology and the requirements are changing too rapidly for 5000 series development to be cost effective.  It is much more important for today's simulations to be flexible, than rigorously documented.It is often said that anything that can be adequately described can be simulated.  Muller's corollary is that by the time you adequately describe something you want to simulate, you don't have the time and money left to simulate it.3. Beyond HLA towards a Joint Synthetic Battlespace3.1 HLA FederationsDMSO has provided the tools in the High Level Architecture (HLA) to help combine the strengths of different simulations to create a Federation that can accomplish more than its individual components.  While the HLA is a necessary foundation, it does not address many of the issues that are important in a Joint Synthetic Battlespace. While federating simulations is a wonderful capability, it is not easy to do well.  The process puts a tremendous burden on the federation developer.  Federating today is similar to buying a new car twenty years ago.  Once you decided on the make and model, you sat down with a salesperson and went through hundreds of decisions including exterior color, interior color, engine, transmissions, radio, etc.  At the end of the process you would get the price and a few months later, the car you wanted.  Japanese car manufacturers discovered that the cost of all of those choices was extremely high, and the consumer didn't really need or want that many choices.  Combining popular options, they offered several option packages from the base model through the luxury model. In a similar fashion, DoD should have several standard simulation environments with built in features that most users want.  The HLA provides the communication framework for DoD simulations, but that's just the car chassis with a wiring harness.  There are many other things that need to be standardized so that DoD can begin to see consilience in simulation and the realization of DoD's M&S vision.3.2 Simplify and UnifyThere should be fundamental things that are shared by all simulations when they want to "exist" in a single Joint Synthetic Battlespace. Simplification to a common denominator is the direction that Joint Simulation must go.  This does not mean that all simulations must dumb-down for all applications.  Rather, to play in a Joint Synthetic Battlespace, there must be some intelligent compromises. The only simulations that don't become more complex over time are the ones that only exist on PowerPoint slides.  By the very nature of simulation development, each new version will be more complex.  It is necessary to build independent, yet common services that can simplify joint interactions.3.3 The Interaction FederateOne of the first things that DoD should develop is a standard interaction federate or service.  Conceptually, this is a giant "who shot whom" lookup table of all weapons against all targets under a variety of conditions.  Many people assume that this service already exists.  The framework for this service exists in STOW's JointSAF, but it needs to be populated with authoritative interactions. While there are hundreds of organizations that have data on potential interactions, there is no single source which provides the definitive joint answer.  What we typically find is that we have excellent data for the vulnerability of a specific vehicle against a specific weapon under a specific set of conditions, but we don't have data for the general case. It is not technically challenging to compile all of the interaction data, but it is a tremendous management challenge. This service could be multi-fidelity with one table for joint training, another for experimentation, another for analysis, and so on.  An extension of this concept is the Ordnance Service which was pioneered in the STOW program.  In addition to providing an end game interaction, a service could use higher fidelity fly-out models to provide simulations with real time position data and eventual interaction results.Another standard must be the environment. One of the major characteristics of any synthetic world is how they define the surface of the earth. The National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) provides standard Digital Terrain Elevation Data (DTED) that many simulations use for this purpose.  DTED level 2, for example, has elevation postings every 30 meters which can serve as a basis for a Terrain Data Base (TDB). Most simulation Terrain Data Bases start with DTED as the foundation, but there is often a long and complicated process for turning NIMA data into a format that is useful to a given simulation.  As the desire for fidelity in the simulation increases, it rapidly increases the complexity of the TDB. If we look at simple vehicle movement, we can see how quickly the requirements grow.  With information from a DTED database, a model can easily compute the changes in elevation and slope.  If desired, we could implement algorithms which reduce vehicle speed when going up hill. The model may want to know about different soil types to help compute trafficability, so that each ground vehicle can have different performance characteristics based on where it is.  A tank going through a sandy area might go slower than on a road with all other variables being equal.  This information is not available in DTED. Roads are one of the most important abstract features. While roads aid in ground movement, there are a number of key features that are important to restrain movement. Streams, rivers, and lakes could be defined so that the simulation knows that they are impediments to movement.  Trees, bushes, rocks, and other natural phenomena could be added as appropriate.  Finally, we could add man-made features such as buildings and bridges.  What began as a simple elevation posting can very quickly become incredibly complex.The terrain skin itself is not static.  Bombs destroy buildings and bridges, engineer equipment create fighting positions, storms change the littoral zone, and so on.  These types of changes are known as "Dynamic Terrain" and they greatly increase the complexity of the simulation world.  The weather, atmosphere, and undersea environment are other factors that make the problem even more complex. The Discoverer II Satellite program promises to make the equivalent of DTED level 4 and 5 data available in near real time[5].  How simulations will be able to use and manage this vast amount of data will be a major technical and management challenge. 3.3 Physics-Based ModelingOur simulations should generally obey the laws of physics, but physics based modeling is not a panacea for DoD simulation. It is often implemented by bringing higher fidelity specialized models into our simulation environments.  Each model will have it's own unique data requirements, algorithms, nuances, and outputs.  Typically these models are highly specific to a given set of conditions.  Of course, one of the first things that needs to be done to bring them into a simulation environment is to generalize them and apply them to a wide variety of conditions. A good example is the visual model for computer generated forces used in CCTT and ModSAF, which uses the ACQUIRE methodology from the U.S. Army Night Vision Electronic Sensors Directorate (NVESD) [6]. This methodology is excellent for acquiring a single stationary target.  Of course, CCTT and ModSAF are typically used in a multiple moving target environment.  An Army tanker is cued by things such as muzzle flash, smoke, movement, other tanks, and dust --all of which are not considered by the ACQUIRE methodology.  This is not to say that the methodology is bad, but it is an example of a physics based model being generalized and used beyond its originally intended purpose.3.4 The Fidelity DilemmaFor a variety of reasons, in a given simulation, there are usually some areas that are modeled with high fidelity while others are ignored.  Higher fidelity is usually thought of as better than lower fidelity. Higher fidelity, much like physics based modeling is over rated.  While it may be appropriate to improve the overall fidelity of an entire simulation, typically we improve the fidelity of a single component model.  Since each model comes from a community with its own language and context, we soon have an incredibly complex simulation containing models from various sources which have different and often conflicting requirements.4. ConclusionsThere are technical challenges remaining in fielding a Joint Synthetic Battlespace, but they pale in comparison with the management challenges.  In addition to the HLA, DoD needs to standardize on one or more Joint Synthetic Battlespaces.  These worlds need to be consistent within themselves with clearly defined interfaces. The DARPA STOW program has demonstrated a prototype of a Joint Synthetic Battlespace which could support a wide variety of DoD programs including DMT, OneSAF, BFTT, and Joint Experimentation.  As useful as STOW is, it remains a prototype. It needs continued support and development to help achieve the DoD M&S vision.5. References[1] U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment, Distributed Interactive Simulation of Combat, OTA-BP-ISS-151 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, September 1995).[2] Michael D. Proctor, Ph.D., Editor, Web-based Technical Reference on Simulation InteroperabilityHYPERLINK "Chapter%208/chapter_8.htm"Chapter 8 - STOW, the Quest for a Joint Synthetic Battlespace, Dr. Andy Ceranowicz, http://www.ie.engr.ucf.edu/proctor_ie/ [3] Edward O. Wilson: Consilience: The Unity of Knowledge, Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 1998.[4] DoD Modeling and Simulation Master Plan, October 1995, http://www.dmso.mil[5] Lt Col Netzer, Discoverer II Industry Day Core Program Briefing,  HYPERLINK "http://www.laafb.af.mil/Special_Interest/disc2/LIBRARY/CoreProgram1.pdf" http://www.laafb.af.mil/Special_Interest/disc2/LIBRARY/CoreProgram1.pdf [6] Phil Topper et. al., The Compendium of Close Combat Tactical Trainer Algorithms, Data, Data Structures and Generic System Mappings, AMSAA, June 1996.Author’s BiographyPete Muller is the Director of Washington Operations for KES, Inc. and has worked on the DARPA STOW program since 1995.  His principle responsibility is for STOW Technology Transition and VV&A, and he has also served as a STOW White Cell Operator for USACOM's  first Joint Experiment, J9901.