Simulation Based Acquisition,DoD/Industry Resource RepositoryRobin FrostUSD (A&T) DTSE&E/SEPentagon, Rm. 3D1075Washington, DC 20301-3000frostrl@acq.osd.milDave ThomenScience Applications International Corporation8301 Greensboro Drive, Suite 209McLean, VA 22102thomend@mail.etas.comKEYWORDSSimulation Based Acquisition; SBA, DoD Industry Resource Repository, DIRRABSTRACT:   Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) is a joint Industry and Department of Defense initiative to define an acquisition process that employs a robust, collaborative use of simulation technology to integrate the acquisition process across acquisition phases and programs.  Initial study of this initiative has identified four key components to SBA: a collaborative environment distributed product descriptions, data interchange formats and a DoD Industry Resource Repository or DIRR.  This paper focuses on the DIRR and its role in future Defense acquisition.  It presents the current strategy to leverage off the groundwork already laid by the Modeling and Simulation Resource Repository (MSRR), explains the conceptual differences between the DIRR and the MSRR, and gives the status of the effort to identify the body of requirements for the DIRR.  The paper in meant not only to inform the community (both government and industry) of this initiative, but also to solicit their input to the process.1.	IntroductionFor the past two year, the Acquisition Council of the Department of Defense (DoD) Executive Council for Modeling and Simulation (EXCIMS) has been working on an initiative, Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA), that defines the strategy of how the DoD will acquire its future Defense systems.  It is envisioned that DoD will be able to capitalize on the phenomenal gains in computer and information technologies occurring today, and exploit these in the acquisition process, thereby revolutionizing the way the Department does acquisition.  A year ago, a Joint SBA Task Force spent six months examining this concept.  The insights from that effort were captured in a document - A Road Map for Simulation Based Acquisition [Ref. 1] – that provides a reference of how DoD can go about realizing its current vision.  The Road Map identified four key elements as being necessary to make a SBA reality.  These are:a collaborative environmentdistributed product descriptions (DPDs)data interchange formats (DIFs)a DoD Industry Resource Repository (DIRR)This paper focuses on the DIRR.  It discusses the attributes that make it unique, and examines functions and elements of what a DIRR is envisioned to be.  It reviews the current strategy being taken to make the repository a reality, and identifies the issues associated with the implementation of a DIRR that must be addressed along the way.   It is hoped that this paper will begin the dialog that must take place about the nature of the DIRR, the identification of its requirements, and the resolution of its issues. 2.	Concept2.1	BackgroundBefore discussing the DIRR, one must first understand SBA.  The goal of SBA is to address the demands and concerns facing DoD acquisition today.  On an average, weapon systems take 8 to 10 years to design and 15 to 20 years to field.  The current environment is characterized by the fact that the full potential of integrated product and process development (IPPD) and the integrated product teams (IPTs) are not realized, solution decisions are made too early, the majority of system costs are locked in by milestone II of a program’s life, and our operation and support costs continue to dominate the total life cycle costs.  In many cases, the use of M&S to support the acquisition process continues to be characterized by highly specialized, one-time use of models with unique data requirements, and limited reusability [Figure 1].Figure 12.2	VisionThe SBA vision is “an acquisition process in which DoD and Industry are enabled by robust, collaborative use of simulation technology that is integrated across acquisition phases and programs.”   The goals of SBA are to substantially reduce the time, resources, and risk associated with the entire acquisition process, to increase the quality, military worth and supportability of fielded systems while reducing total ownership costs throughout the total life cycle, and to enable IPPD across the entire acquisition life cycle [Figure 2].Figure 22.3	Principles of Reuse and InteroperabilitySBA seeks to capitalize on the economies inherent under the principles of reuse and interoperability.  If tools or data or environments can be reused at different stages of the acquisition process, the program reaps the benefits of not having to develop new tools, new data, or new environments for that specific instance.  Similarly, if the information obtained in one step is readily available to other steps in the process, the program can avoid the costs of recreating or converting the information.  The Joint SBA Task Force contacted both industry and government to identify the key components of the envisioned future environment.   The result of that effort highlighted the four key components listed above. These and the relationship between them are depicted below in Figure 3.Figure 3The idea of collaborative environments is to create groupings of tools, people, and processes to foster reuse and interoperability.  The intent is to be able to work across functional areas, across acquisition phases, and across programs.   It provides the acquisition community a “reusable framework of tools, resources, and (potentially) IPTs within the bounds of a given application domain.” [Ref 1]A Distributed Product Description, or DPD, combines data and other characteristics associated with a given product together with the inherent inter-relationships of the product with its environment. As described in the Road Map, the DPD is “a distributed collection of product-centric information that is interconnected via web technology into what appears (to the user) to be a single, logically unified product representation.” [Ref 1]   As a product is developed during its initial stages, the DPD associated with the product matures in parallel.  The acquisition process is acquiring both the product and the associated representations of the product at the same time.  It is these product representations within the DPD that will enable IPPD and the IPTs.  When provided the appropriate automated support tools and schema, the IPT members will have access to and work with the same information resident in the DPD.  This will mean the M&S community will need to develop a set of appropriate Data Interchange Formats (DIFs) that will support the interchange and flow of product information.The fourth key element is a DoD/Industry Resource Repository, or DIRR.  “This component would provide a web technology-based distributed repository of tools, information resources, and generic infrastructure for use within and reuse across acquisition programs.” [Ref 1]  2.4	DIRR CharacteristicsThe first characteristic of the DIRR is noted in its name – a DoD and Industry partnership.  This reflects the SBA strategy where the Department and Industry together, through the interchange of requirements, ideas and information, work towards the design, development and fielding of a new Defense systems.  This collaborative environment is enabled by and heavily dependent upon advanced simulation technologies.The fact that many of the participants in IPTs are geographically dispersed necessitates the next characteristics, that the DIRR be highly distributed.  The concept is not to have a single physical location where all the tools, models and information reside, but rather a system of nodes that together constitute a virtual resource repository. The vision is that users will enter the repository system from their local sites and be able to traverse quickly and efficiently through the information they are authorized to access.  The fact that that information is stored on different computers located at a number of sites is transparent.The information contained in the DIRR must be of value to the user.  This means that it must be readily accessible, be usable, and be accepted.  The system must be able to provide the right information at the right time.  Further, it needs to be able to be quickly updated and support an active rapidly moving system acquisition program.  This breadth of support entails not only quantity of information, but also a great variety in type of information, tools and data it must be able to support.  This in turn must be accessible by the users and employable by them.  Part of this requirement is that the quality of information is maintained in terms of accuracy, currency and consistency.Finally, the DIRR must provide all stakeholders of the program the necessary security measures to protect both restricted and classified materials.  It must be able to prevent unauthorized access and any attempts to sabotage retained information, tools and models.3.	IssuesIn the coming year, the Defense acquisition community, both industry and government, must begin the dialog on what a DIRR should be.  We need to identify the specific requirements for this community resource.  In the process, we will begin to resolve some of the questions and issues that currently exist.3.1	Cultural and ProcessMany of the issues that must be addressed are not those of physics or technology.  Instead, they have to do with processes, responsibilities and relationships.  These can be categorized into areas such as: ownership, responsibility, management, liability, incentives and credibility.   When information is placed into the DIRR, who then assumes ownership of that information?  Does the originator retain it?  Can some of the information become as “shareware,” available to any and all who are authorized to use it?  There are questions as to responsibility?  For example, who is responsible for the accuracy, currency and consistency of the information?  Similarly, if there is an issue of liability stemming from the use of information obtained from the system, what is the extent of that liability?  Who bears that liability?  How does the system address industry’s concern over safeguarding intellectual property?  The government customer needs access to information from all parties.  Yet the competitive advantage of one firm must be protected from disclosure to others.The information retained in the DIRR will span the different levels of security classification.  The system must accommodate this reality, and provide the security management necessary to protect the information from unauthorized access.In establishing firewalls and restrictions of use and access, the engineers of the DIRR must be sensitive to the fact that the system they design and implement cannot be, or even be perceived to be, a greater burden than it is worth.   For the DIRR to be successful, it must be of value to the customer.  It must be an enabler of and not an encumbrance on the Integrate Product Process Development (IPPD).  The incentive must be there for all parties to deposit their information into the system and to access and used the DIRR as an integral part of their day-to-day business practice.3.2	EnvironmentMuch of the technology exists today to establish a virtual repository.  As someone once said, “the real issues are carbon, not silicon based.”   That is not to say that there are no further challenges to implementing an M&S virtual repository in support of the Defense acquisition community.  The unique nature of the information, tools and models to be retained in the DIRR may exceed current capabilities.  The additional requirement that the material, available through the DIRR, be accessible to authorized users located around the world.  The basic architecture will have to be developed and implemented and standards will need to be identified and established to permit the free access and exchange of information by authorized users.  The concept of users from their personal computers being able to access and interact with simulations and advanced tools will require the development of a structure that supports such interactions. The development of a DIRR will also require advances in the area of user tools to permit the quick and efficient interface with the repository.  Specialized browsers, search engines and other software and infrastructure will be required to assist the user in locating and connecting with the tools and materials being sought.  Intelligent user interfaces must be developed to provide the user with “user-selectable views” of information stored in the DIRR.  Tools will be required to facilitate to introduction of changes to information in the repository, and to notify those concerned as to the changes being made.  Finally, advances in software and hardware may be required to handle security and restriction requirements of the system.4.	StrategyThe corporate strategy for establishing a DIRR is to undertake an evolutionary approach; to build upon the current repositories that exist today.  One such effort is the Defense Modeling and Simulation community sponsored Modeling and Simulation Resource Repository (MSRR).  Like the DIRR, it too is a web technology based system.  A number of programs have begun exploring the use of a common repository across their entire program.  We need to capture the lessons learned from these pathfinder efforts, and design and conduct future experiments to explore the new and remaining issue.  The Advance Amphibious Assault program office has been recognized for the work they have done in this area.  Their Integrated Data Management System makes information available to both Government and Industry personnel on the program.  Likewise, the Ballistic Missile Defense Office (BMDO) has recently demonstrated their Virtual Data Center.  One of the issues they have explored and learned is the handling of restricted and classified data, using web technology, in a collaborative government and industry environment.  5.	Summary SBA is coming.  A necessary component, recognized by both industry and government alike, is the need for a DIRR to support reuse and interoperability within and between programs.  The Defense acquisition community can take one of three approaches.  It can either “meander,” as we are doing today, with a number of individual, but essentially uncoordinated efforts to define and develop such a repository concept.  It can take a top-down approach to fully define and develop the DIRR and wait until it finally “materializes.”  Or, it can adopt an approach to “migrate” from where we are today, to a DIRR, leveraging current efforts, and learning from experience along the way.  The consensus of the community is to pursue the third approach. 6.	References[1]	Acquisition Council draft, A Road Map for Simulation Based Acquisition, 4 December 1998Author BiographiesROBIN FROST is a Systems Engineer in the Systems Engineering Directorate of Office of the USD (A&T).  Ms Frost holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Systems Engineering from the University of Virginia.  She has worked as an engineer and an engineering supervisor for IBM and the US Navy, and has served in the Office of the Secretary of Defense since 1995.  She oversees OSD policies on M&S in Acquisition, Chairs the Acquisition Functional Working Group under the Acquisition Council and heads the Industry Government team researching SBA.DAVE THOMEN, a Senior Analyst with SAIC, provides technical support to USD (A&T) DTSE&E on M&S in Acquisition.  He holds a Master of Science degree in Operations Research from the Naval Postgraduate School.  He supported the development of the Simulation, Test and Evaluation Process (STEP) Guidelines and has participated on the Government Industry Team researching SBA. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  