Simulation Based Acquisition,The InitiativeRobin FrostOUSD (A&T) DTSE&E/SEPentagon, Rm. 3D1075Washington, DC 20301-3000frostrl@acq.osd.milDave ThomenScience Applications International Corporation8301 Greensboro Drive, Suite 209McLean, VA 22102thomend@mail.etas.comKEYWORDSSimulation Based Acquisition; SBA; SBA Road Map; SBA Initiative; Collaborative Environments; Distributed Product Description; DPD; Intelligent Synthesis Environment; ISEABSTRACT:  Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) is a joint Industry and Department of Defense initiative to define an acquisition process that employs a robust, collaborative use of simulation technology to integrate the acquisition process across acquisition phases and programs.  The intent of the initiative is to reduce the time, resources and risk associated with acquisition, enable the integrated product and process development (IPPD) and improve the quality of the fielded product. In 1999, the SBA Initiative has begun the action necessary to bring about an SBA strategy for Defense acquisition. Recent steps have been to identify a set of SBA pathfinder efforts to research some of the concepts proposed in the SBA Road Map.  Actions have begun on a series SBA Business Games to explore the cultural and process issues associated with SBA.  This paper provides an overview of SBA and provides the latest information on this DoD initiative.  SBA will impact all areas of acquisition, from conception of system requirements to fielding and sustainment of a system, and to its eventual disposal. It concerns the total life cycle of systems.1.	IntroductionThis paper is an introduction to an initiative that the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) has undertaken, called Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA). SBA is a strategy that addresses, through robust use of simulation, what we buy and how we buy it.  All the military Services are responding to this initiative with actions of their own.  And this trend is not limited to the Department of Defense (DoD) alone.  NASA has a similar initiative, as do other government agencies.  Similarly, Industry, in the commercial arena, has also made changes in its processes to incorporate SBA-like ideas.The SBA initiative is well underway, and will impact the way the Defense acquisition community, both government and industry, undertakes the acquisition process.  It will touch upon every aspect of Defense systems design, development, acquisition and sustainment.  It will impact systems from requirements to disposal.  This paper will review the background that gave rise to the initiative, the SBA concept and its key components, and the current steps being taken to implements the initiative.2.	What Is SBA?2.1	BackgroundThere are several revolutions underway today within DoD.  The Revolution in Military Affairs challenges us to be prepared for uncertainty; to be prepared to fight differently, and in different conflicts than we have fought before.  Our focus has shifted to such things as information dominance, rapid force projection, and smart self-contained weapons.  As we modernize our armed forces, this revolution is defining what we must buy.  Likewise, the Revolution in Business Affairs directs that we place management emphasis on core competencies.  There is an emphasis to reduce overhead, leverage computer technology and implement integrated products.  This revolution is impacting how we buy.It is becoming clear that modeling and simulation (M&S) will become core resources as we face these multiple fronts and their implications for the future of acquisition within DoD.  In response to the changes in military affairs, we must replace existing equipment with systems having greater flexibility and complexity.  For all those involved in the acquisition of these new systems (whether determining the requirements or how the new weapons will contribute in a system of systems environment), the use of M&S early and throughout the acquisition process will become essential.  To fully implement the acquisition reforms, the members of the integrated product teams (IPTs) will need to communicate their ideas in a collaborative environment and share a common vision and understanding of the proposed system.  M&S will be the catalyst that will make that happen. [Ref. 1]2.2	The NeedTo understand the need for SBA, we must look at how we conduct acquisition today.  On an average, weapon systems take 8 to 10 years to design, and 15 to 20 years to field.  Even minor improvements to these times would be unacceptable.  At the rate of technology change, these systems, long in development, are out-of-date when they reach the field.  The current environment is characterized by the fact that the full potential of IPPD and the IPTs are not realized, solution decisions are made too early, the majority of system costs are locked in by milestone II of a program’s life, and our operation and support costs have become the proverbial tail wagging the dog.  In many cases, M&S continues to be characterized by highly specialized, one-time use models with unique data requirements, and limited reusability.  [Figure 1]Figure 1The Vice President has directed, as part of the National Performance Review goals, that cycle time for our new systems is to be cut by 25%.  Our DoD leadership has stretched this goal to make an even more aggressive target of 50%. The Defense Systems Affordability Council has recognized the potential that M&S brings to acquisition and has tapped SBA to be one of the three top initiatives to help realize the stretch goal they have set before themselves.2.3	The VisionToday, SBA is still a concept.  Although areas of SBA emphasis can be found to exist in current programs, the entire concept has yet to be defined and implemented.  SBA is more than just the use of M&S in the acquisition process.  SBA is the envisioned future operating concept of the DoD acquisition system [Figure 2]. Specifically, the Acquisition Council of the DoD Executive Council for Modeling and Simulation (EXCIMS) has stated that the vision of SBA is:An acquisition process in which DoD and Industry are enabled by robust, collaborative use of simulation technology that is integrated across acquisition phases and programs.  The goals of SBA are to:Substantially reduce the time, resources, and risk associated with the entire acquisition process;Increase the quality, military worth and supportability of fielded systems while reducing total ownership costs throughout the total life cycle;Enable Integrated Product and Process Development (IPPD) across the entire acquisition life cycle.Figure 22.4	Evidence for Confidence in SBAThe confidence the DoD leadership has placed in SBA is based on strong and compelling evidence found in recent acquisition programs.  In the Study on the Effectiveness of Modeling and Simulation in the Weapon System Acquisition Process, instances are cited that illustrate the potential benefits of SBA [Ref. 2].  Examples include how M&S tools have permitted the Navy to reduce the standard parts list from 95,000 for the Seawolf class submarine to about 16,000 for the NSSN.  The Army Tank and Automotive Research Development and Engineering Center was able to design a new, low silhouette tank prototype using 14 engineers for 16 months, whereas it previously took 55 engineers 36 months.  Using CAD on the Air Force B-2 permitted them to achieve first-time correct tube bending of expensive titanium electronic cable conduits.The evidence from programs such as these, combined with examples from industry (e.g., the automotive and aircraft manufacturers) and the research initiatives of DARPA and other agencies (e.g., Simulation Based Design) illustrates the potential contribution of a comprehensive, integrated simulation-based approach to defense acquisition.  SBA entails deliberate and coordinated use of M&S across the many acquisition domains, over all phases of a program’s life cycle.  It further promotes the reuse of M&S between programs.  Current acquisition programs are making revolutionary advances today using SBA concepts.  For example, the Navy’s DD-21 initial down-select will be based on the contractor proposed smart product models.  The program used a virtual concept model to experiment, with the user, the DD-21 operational capabilities well in advance of defining a system design.  Other government agencies are pursuing SBA-like concepts.  NASA, for example, has funded a program called Intelligent Synthesis Environment (ISE), which is very similar to SBA.2.5	SBA is InevitableGiven the evidence of what can now be done with M&S in acquisition, and the number of independent initiatives currently underway indicates that, eventually, the acquisition process will evolve into a simulation-based approach.  The issue is whether we can afford to wait for this to evolve naturally over time, or if there are some deliberate steps we can take now to accelerate its realization in, say,  2007 rather than 2027.3.	SBA Road MapOSD is committed to making SBA a reality, and recognizes the need for change in the acquisition process if we are to modernize the force.  In 1998, a joint task force was created to develop a document that presents an approach of how DoD can move from its current process to that which fulfills the vision set forth earlier.  Composed of representatives from all the DoD components, under the leadership of Dr. Sanders, Director, Test, Systems Engineering and Evaluation and the M&S community’s Acquisition Council, and working in close cooperation with industry, the task force wrote the SBA Road Map.  What follows are several of the observations that have emerged from their work.3.1  Not just TechnologyAlthough it has been the advances in computer and other M&S enabling technologies in recent years that has made the concept of SBA feasible, it is not the remaining technological issues that offer us the biggest hurdles in the next few years.  Rather, it is the cultural and process changes that pose the greatest challenges to implementing SBA.  The demands on what we must buy together with the constraints on time and resources will necessitate changes in how we procure our future systems.  It may means changes in processes, policies and even organizational structures.  SBA will define new relationships between government and industry, between industries, and within government itself.3.2	Shared Use of Data, Tools and Techniques is EssentialSharing must occur between all participants of the process.  In many cases the most significant barriers are the legal, bureaucratic and social barriers that stand in the way.  This issue goes beyond proprietary data rights.  Although we have seen examples (e.g., a “model marketplace” established at Boeing’s Defense and Space Group) where they are making headway in this area, we may need changes to existing policy or the creation of new policy.  Other changes, however, are not precluded by policy, but simply need to be instituted to overcome existing cultural or process obstacles.3.3	Cultural ChangesCultural resistance to change is a significant barrier.  A recent industry survey on acquisition reform implementation revealed “cultural resistance”, for the most part ascribed to government, as being the most frequently cited barrier to acquisition reform implementation [Ref. 3].  The test community, for example, is currently undergoing a cultural shift with the evolution of the Simulation Test and Evaluation Process (STEP), a sub-process of SBA.  This new paradigm is a collaboration of simulation and test as part of an effective evaluation strategy.  The traditional “test-fix-test” approach becomes a “model-simulate-fix-test-iterate approach”.  As further evidence of the significance of overcoming existing cultural barriers, an American Defense Preparedness Association (ADPA) study in 1996 indicated that there are no technical showstoppers to implementing SBA, rather the primary issues associated with SBA were largely cultural [Ref. 4].3.4	IncentivesProgram Managers need incentives to change from the traditional approach of weapon system acquisition to a new approach that incorporates the tenets of SBA.  Given the extensive use of modeling and virtual prototyping early in the program, it is likely that future programs will experience even greater costs earlier in the acquisition process.  (The savings comes when total ownership costs are examined.)  The challenge is to identify the incentives needed to motivate the acquisition community to alter current acquisition processes and budgets, and to accelerate adoption of the SBA initiatives.3.5   Key Components of SBAThe SBA Road Map identified four key components to implementing SBA.  These are:collaborative environments (CEs)distributed product descriptions (DPDs)DoD/Industry resource repository (DIRR)data interchange formats (DIFs)Under SBA, there will be a need to bring together the tools and technologies, people and processes into collaborative environments.  Whether these are created at the traditional product level, or are created to define and encompass different domains, they are formed to exploit the benefits to be gained through interoperability and reuse.  Within these collaborative environments the individual tool selection will focus on not only the specific attribute of the tool, but its ability to readily support the process through the exchange of information and through being of added value on multiple occasions. In essence, together these tools will become a system of models and simulations.  As described in the Road Map, the DPD is “a distributed collection of product-centric information that is interconnected via web technology into what appears (to the user) to be a single, logically unified product representation.” [Ref. 5]  As a product is developed, the DPD associated with the product matures in parallel. The acquisition process, therefore, acquires both the product and the associated representations of the product at the same time. To facilitate the exchange and use of the information, DPDs, tools, models and simulations, by the collaborative environments, a DIRR will need to be established.  Leveraging the work already done in the Modeling and Simulation Resource Repository (MSRR), it is envisioned that the SBA DIRR will be a web-technology based distributed repository.Finally, the development of data interchange formats (DIFs) will be needed to permit the exchange of the DPDs and other SBA information between the CE participants and to permit the tools, models and simulations to be employed by authorized users.Figure 33.6   The ArchitectureTo construct a CE, establish a DIRR and institute DPDs and DIFs requires the establishment of a framework or architecture.  As envisioned in Figure 3, this entails thinking of it in three levels.  At the top is an Operational Architecture, defining such elements as the organizations, activities, and processes involved.  Next, is a System Architecture including platforms, components and data flow.  Finally, the standards, rules and conventions are defined in a Technical Architecture at the bottom.4. The Way AheadThe SBA Road Map established the context in which the SBA Initiative is being developed.  As a result of the process of creating the Road Map, several core issues were identified, which, in turn have initiated a further cycle of refining and providing greater detail to SBA.  The Defense acquisition community has also begun development of a corporate Implementation Plan that will map the next steps in the transition from the current acquisition process to the new strategy.  Over the next twelve months, the plan is to take actions in areas such as:establishing a mechanism for full industry involvement;coordinating collaborative environments;evolving the Collaborative Environment Reference Systems Architecture;developing a DPD template;capturing current pathfinder work by programs, and planning for specific pilot or experiments;conducting business games on unresolved process issues;continuing the necessary science and technology researchThe results of these efforts will further improve our understanding of the opportunities of SBA and the processes involved as we migrate to this new way of doing business.5.	SummaryThere continues to be rapid development within the SBA Initiative. The principal challenges that remain are primarily cultural and procedural.  Although technical challenges lie ahead, there are no real technical showstoppers.  Identifying the specific changes in how we do business, and undertaking those changes is the real work in the months and years ahead.  The revolutions in military affairs and business affairs are changing what and how we buy.  The continued involvement of both the acquisition community and the M&S community will be needed to make SBA a reality.6.	References[1]	Dr. Patricia Sanders, Simulation Based Acquisition, Program Manager, Vol. 26 No. 140 (pp. 72-76), September - October 1997[2]	DTSE&E study: “Study on the Effectiveness of Modeling and Simulation in the Weapon System Acquisition Process”, October 1996[3]	Coopers & Lybrand study “Acquisition Reform Implementation, An Industry Survey”, October 1997[4]	ADPA, “Study on the Application of Modeling and Simulation to the Acquisition of Major Weapons Systems”, September 1996 [5] Acquisition Council draft A Road Map for Simulation Based Acquisition, 4 December 1998.Author BiographiesROBIN FROST is a Systems Engineer in the Systems Engineering Directorate of Office of the USD (A&T).  Ms Frost holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Systems Engineering from the University of Virginia.  She has worked as an engineer and an engineering supervisor for IBM and the US Navy, and has served in the Office of the Secretary of Defense since 1995.  She oversees OSD policies on M&S in Acquisition, Chairs the Acquisition Functional Working Group under the Acquisition Council and heads the Industry Government team researching SBA.DAVE THOMEN, a Senior Analyst with SAIC, provides technical support to USD (A&T) DTSE&E on M&S in Acquisition.  He holds a Master of Science degree in Operations Research from the Naval Postgraduate School.  He supported the development of the Simulation, Test and Evaluation Process (STEP) Guidelines and has participated on the Government Industry Team researching SBA. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  