Development of a Naval Training FederationJeffery J. BergenthalLockheed Martin Information SystemsAdvanced Simulation Center37 North AvenueBurlington, MA 01803(781) 505-9510 HYPERLINK mailto:jbergent@lads.is.lmco.com jbergent@lads.is.lmco.comDouglas ClarkAnalysis & Technology, Inc.Century Building, Suite 12502341 Jefferson Davis HighwayArlington, VA 22202(703) 418-8667 HYPERLINK mailto:dclark@atinc.com dclark@atinc.comPaul W. MaasselVisiTech, L.C.3107 North 18th StreetArlington, VA 22201(703) 391-6264 HYPERLINK mailto:maassel@visitech.com maassel@visitech.comDr. Carrie Karangelen RootConsultant5001 Fulton Street NWWashington, DC 20016(202) 686-1515 HYPERLINK mailto:carriek9@aol.com carriek9@aol.comKeywords:Consistency, FEDEP, Legacy Systems, Naval TrainingABSTRACT: Training systems within the US Navy and US Marine Corps have been developed to encompass a broad range of training requirements from part task trainers at the individual equipment level to engagement and campaign simulations that span the entire battleforce. Today’s focus on Network Centric Warfare requires interaction and cooperation across the range of Naval systems.  In order for the forces to train as they fight, the individual training systems, although potentially distributed in location, must be capable of being brought together into a training federation.  This requires not only interoperability among the trainers but also a common synthetic battlespace that maintains consistency across the training federation insuring a fair fight during the training exercise.  As a first step in attaining this goal, the Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) is being applied to development of a Naval Training Federation that will consist of a set of legacy training systems, the majority of which are not HLA compliant.  This paper outlines the rationale and goals of our approach, describes the application of the FEDEP in the development of this federation, and provides the current status of the Federation development.  The issues involved in establishing a federation across multiple legacy training systems and our evolving resolution of these issues are described. BackgroundBeginning in December 1998, a diverse group of Government and Industry personnel representing a wide range of Navy air, surface & subsurface trainers, and Marine Corps training systems have met to explore the value of the interoperation of training devices.  This series of ad hoc meetings and working sessions, chaired by PMS430, have focused on the High Level Architecture (HLA) impact on independent simulation & training systems, realizing there is now a methodology available for connecting these systems.  An analysis of a representative cross section of simulation & training systems has highlighted that the battlespaces represented in these systems differ in both content and resolution.  These differences currently preclude Naval training systems from operating together in a meaningful way.  As a result of this analysis, the most recent working sessions have focused on applying HLA concepts, tools, and processes to develop a means to enable the interoperability of Naval simulation & training systems in a consistent manner.  Interoperability not only requires the ability to communicate between simulations through an interface, it also requires consistency in the represented battlespace.  The envisioned solution, a reference Federation Object Model (FOM) for Naval Training, will provide a common battlespace representation allowing for interoperability and consistency between Naval simulation & training systems.  The initial step in realizing this solution will be the development of a Naval Training MetaFOM (NTMF) that will federate a selected set of Naval trainers and provide an initial object model from which the reference FOM may evolve. Rationale and GoalsDuring the working sessions, the value of a reference FOM for Naval training systems was discussed and evaluated.  The following sections provide an overview of the rationale for the selection of the reference FOM approach and the goals of the NTMF.RationaleThe rationale for the NTMF encompasses three needs within Naval simulation & training systems:The need for the force to be able to train as they will fight.The need for a common synthetic battlespace.The need for simulation & training systems to allow for evolution to match the evolution of the force, weapons systems, and threat.The utility of a reference FOM in addressing these needs is briefly discussed in the following sections.Train As the Force Will FightAs discussed in the Abstract, today’s focus on Network Centric Warfare requires the interaction and cooperation across the range of operational Naval systems.  For the forces to train as they fight, the same level of interaction and cooperation is required for the training systems.  As a consequence, individual training systems will be brought together into federations for specific training purposes.  Given the wide usage of common operational systems within the Navy and Marine Corps, the training device for an individual operating system may be required to interoperate with a large number of other training devices, each potentially in a different federation execution.  For example, an onboard trainer (OBT) that provides acoustic stimulation to acoustic sensors may be required to interoperate with other acoustic and non-acoustic OBTs and a Semi-Automated Forces (SAF) simulation system in order to facilitate ship-level team training.  Additionally, it may be required to interoperate with a helicopter training device to facilitate Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW) training for the helicopter crew.  FOMs could be developed for each federation, however, this will likely lead to multiple definitions of the same objects, attributes, and interactions that a federate may need to support.  The NTMF, on the other hand, would identify commonly used objects, attributes, and interactions that support multiple federations.Common Synthetic BattlespaceAs mentioned previously, the battlespaces represented in Naval simulation & training systems differ in both content and resolution.  For example, bathymetry may be modeled at different resolutions by each training system.  Some training systems may include bottom types and sub-strata, while others model only interactions with the ocean surface, treating the rest of the ocean as a homogeneous flat-bottomed box.  The portion of the battlespace a training system models is likely limited to the slice of the battlespace that training system has a defined requirement to represent.  The differences between these system requirements often impede interoperability.  Identifying these differences, understanding their criticality in simulating the synthetic battlespace necessary to meet training objectives, and providing an infrastructure that bounds the differences based upon the training objectives is critical to maintaining consistency among the training systems.  In addition to ensuring a fair fight in one-on-one and few-on-few level training exercises, a consistent view of the battlespace presented by different training systems is necessary to ensure that the decisions being made are accurate, reliable, defensible, and creditable in training exercises focused on command level decision making.  If the exercises do not provide this consistency, the effectiveness of the training is called into question.   This is the most critical and most challenging aspect of achieving true interoperability.  An added bonus of a common synthetic battlespace is reuse.  Most simulation & training systems are developed in isolation, resulting in the duplication of effort in creating models of the synthetic natural environment and battlefield operating systems.  A common synthetic battlespace will enable the reuse of software models as existing systems are upgraded, and as new systems are developed.Battlespace EvolutionThe Naval battlespace is not static.  The capabilities of Naval weapons systems, sensors, and support equipment continuously evolve through the application of technology advances to meet the challenges of a smaller force structure, the complexities of the littoral zone, and a changing threat.  As the operational equipment and missions evolve, simulation and training capabilities must also evolve to allow the force to maintain a high level of readiness.  Providing an open, extensible and configuration managed battlespace representation will allow for a more straightforward evolution of simulation & training systems than can be realized today.   With the implementation of the reference FOM, the definition of objects, attributes, and interactions that describe new operational equipment and missions would be determined by obtaining the consensus of the Naval training community, allowing all training systems to have common direction for their evolution.GoalsThe primary goal of the NTMF is to provide a means to facilitate the interoperability of Naval simulation & training systems in a consistent manner that supports training requirements The objectives set for the for NTMF development are as follows:Providing a venue for standardizing the representation of the Naval battlespace.  This includes the development of a common understanding of the required communications between Naval training systems, and the development of a specification and format for the data that will be exchanged between training systems.Providing a first instantiation of this Naval battlespace.Providing a recommended process to be used for connecting Naval training simulations together and for assessing the commonality and sufficiency of the battlespace representation.Evolving the FOM to satisfy all needs identified in Section 2.1.Secondary goals and objectives of the NTMF include:Eliminating the duplication of effort in recreating the battlespace by providing a standard battlespace representation that can be used for new simulation & training systems, pre-planned product improvements (P3Is), and updates to legacy systems.Providing a path for facilitating inter-service interoperability through the evolution of the NTMF.Developing the FOMIn April 1999, we began applying the Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) to develop the NTMF.  The FEDEP five step process was abbreviated, as shown in Figure 1.  The following sections describe the activities we are currently performing to define the requirements the expected activities that will be performed in developing the NTMF.Determining RequirementsOur activities to date in defining the requirements have focused on gathering information from a small set of existing and in-development simulation and training systems and determining the systems to consider for inclusion in the initial federation.    A small, less than five, set of funded systems will potentially be easier to federate than a large group of unfunded programs.Information Gathering and AnalysisIn order to rapidly gather and analyze a large amount of information regarding potential systems of interest, a detailed questionnaire was developed and provided to Points of Contact (POCs) that had been identified for each system.  The questionnaire contained three parts:Background – Requested information concerning the system’s name, general description, sponsor information, current status of the system, HLA compliance status, need date for the NTMF, training audience, functional usage, and force level (e.g., one-on-one, few-on-few, etc.).Interface Details – Requested information concerning other devices the system is interoperable with, if it has a Simulation Object Model (SOM) and has participated in a federation execution, devices the system is required to interoperate with, objects supported by the simulation and their level of detail, interactions and their level of detail, information that could be provided to other simulations, information that could be used from other systems, and the relationship of simulation time to real world time.Battlespace Description – Requested information concerning the battlespace represented in the system such as, sensors supported by the simulation, the portions of the acoustic, electro-magnetic, infrared, and visual spectrums modeled, types of servers used by the system (e.g., environmental server), the horizontal surface domain (global land, regional land, littoral, ocean, etc.), the vertical domain (ocean depth and/or atmosphere altitude), environmental representation and effects, to include the specific environmental models used within the system.Figure 1.  Abbreviated FEDEP Used For the NTMF Development.Responses to the first two parts of the questionnaire have been received from thirteen systems and an analysis of the responses was completed.  The detail between all responses was not uniform, and some responses were only partial.  Common characteristics between the systems providing responses most notably included:Most systems are currently interoperable through DIS protocols.Those systems that have federated, or will be HLA compliant in the near future, utilize either the RPR FOM or the STOW FOM.The general level of detail for objects within the systems is the entity level (i.e., at the vehicle/contact level).All systems operate with simulation time equal to real world time.Responses to the third part of the questionnaire are now due, and an analysis of these responses is expected to be completed in mid-August 1999.The data gathered from the questionnaire responses provides basic information on the functions of each system and its data requirements.  This information will assist the working group in identifying a set of federation use cases to feed the development of the federation conceptual model.    Systems of InterestFour training systems that are currently in-development, or undergoing upgrade, have been identified as having a near term need for the NTMF to support stated and/or perceived interoperability requirements.  These training systems are:Battle Force Tactical Training (BFTT) – Sponsored by PMS430, BFTT provides a closed-loop training capability by using an overarching synthetic battlespace to stimulate combat system sensors, weapons, and onboard trainers.  BFTT is programmed for 158 surface ships and 9 shore locations.Generic Acoustic Stimulation System (GASS) – Sponsored by PMA264, GASS provides acoustic stimulation for Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW) trainers.  GASS includes contact generation, propagation through non-isotropic acoustic environment and sensor simulations.  The EnVironmental Acoustic module is implemented as a server.SH-60B/R Trainer Upgrade – Sponsored by PMA205, the SH60 TU is an upgrade to existing Weapons Tactics Trainers (WTT) and Weapons Systems Trainers (WST) for the SH60 airframe.  The WTT/WSTs are designed to provide aircrew and sensor operator team training.Submarine Multi-Mission Team Trainer (SMMTT) – Sponsored by SEA92L17, SMMTT provides the capability to train submarine combat systems and acoustics crews in team, joint, and synthetic battlegroup operations. It consists of two (2) segments: combat control (SMMTT/CC), and acoustics (SMMTT/A). The major functions simulated by SMMTT are own ship and contact position keeping, environmental information, acoustics processing, navigation, weapons, and Over-The-Horizon. All major variants of submarine combat control and acoustics systems are supported.These systems, combined, cover a wide spectrum of the Naval battlespace, allowing the NTMF to be robust, and extendable in the future, into the full Naval battlespace.Defining Objects & InteractionsThe development of the NTMF will evolve through interactions among the working group participants.  The initial effort has been to compare the existing FOMs of the systems of interest.  The differences between the FOMs will then be examined for overlap.  This is a reasonable approach since most of the programs have based their FOM on versions of the RPR FOM.  It is expected that the common origin of these FOMs will limit overlap to areas not yet formally agreed upon in the RPR FOM.  It would seem useful to have a tool that is capable of comparing FOMs or to assist in their comparison.  Differences among them will be resolved, or at the least clearly defined prior to releasing an initial NTMF.Analysis of the use cases will identify the objects and interactions that must be represented in the federation.  This will be compared to the results of the FOM analysis providing further input for the NTMF definition.Throughout this process, the working group will participate in information exchanges with other FOM activities.  One such exchange for the RPR FOM has already occurred.  This will allow the NTMF to leverage other developments as well as lessons learned.Issues DiscoveredAn initial list of concerns raised by working group participants includes:C4I ConnectivityServers for weapons and other functionsSynthetic Natural Environment representationTiming IssuesRTI versionData Distribution ManagementData Collection and ReviewAvailable bandwidthOur expectation is that some of these issues will be further defined upon completion of the analysis of the questionnaire part 3 responses (e.g., Synthetic Natural Environment representation).  We plan to follow DMSO’s Environment Federation experiment and potentially leverage its results to address this particular issue.Completing the FOM DevelopmentAs previously stated the NTMF design activities were initiated in April 1999.  The analysis of the responses to Parts 1 and 2 of the questionnaire was completed and briefed to the working group in early June 1999.  The completion of the analysis of the responses to Part 3 of the questionnaire is planned for mid-August.  Following this, the identification of a small set of federation use cases will begin.  Concurrent with these activities, the FOM comparison will be performed.  A target date of Fall 1999 has been established for the release of a Beta version of the NTMF for evaluation.  Upon completion of the evaluation, a release of Version 1.0 of the NTMF will be made.  A target date has not yet been established for this release due to the uncertain nature of funding for fully funding Steps 4 and 5 of the FEDEP. Members of the working group are actively seeking an organization that Version 1.0 of the NTMF will be transitioned to for configuration management and future evolution into the reference FOM for Naval Training.  It is envisioned that this organization’s responsibilities would include:Providing procurement guidance, with regard to the NTMF, to USN and USMC training Program Offices.Supplying the NTMF, including supporting documentation, to USN and USMC Program Offices for use in Naval training systems.Providing technical assistance to USN and USMC Program Offices in integrating the NTMF into their training systems.Evaluating feedback provided by NTMF users and updating the NTMF to incorporate additions and refinements.Evolving the NTMF through the application of HLA tools and processes to encompass additional Naval simulation & training systems and/or evolution of the Naval battlespace.Lessons Learned From Applying the FEDEPAs we are still in the early stages of the federation development, only a few lessons have been learned to date.  Two lessons center around the questionnaire, and expose its strength, as well as its weakness.  Lesson 1:  Use of a questionnaire can result in the rapid collection of a large amount of information on potential federates in a format that allows for analysis of the collected data.  The questionnaire was developed by combining the inputs of five members of the working group, and testing it by having a system POC provide responses and feedback on the clarity of the questionnaire.  The data received was generally of the same level of detail, and was extremely useful.  While the same information could have been obtained from system documentation, the amount of time required to collect and analyze the data would have been significantly greater.Lesson 2:  Use of a questionnaire may result in receiving fewer responses than requested.  The questionnaire was distributed to POCs representing over twenty simulation & training systems.  Only thirteen responses were received, and some of these were not received on schedule.  Results of this type are typical with questionnaires, especially when the response is an unfunded activity.  In addition, only one program has responded at this time to the third part of the questionnaire.  Many programs are concerned with the cost of documenting their programs’ battlespace at the level of detail requested in the third part of the questionnaire.  The one program that responded already has a SOM developed.Lesson 3:  Maintaining cognizance of other federation activities provides the potential to aid a specific federation development effort.  As mentioned previously, we have, and will continue to participate in information exchanges with other federation activities during the NTMF development.  While there has been no tangible benefit at this point, we believe that leveraging other developments and lessons learned will significantly aid the NTMF development.  As an example, the Environment Federation’s effort to record the SEDRIS Data Representation Model and the SEDRIS Data Coding Standard in the Object Model Template and use it in a FOM may provide us with a comprehensive and unambiguous way of specifying the environmental components of the NTMF.AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to acknowledge CDR Peggy Feldmann of PMS430 for being the driving force in getting members of the Naval training community together to begin this effort.  We would like to additionally acknowledge Dick Esslinger, also of PMS430, for his efforts in setting the objectives for the working group and managing the efforts to develop the NTMF.Author’s BiographiesJEFFERY BERGENTHAL is a Senior Project Engineer in the Advanced Simulation Center (ASC) group of Lockheed Martin Information Systems and has over 13 years experience in modeling and simulation.  He currently provides management and key engineering services in several advanced technology development projects involving Computer Generated Forces being performed at ASC for PMS430, and STRICOM.  Mr. Bergenthal received his BS in Management Science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and his MS in Operations Research from the University of California, Los Angeles.  Prior to joining Lockheed Martin, Mr. Bergenthal served as an Air Defense Artillery officer in the US Army.DOUGLAS CLARK is Vice President of Analysis & Technology and has over 25 years experience in modeling and simulation.  He has led efforts developing signature data and models to support simulations, developed design concepts, and provided engineering support to the development of trainer systems and engineering federations.  Currently he is a member of the MARVEDS Working Group concentrating on issues associated with the development and use of synthetic environments and also supports the Battle Force Tactical Trainer (BFTT) technical team.  Mr. Clark has an MS in Electrical Engineering from the University of Connecticut.PAUL MAASSEL serves as Vice President for Systems Engineering at VisiTech, Ltd.  He has spent the past 10 years assisting the Navy and Marine Corps to develop new technologies in distributed simulation, artificial intelligence, and virtual reality, and he is a member of the SISO Synthetic Natural Environment Planning and Review Panel.  Mr. Maassel received his BSEE from Valparaiso University and MSSM from the University of Southern California. DR. CARRIE KARANGELEN ROOT has over 20 years of active participation in modeling and simulation. Currently she is providing design, development, and analytic support and guidance to the Generic Acoustic Stimulation System (GASS) program as well as analysis and guidance to the Navy Modeling and Simulation office (N6M) in the areas of ocean acoustics, synthetic environment modeling and simulation.  Dr. Root has a consulting business in engineering and management.  Dr. Root earned her doctorate from Catholic University in Fluid Mechanics.FEDEPSteps 4 & 5Use Case ScenariosFederationConceptualModel  Use Cases  Training ScopeDesignandDevelopFederationDevelopConceptualModelDefineRequirementsFOMScenarioFED File