Sensor Control PDUClifton A. ByrumNaval Surface Warfare Center(Code T13)17320 Dahlgren RoadDahlgren, VA 22448-5100(540) 653-7145 HYPERLINK mailto:byrumca@nswc.navy.mil byrumca@nswc.navy.milandGrayden T. FigartChugach Development CorporationP. O. Box 1478Dahlgren, VA 22448(540) 663-5434gfigart@crosslink.netKeywords:Sensor Control, DIS, PDUABSTRACT: The US Navy has developed a new Sensor Control PDU for use within its Distributed Engineering Plant (DEP) to support various efforts within the US Navy.  This new PDU supports the DEP users control of sensor detection of all tracks and all sensors throughout this DIS-based federation.  This new PDU is recognized by all federates within the DEP.  The Sensor Control PDU provides the opportunity to make any track a virtual stealth by controlling its probability of detection to the sensors within the federation one sensor at a time as desired.  It has been designed to be universally reusable by others in any DIS PDU compatible federation.  Its capabilities are readily adaptable to the HLA environment as an additional attribute for objects that will be “tracked.”  The distribution of this “Sensor Control” attribute can be filtered by setting the proper Data Distribution Management (DDM) controls.1. IntroductionThe US Navy has established the Distributed Engineering Plant (DEP) as a means to perform Battlegroup- and Battleforce-level interoperability testing in a land-based environment.  In some cases it has been deemed desirable to provide the user with exercise control functionality beyond the normal limitations that represent pure physics.  The particular functionality discussed within this paper is disclosure of any track in the exercise to any sensor in the exercise.2. BackgroundThe DEP is an ATM-based network of multiple US Navy Land-Based Sites as shown in Figure 1.  It serves as a test or engineering tool for system level or battlegroup level users.  Normally, the geography of the placement of objects and the application of physics to the scenario will control the visibility of tracks to the various sensors.  During some exercises, it becomes desirable to artificially control the probability of detection of selected scenario tracks to particular sensors in the exercise to examine atmospheric effects, aspect angle dependencies, and mechanical limitations.  The DEP designers have developed a special use of the existing DIS PDUs to implement the desired visibility of tracks to various sensors.  This capability is typically referred to as the Sensor Control PDU.3. The ConceptThe concept of this new Sensor Control PDU centers around the need to force atypical situations into an otherwise typical scenario as shown in Figure 2.  The basic desire is to test fades or dropouts which may occur due to atmospheric or radar cross section differences.  This new Sensor Control PDU helps the DEP users create non-standard situations to evaluate combat system performance and correlation algorithms.4. The Basic ConceptIn live operations, all sensors from all platforms attempt to “track” all other objects by emitting energy and sensing the echoes as shown in Figure 3.  In the DEP, this RF environment does not exist, but is simulated.  The requirement that inspired the development of the Sensor Control PDU was to limit the RF energy processing (echo) at the sensor level for a single track.5. The MethodThe existing DIS Simulation Management (SIMAN) PDUs provided the necessary framework for defining the required Sensor Control PDUs.  The intent was to make this new capability generic enough to work for most (or all) other DIS (or HLA) compliant combatant simulations.  This new class of SIMAN PDUs permits attenuation of every sensor’s ability to detect every object.  6. Sensor Control PDU DetailsThe Sensor Control PDU, shown in Table 1, is actually a standard SIMAN PDU (Action Request PDU) with a PDU Type of 16 and a Protocol Family of 5.  The Sensor Control PDU creates a paired relationship between one object, the track, and one or more sensors on one tracking platform object.  This PDU requires an Action ID to identify whether to turn the track ON to all indicated sensors, turn the track OFF to all indicated sensors, or set the provided Probability of Detection (PD) for the track to all indicated sensors plus five Fixed Datum records and zero Variable Datum records.  If the Action ID value indicates that the track detection is to be based on a PD, then the values in the five Fixed Datum records provide the required defining data.  The first Fixed Datum record provides a bit encoded indication of the sensors that are to be affected.  The second fixed datum record provides the Site ID of the object (track) for which the PD is applicable. The third fixed datum record provides the Application ID of the object (track) for which the PD is applicable. The fourth fixed datum record provides the Entity ID of the object (track) for which the PD is applicable. The fifth fixed datum record provides the PD value (from zero to one hundred) of the object (track) for which the PD is applicable.The reply to the Sensor Control PDU is actually a standard SIMAN PDU, shown in Table 2, with a PDU Type of 17 and a Protocol Family of 5.  It is an Acknowledge Action Response PDU.  It is sent from the original receiver to the original sender with a Response Status of either Complete or Request Rejected.  It contains a copy of the information that was in the original Sensor Control SIMAN PDU, except that the actual PD used and the sensors involved are supplied in the response.7. Proper UseThe Sensor Control PDU is initiated by the “Test Control” Source for the exercise.  Any site/application in the exercise can be the Test Control Source at any time during the exercise.  The Test Control Source will need the software to permit the Sensor Control PDU to be created.  The Test Control Source will transmit the Sensor Control PDU to the appropriate Receiving Site at the specified time (often immediately).  The Receiving Site will perform the desired action as warranted and return the Acknowledge Action Response PDU to the sender.  The single PD value will be applied to all specified sensors on the affected platform.  The Sensor Control PDU will apply only to the single specified object (track) and tracking platform.8. MisuseThe Sensor Control PDU was not designed to control disclosure of numerous tracks by numerous sensors.  Any desire to perform such a function should be implemented by designing some other mechanism.  Since the Sensor Control PDU creates a paired relationship between one track object and one or more sensors on one tracking platform object, it would require a large number of Sensor Control PDUs to create a wide coverage for an exercise with a large number of tracks and trackers.  The Sensor Control PDU was not created to control a scenario, but to provide a special tool for limited, occasional use.9. LimitationsThe Sensor Control PDU does not permit a single track to have limited disclosure to the sensors on several tracking platforms with a single issuance of the Sensor Control PDU.  It also does not permit the sensors on a single tracking platform to have limited detection of multiple tracks with a single issuance of the Sensor Control PDU.10. DEP Use of the Sensor Control PDUThe DEP design includes use of the Sensor Control PDU.  It is implemented in most of the US Navy Surface Combatant Wrap-Around Simulation Programs (WASPs).  Anyone desiring to interface with the DEP should expect the Sensor Control could be used within any DEP exercise.11. ConclusionThe Sensor Control PDU has been developed and proven to work as defined within the DEP.  It was designed for reuse by anyone desiring to include detailed sensor control in an exercise.Author BiographiesCLIFTON BYRUM is an Aerospace Engineer at the Naval Surface Warfare Center, Dahlgren Division (NSWCDD), Dahlgren, VA. He is currently the Simulation Manager for the US Navy’s Distributed Engineering Plant (DEP) project.  Mr. Byrum holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Mechanical Engineering and Computer Science from the University of Mississippi, MS.  Mr. Byrum has worked for NSWCDD for 14 years where he has been involved in the family of systems analysis of Strategic Defense Initiative (SDIO) and Theater Ballistic Missile Defense (TBMD) architectures and in the construction and use of large scale force-on-force simulation systems.  Mr. Byrum has also served as the Modeling and Simulation Manager for the Navy Area and Theater Wide TBMD program offices.GRAYDEN FIGART is a Sr. Data Management Specialist at Chugach Development Corporation working under contract to the Department of the Navy at the Naval Surface Warfare Center Dahlgren Division (NSWCDD), Dahlgren, VA.  He is supporting both the Battle Force Systems Branch, Maritime Defense Division, Theater Warfare Department (Code T23) and the Warfare Systems Division (Code T30).  Mr. Figart is currently providing systems engineering support to the Cooperative Engagement Capability (CEC) project and the Distributed Engineering Plant (DEP) project.  He is supporting the CEC Hardware-in-the-Loop (HWIL) project including its integration into the DEP.  Mr. Figart holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Mathematics from University of Richmond, VA.  Mr. Figart has worked for NSWCDD for over 31 years where he has been involved in the TALOS, MK-92, TARTAR, and AEGIS Tactical Systems and the Wrap-Around Simulation Programs (WASPs) for nearly every surface combatant. PAGE  6		1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop		Orlando, Florida, September 1999 