THEDEVELOPMENTAL TEST AND EVALUATION (DT&E) ACCREDITATION PROCESS OF THEINTEGRATED SYSTEM TEST CAPABILITY (ISTC)ELIZABETH VANN and DR. KEN KAWANOAEgis Research Corporation6703 Odyssey Drive, Suite 200Huntsville, Alabama 35806bvann@aegisrc.comTHOMAS P. LAMPTONSystem Test and Evaluation Directorate,National Missile Defense Joint Program OfficeSystem Test and Evaluation Directorate (JNT), ISTC ProgramPO Box 1500 (Attn: BMDO/JNTS)Huntsville, Alabama 35807lamptont@md.redstone.army.milKeywords:accreditation, hardware-in-the-loop, National Missile Defense, integrated ground test, software-in-the-loop, test and evaluation, verification, validationABSTRACT:  The Integrated System Test Capability (ISTC) is a National Missile Defense (NMD) System Test and Evaluation (T&E) Resource.  It is a source of system test data to support Developmental Test and Evaluation (DT&E), Operational T&E, Element Program Managers (PMs), the Lead System Integrator (LSI) and System Engineers.  It is used in the execution of Integrated Ground Tests (IGTs), and Pre-mission and Post-mission support of Integrated Flight Tests.  ISTC provides a controlled and repeatable test environment.  Because of ISTC’s hardware-in-the-loop (HWIL) architecture, it may be used to verify the functional interfaces between elements and will be a primary source of data to verify NMD system requirements.  ISTC’s software-in-the-loop (SWIL) architecture also supports verification of NMD software integration.In accordance with the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO) Directive 5002, accreditation of the ISTC is defined as certification by competent T&E authority that the ISTC produces a realistic, unbiased credible measurement of specific performance or suitability parameters when operated within a specific domain of scenario and environmental conditions for the examination of specific test issues.This paper describes the ISTC DT&E accreditation process, links the definition of the acceptability criteria to test requirements, and describes how necessary and sufficient information required for the accreditation of the ISTC framework, the individual integrated NMD element representation test articles and the integrated System Test Configuration are generated for the IGTs.1.0		INTRODUCTIONThis Paper presents an overview of the National Missile Defense (NMD) Developmental Test and Evaluation (DT&E) accreditation process for the Integrated System Test Capability (ISTC).  The process balances test resource credibility requirements against resource constraints and existing policy guidance.  The process reflects the strategy for government accreditation of the ISTC for DT&E and supports the accreditation decisions made by the NMD Joint Program Office (JPO).  It is compliant with existing guidance, including:DoD Guidance [DoD Directive 5000.59, and DoD Instruction 5000.61];BMDO Guidance [BMDO Directive 5002 and BMDO Directive 5011]; andUSD for Acquisition, OSD, Verification, Validation and Accreditation (VV&A) Recommended Practices Guide.The DT&E accreditation process also supports requirements levied on the ISTC PM to support the Early Operational Assessment (EOA). The agencies conducting the NMD EOA include the Joint Interoperability Test Command (JITC), the US Army Operational Test & Evaluation Command (OPTEC) and the US Air Force Operational Test and Evaluation Center (AFOTEC).The Operational Test Agencies (OTAs) are executing an independent accreditation process for ISTC and have developed a formal Accreditation Plan in accordance with respective Department of Defense (DoD), AFOTEC and OPTEC guidance. The EOA accreditation process is supported by the accreditation strategy used for DT&E.1.1	PurposeThis paper addresses how the ISTC accreditation process is an assessment of the simulation’s ability to support a developmental test.  Specifically, accreditation begins with the detailed planning for a test and the linkage of test objectives and test requirements to measurable acceptability criteria, which if satisfied, lead to a formal accreditation decision by the Accreditation Authority.1.2	OverviewThis paper describes the ISTC DT&E accreditation process, links the definition of the criteria to test requirements, and describes how necessary and sufficient information required for the accreditation of the ISTC framework is generated for the individual integrated NMD element representation test articles and the integrated System Test Configuration for the Integrated Ground Test (IGTs).2.0		BACKGROUNDWhat is the NMD System?The NMD system is the integration of weapon, sensor, battle management command, control, and communications (BMC3) systems designed to provide ballistic missile defense for the United States (US).  The National Ballistic Missile Defense (BMD) mission includes surveillance, warning, cueing, engagement of threat objects, and assessment, prior to impact on US targets.  This capability is achieved through integration of the NMD system with the Integrated Tactical Warning and Attack Assessment (ITW/AA) network to execute the BMD mission.  The NMD system will also provide support for other collateral military missions.  The NMD system is not being procured in a standard acquisition program but rather as a tailored Deployment Readiness Program (DRP).  The NMD system acquisition strategy is to position the US to respond effectively to a strategic ballistic missile threat, as it emerges.  Following the 1993 Bottom Up Review, the NMD program focused on maturation of the most challenging technical elements - often called the “long poles” - of the NMD system.  Based upon an Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) Program Review in March 1996, the NMD effort was shifted from a Technology Readiness Program (TRP) to a DRP.  Initially the Secretary of Defense directed a “3+3” development and deployment strategy for NMD as a risk reduction program to hedge against the emergence of an unexpected ballistic missile threat to the US.  In a January 1999 decision, it was stated that a system probably could not be deployed until 2005, two years later than previously predicted.  Consequently, the “3+3” strategy was replaced by a “3+5” strategy.  The supporting acquisition strategy provides for deployment of a limited NMD capability to protect against an unauthorized or accidental limited launch, or a Rest of the World (ROW), or rogue, threat.  The decision concerning deployment is deferred until the need is apparent, resulting in a two-phased program; one, initial development and the other, continued development.The initial development program focuses on deploying a limited capability system, known as Capability 1 (C1), in a short period.  C1 would be fielded if a deployment decision occurs under the “3+5” program.  If no deployment decision is made under “3+5”, the program will continue to focus on developing a fully capable system that would protect against a more robust, anticipated threat in the out-years.  The decision to field either system will be held in abeyance until the threat warrants a response.  This distinctive approach to system development requires a unique approach to test and evaluation.  Figure 2.1-1 depicts the NMD DRP approach.  Basic to the strategy is maximum use of the existing program created in the NMD TRP.  The system capability will grow through three avenues:  incorporating advanced technology, increasing element performance and adding additional elements.  System effectiveness will continue to improve as advanced technologies mature and are incorporated.2.2	What is the ISTC?ISTC is a NMD System T&E Resource and is therefore a test program source of system data to support Developmental Test and Evaluation (DT&E), Operational T&E, Element Project Managers (PMs), the Lead System Integrator (LSI), and System Engineering through the execution of IGTs, and Pre-mission and Post-mission support of Integrated Flight Tests (IFTs). ISTC provides a controlled and repeatable test environment as shown in Figure 2.2-1.  Because of ISTC’s hardware-in-the-loop (HWIL) architecture, it is used to verify the functional interfaces between elements and is also a primary source of data to verify NMD system requirements.  ISTC’s software-in-the-loop (SWIL) supports verification of NMD software integration.  The NMD system is tested to C1 scenarios that cannot be tested in a live test environment.  ISTC is used to evaluate target intercept boundary conditions.ISTC FrameworkThe function of the framework is to enable the aggregate NMD Test Configuration to behave as though all the test elements were operating in a real NMD scenario with real-time, real-world dynamic interactions and conditions.  The framework supplies each autonomous test node with its own simulated threat and associated environments, natural and man-made, that are uniquely tailored to the dynamic conditions of the node, yet globally consistent across all elements in the test scenario.  In this manner, ISTC exercises all NMD system elements simultaneously under a common set of synchronized battle conditions.The framework consists of the Common Test Environment (CTE) nodes and distributed software as well as assignable-resource processor nodes and Man-Machine Interface (MMI) displays, and any test data and control networks as required to control the test and collect data.Framework nodes provide common test services in support of the operation of the testbed.  These nodes and their associated software are collectively called the CTE. 2.2.1.1	Test & Control (T&C) NodeThe T&C node consists of a central computer with interfaces located at each ISTC node connected by a dedicated T&C communications network.  The T&C segment provides the ISTC user with the capability to plan, initiate, control and execute test; reduce and analyze the test results, in three distinct phases:Pre-Mission Phase:  In the pre-mission phase, the T&C segment supports the generation, editing and review of test configurations for future execution.Mission Phase (Run Time):  In the mission phase, during test operations the T&C segment performs real-time data collection and performance monitoring.Post-Mission Phase:  In the post-mission phase, after test execution, the T&C segment supports post-mission data reduction and analysis of test data. 2.2.1.2	Global Environment (GE) NodeThe primary purpose of the GE segment is to monitor and display the global truth data for the test scenario, for each element under test during execution of the test.  The GE segment maintains and displays the state and characteristics of all threat scenario objects, NMD element assets, natural and man-made objects.  During test execution, the GE segment monitors parameters and displays the current status and situation. The GE segment consists of a central computer and a dedicated GE communications network.The GE implements models of natural, man-made and induced environments in which an NMD system is required to operate.  A key requirement of the GE modeling effort for ISTC is to provide a consistent “truth” model of the expected physical environment across the entire system of multiple ISTC element nodes and nodes types.  Those environments that most affect the performance of the NMD system are the focus of the ISTC implementation. System Performance Monitor (SPM) and Timeline (TL) NodeThe purpose of the SPM is to display the progress and activity of a test in real-time or near real-time.  The SPM segment provides the test operator with an overview of the comparison of scenario “truth” as represented by the Common Test Environment (CTE) data set and the NMD architecture’s “perceptions” of truth as communicated between elements over the NMD communications network. The TL segment provides a real-time overview of the operational messages passed between nodes of the NMD system during test execution.2.2.1.4	External Interface Driver SegmentThe External I/F Driver segment provides the capability to exchange tactical messages with simulations of external elements that are not part of the NMD system.  Other external systems that interface with NMD: including intelligence, command and control centers, Global Positioning System (GPS), technical control, and the Integrated Tactical Warning/Attack Assessment (ITW/AA) system.  A wide variety of information flows to external systems associated with, and in support of the NMD operational mission.The External I/F Driver segment consists of one or more nodes that:Support the execution of NMD ISTC Test Configurations which specify element segments that possess “external” tactical message interfaces with elements for which test articles are not available, andComplete these “external” interfaces via receipt and/or injection of tactical message sets into the simulated tactical communications network in real-time during test execution.In addition to these nodes, surrogate element test driver models of individual elements are represented.  These digital models can be used to facilitate testing of the tactical elements. Element RepresentationsBattle Management, Command, Control and Communications (BMC3)The NMD BMC3 Element provides the equipment, communications, operations, procedures and personnel essential for planning, directing and controlling operations of assigned assets to accomplish the NMD mission.   The BMC3 Element consists of the following sub-elements:Battle Management, Command and Control (BMC2) which provides the command and control, planning, tasking, threat analysis decision aids and Human-In-Control (HIC) integral to the NMD system.NMD Communication Network which provides the data and voice communication links between all NMD Elements, external systems and NMD sites, and the network management.In-Flight Interceptor Communications System (IFICS) which supports communications between the BMC2 and the in-flight interceptor for the purpose of transmitting In-Flight Target Updates (IFTU), Target Object Maps (TOM) and receiving In-Flight Status Report data.Ground Based Radar-Prototype    (GBR-P)The GBR-P serves as the primary sensor for the NMD for scenarios with missile complexes that enter X-Band Radar (XBR) coverage.  The radar performs surveillance, acquisition, track, discrimination and kill assessment. Upgraded Early Warning Radar (UEWR)The NMD UEWR representations provide midcourse surveillance function of detecting and tracking all threat missile complexes.  For scenarios where there is no GBR coverage, the UWER representation serves as the primary sensor for the NMD.  The radar performs surveillance, acquisition, track and object classification support.  The UEWR representations currently include radar definition files containing radar parameters that can be used to represent both Position and Velocity Estimation Phased Array Warning System (PAVE PAWS) and Ballistic Missile Early Warning System (BMEWS) configurations depending on scenario requirements.Ground Based Interceptor (GBI)The NMD GBI representation simulates the boost, midcourse, and terminal hit-to-kill phases of the interceptor flight.  Also incorporated into the Exoatmospheric Kill Vehicle (EKV) representation are models of seeker hardware, optics, Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU), propulsion and associated vehicle control systems.  These math model representations also include models of the seeker sensor and data processing software.  ISTC Integration ProcessElement integration into the ISTC is a joint effort between the NMD Element Project Offices, the LSI and the ISTC Project Manager (PM) with his development, Verification and Validation (V&V) and Systems Engineering and Technical Assistance (SETA) contractor teams.  The integration of NMD element representations into the ISTC is based on the system engineering approach which considers top-level requirements that are  allocated into the ISTC architecture.  The integration of new components into the ISTC follows a general process that is appropriate for rapid prototyping development.  Each NMD Element PM is responsible for certification of their element representation in ISTC prior to its use in any formal system performance assessment.  The objectives of the PM’s certification of the respective element representation include: documenting the information necessary for accrediting the use of a particular M&S or HWIL configuration for use in a particular test;identifying its configuration;documenting its capabilities and limitations;identifying the element representation’s development and use history, if any;understanding the implications of its limitation and constraints in the test design.There are four phases in the element representation certification process as indicated:Delivery to ISTC.Integration into the ISTC Framework.Integration into the test configuration.Test configuration ready for the IGT.Figure 2.3-1 depicts the progressive integration process and associated accreditation of the ISTC and element representations within it.3.0 	ISTC Accreditation ProcessAccreditation of ISTC is a fundamental objective in ISTC development to ensure that test data and analyses generated by the ISTC can be used in any NMD contingency deployment decision.3.1	Purpose for the Accreditation ProcessConfidence in test resources and in the credibility of T&E results is imperative for the Deployment Readiness Review (DRR).  Deliberate VV&A of T&E resources like ISTC is crucial to the DRR.  Consequently, the need exists to regularize the accreditation process for test resources within the NMD JPO.The key objectives for any overarching accreditation strategy should include:being responsive to the information needs of the Accreditation Authorities,supporting accreditation decisions that support the DRR, andcomplying with the existing VV&A guidance applicable to Major Defense Acquisition Programs (MDAPs).The goal of T&E resources VV&A activities should be the accreditation of test resources and resultant T&E data for the DRR.The DoD Directive 5000.59 defines accreditation as “the official certification that a M&S is acceptable for use for a specific purpose.”  A significant requirement articulated in DoD Directive 5000.61 is: “M&S used to support major DoD decision making organizations and processes shall be accredited for that use by the DoD component sponsoring the application”.  The guidance of BMDO Directive 5011 indicates that:“BMD T&E resource accreditation includes specific V&V and credibility assurance steps designed to gather compelling evidence that T&E accurately reflects how systems work in the environments for which they are intended”, and“The T&E accreditation authority is the commander or senior civilian director of the test agency planning to use the test resource or data that it produces”.This guidance suggests that JNT and JNE are the responsible NMD JPO organizations that should serve as the Accreditation Authority for test resources used in DT&E.  For IGT-1A and IGT-3 the Director, JNT served as the Accreditation Authority with the concurrence of the Director, JNE.  It is expected these same organizations will serve as the DT&E Accreditation Authority for future IGTs. The BMDO Directive 5002 provides additional accreditation planning guidance applicable to T&E resources that will support Defense Acquisition Board (DAB) reports or programmatic decisions.  The BMDO Directive 5002 also indicates that all test resources used In DT&E that yield data for the DRR must be accredited.  It states:“The following resources require T&E accreditation:Models, simulations, and test bedsTargetsThreat systems and simulators”“V&V of test resources should not be confused with independent IV&V of software against software design specifications.  Such software quality assurance is only the first step in the VV&A process”“Not all test resources will undergo an extensive accreditation process.  Only those whose overall importance to a system acquisition warrant the expenditure will be accredited.”“Resources that yield data upon which acquisition decision will be made, must be accredited.”3.2	Scope of the Accreditation ProcessThe ISTC PM, System T&E Directorate (JNT), of the NMD JPO executes the ISTC V&V plan, generating records of original entry and preparing reports and necessary abstracts.  These materials are made available to the NMD Modeling and Simulation Advisory Panel (MSAP).  The NMD MSAP is a high-level advisory group with membership including senior representatives of government agencies and activities that may be potential Accreditation Authorities. The NMD MSAP periodically reviews and provides comments and suggestions throughout the planning and execution of the ISTC VV&A program.  The NMD MSAP also makes recommendations regarding potential BMDO and broader DoD accreditation decisions and provide notification to the NMD T&E PIPT.An overall process for accreditation of the specific ISTC configuration in a given IGT has been developed and is articulated in an NMD Capstone Accreditation Plan for DT&E/IGTs.  The NMD JPO accreditation process for ISTC includes:symbol 183 \f "Symbol" \s 10·	Reviewing configuration management procedures;symbol 183 \f "Symbol" \s 10·	Reviewing specific logical verification of developmental documentation to ensure that the ISTC adequately addresses tactical and technical considerations required for the Developmental Test and Evaluation (DT&E) application;symbol 183 \f "Symbol" \s 10·	Reviewing V&V documentation to determine the completeness of code verification, logical verification, sensitivity runs, and comparisons with external sources;symbol 183 \f "Symbol" \s 10·	Reviewing face validation which might include recognition of previous successful applications of the ISTC for similar purposes or recognition of acceptance by users;symbol 183 \f "Symbol" \s 10·	Reviewing how input data and scenario data are used or modified internally to the test resource,symbol 183 \f "Symbol" \s 10·	Reviewing the credentials and performance record of the personnel responsible for developing, running, maintaining, verifying and validating the ISTC;symbol 183 \f "Symbol" \s 10·	Reviewing comparisons of ISTC results with developmental test results and, if necessary, planning for future developmental testing to fill critical validation data voids for accreditation decisions;symbol 183 \f "Symbol" \s 10·	Reviewing comparisons of ISTC results with operational results such as OT data; andsymbol 183 \f "Symbol" \s 10·	Listing shortfalls of the ISTC with respect to the real world.Acceptability criteria are developed for each IGT by the ISTC PM in close coordination with the LSI, Element PMs, NMD JPO DT Test Organization, DT Test Planning organization, the NMD System Verification Team (SVT) and the Systems Engineer through the MSAP and IGT Technical Integration Management Team (TIMT) Meetings.  They will levy qualitative and quantitative measures of performance on the test resource. Limitations and constraints will be documented by the ISTC PM before each IGT is conducted. These criteria will be developed with due consideration of the IGT test design and test objectives, the ISTC design and the maturity of the elements incorporated into the configuration.  3.3  	Documentation of  the DT&E Accreditation ProcessCapstone Accreditation PlanTo streamline the process an NMD JPO Capstone Accreditation Plan for DTs/IGTs was developed to provide the overarching strategy in support of the planned IGTs.  The scope of this document includes the integrated NMD Element Representation Test Articles and the overall integrated NMD System Test Configuration.  The plan defines what data are to be obtained, how they are to be obtained, describes what resources are to be used, and identifies the organizations that will accomplish the evaluation to satisfy the requirements set forth by the NMD T&E community.  Detailed Accreditation PlanIndividual Detailed Accreditation Plans were, and will continue to be developed, coordinated and published, to address the Acceptability Criteria specific to each IGT.The Detailed Accreditation Plan was developed (Figure 3.3.2-1) with due consideration of the IGT test design and test objectives defined in the NMD Lead System Integrator (LSI) IGT Detailed Test Plan (DTP), the ISTC design, and the maturity of the NMD elements incorporated into the test configuration.  The acceptability criteria for an IGT address the:ISTC Common Test Environment (CTE) Framework which includes:Test and Control (T&C) – Premission, Run Time, and Post-MissionSystem Performance Monitor (SPM)Global Environment (GE)ISTC Test Drivers (Surrogate Element Models)Other Related Framework Considerations including Configuration Management (CM), Security, Year 2000 (Y2K) Compliance, and High Level Architecture (HLA) implementationElement V&V which includes:V&V DocumentationBaseline ConfigurationIndependent V&V AnalysisIdentification of Limitations and CaveatsElement Integration into the ISTC Framework which includes:CTE IntegrationBattle Management Command, Control, and Communications (BMC3) IntegrationUpgraded Early Warning Radar (UEWR) IntegrationGround Based Radar-Prototype (GBR-P) Integration Ground Based Interceptor (GBI)Test Readiness for the IGT which includes:Test Configuration ManagementTest Documentation and ProceduresTest Personnel QualificationsSeveral issues may impact the accreditation of ISTC for a given IGT.  These include:Limitations of representations. There are some test drivers that have been developed based on previous ISTC experience.  These test drivers may not have been formally verified and validated and as a consequence their accuracy and fidelity have not been characterized. The NMD element representations are limited to the functionality of  the prototypes currently under contract.These issues are captured as caveats and limitations and are integral to the Acceptability Assessment and Accreditation Recommendation Report.These documents are coordinated with key DT&E stakeholders and staffed through the NMD MSAP (formally the Test and Evaluation Resources VV&A Advisory Panel (TERVAP)). To address concerns and comments identified by the OTAs and other government agencies, the documents undergo a series of revisions; and are subsequently approved.The scope of each document includes the definition of exit criteria for the NMD Element Representation Test Articles and the overall integrated ISTC Test Configuration for the respective IGT.Acceptability Assessment and Accreditation RecommendationThe results of the accreditation process identified in the NMD JPO Capstone Accreditation Plan and the Detailed Accreditation Plan are provided in an ISTC Acceptability Assessment and Accreditation Recommendation Report specific to an IGT.  This report provides the developmental tester and evaluator with an assessment of the ISTC’s capabilities for the conduct of a given IGT. It also documents the ISTC V&V evaluation results and recommendations.The report formally documents the NMD JPO assessment process, results and the accreditation recommendations for the utilization of ISTC in executing a given IGT.  These recommendations are provided for consideration, to the developmental T&E accreditation authority.  This data is also furnished to the OTA accreditation authority. Accreditation by JNE and JNTThe ISTC PM/LSI Element Integrated Product Team (IPT) will deliver to the NMD JPO, System T&E Director, and the Director, Systems Engineering, a Joint Memorandum for Record (MFR) recommending accreditation of the ISTC for a particular use.  Upon accreditation by the Directors, a Letter of Accreditation that formally documents the accreditation decision is executed.  The baselined configuration is then made available for NMD IGT test activities, subject to the identified limitation and constraints for use.4.0 	Roles and ResponsibilitiesOpportunities exist in clearly delineating a formal DT&E accreditation process for ISTC that is:cost effectivebased on a clear understanding of the problem and application;using a structured method for collecting, organizing, recording, archiving, and retrieving accreditation support data;leveraging LSI V&V activities and results without total reliance on them; andbuilding on V&V activities / plans already underway.The strategy culminates in a structured method of assessing suitability against well-defined requirements and provides a well-documented justification for any DT&E accreditation decision.JNE/JNT Accreditation Support RoleThe JNE and JNT Directors serve as the Joint Accreditation Authority for Developmental T&E (DT&E).The Director, System T&E, NMD JPO, is the DT&E Accreditation Authority for all NMD T&E Resources, and the Approval Authority for T&E Resources VV&A plans/programs through the NMD Modeling & Simulation Advisory Panel (MSAP) VV&A Subgroup.  The Director, System T&E, shares the authority with the Director, Systems Engineering, NMD JPO for the accreditation of a given integrated ISTC configuration for use in a specific application.They may:accredit the ISTC, as is, for the IGT,accredit the ISTC, with caveats for the IGT,require modification to the ISTC prior to the IGT Runs for Record,require additional V&V prior to making an Accreditation Decision, ornot accredit the ISTC for the IGT.NMD MSAP VV&A SubgroupThe NMD MSAP VV&A Subgroup serves as the forum for discussing and staffing all NMD MSAP VV&A actions.     They are focused on VV&A issue resolution, and report through the NMD T&E Program Integrated Product Team (PIPT) to the Director, System T&E and through the Systems Engineering IPT to the Director, Systems Engineering.ISTC Product Manager (PM) The ISTC PM serves as the Lead POC for ISTC V&V Activities and is responsible for coordinating all ISTC V&V data requirements required by the OTAs and other Accreditation Agencies.The ISTC PM is responsible for GE, T&C, SPM and NTE interfaces between segments and nodes and is jointly responsible (with Element PMs) for meeting interfaces between NTE and PTE for each element node.The ISTC PM is responsible for Phase 2, Phase 3, and Phase 4 and provides an accreditation assessment and recommendation to JNE/JNT.NMD Element PM Accreditation Support RoleEach NMD Element PM/LSI is responsible for their respective Element Representation and serves as Lead POC for ISTC element related V&V activities.Each is jointly responsible (with the ISTC PM) for meeting interfaces between the Node Test Environment (NTE) and the Processor Test Environment (PTE) for their respective element node.The NMD Element PM/LSI is responsible for executing Phase 1 and supporting Phases 2, 3 and 4 of the Element Integration/Test/Accreditation Process and also responsible for identifying caveats and limitations for their respective element.Each Element PM is responsible for certifying the Element Representation meets the PM’s expectations.Operational Test Agency (OTA) The OTAs are responsible for accreditation of NMD T&E Resources for Operational Test (OT) in accordance with their agency policies and procedures, however, the OTA’s Accreditation is supported by the V&V done by the NMD JPO.  5.0		Observations and ConclusionsSeveral observations are supported by AEgis Research experience in Accreditation Planning for ISTC and other similarly complex tools.  5.1	ObservationsLessons learned in previous IGTs have been considered in developing the current accreditation process for ISTC.  Early participation of Element PMs and the LSI in defining the acceptability criteria for accreditation is essential, as well as the early identification of Element and ISTC Framework caveats and limitations.  Also, the early designation and use of a common integration scenario is needed.  Full coordination of staff actions at the appropriate level is required.5.2	ConclusionsThe results of the planned ISTC accreditation effort provide the developmental tester and evaluator with an assessment of the ISTC capabilities to support an IGT and support the OTA Accreditation.  The ISTC Capstone Accreditation Plan and Detailed Accreditation Plan are used to prepare an Acceptability Assessment and Accreditation Recommendation Report for each IGT.  Accreditation is based on data from the element ISTC integration activities, test configuration integration, and the acceptability criteria for each IGT.6.0		REFERENCES[1]	National Missile Defense Joint Program Office, “Capstone Accreditation Plan for Developmental Tests/Integrated Ground Tests”, 11 January 1999, Report No. EJ-ISTC99-RP006_rB.[2]	National Missile Defense Joint Program Office, “Detailed Accreditation Plan for Integrated Ground Test-4”, 9 June 1999, Report No. EJ-ISTC99-RP013_rC.[3]	National Missile Defense Joint Program Office; “ISTC Acceptability Assessment and Accreditation Recommendation Report for Integrated Ground Test-3”, 28 January 1999, Report No. EJ-ISTC99-RP002_rB.[4]	National Missile Defense Lead System Integrator, “Integrated Ground Test-4 Detailed Test Plan”, 21 May 1999, Report No. D743-10148 Draft.[5]	Vann, Elizabeth, “Incorporating the Integrated System Test Capability (ISTC) into System Integrated Exercises (SIE) for the National Missile Defense (NMD) Test Program”, Proceedings of the 1998 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization, Inc., September 9-13.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThis work was supported by the Integrated System Test Capability Product Office, System Test and Evaluation Directorate of the National Missile Defense Joint Program Office.AUTHOR’S BIOGRAPHIESELIZABETH VANN is a Systems Engineer with AEgis Research Corporation in Huntsville, Alabama.  She supports the Accreditation of the ISTC and previously served as the VV&A Lead Engineer for the Common Test Environment areas of the ISTC. Miss Vann was awarded a BS degree in Computer Science from the University of Alabama-Huntsville (UAH).DR. KEN KAWANO is a Senior Systems Engineer with AEgis Research Corporation in Huntsville, Alabama. He received a BS in Chemistry from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts and a PhD in Organic Chemistry from the University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin.THOMAS P. LAMPTON is an Aerospace Engineer with the US Army Space and Missile Defense Command (USASMDC) assigned to the System Test and Evaluation Division, US Army National Missile Defense Joint Program Office (NMD JPO) in Huntsville.  He serves as the government's Resources Integration / Element Coordinator for NMD test resources, including the real-time, NMD element simulations within the NMD Integrated System Test Capability.  Mr. Lampton has a BS in Aerospace Engineering from the University of Notre Dame, and is pursuing a Masters in Business Administration from the Owen Graduate School of Management, Vanderbilt University. Figure 3.3.2-1  Scope of IGT-4 Accreditation ProcessFigure 2.3-1 Element Representation Accreditation Process.Figure 2.2-1: ISTC System DiagramFigure 2.1-1 NMD Deployment Program Approach