A Simulation Environment for Landmine Alternative Concept ExplorationKeith Snively, Picot ChappellE-OIR Measurements, Inc.P.O. Box 1240Spotsylvania, VA 22553-1240Pam JacobsNight Vision and Electronic Sensors Directorate (NVESD)Ft. Belvior, VAKeywords:Mine, Landmine Alternatives, Soldier Training, Man-in-the-Loop, Mine Ban Treaty, Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS).ABSTRACT: The Presidents Decision Directive 64, PDD-64, establishes objective dates to eliminate the use of all landmine systems, especially the anti-personnel (AP) component and current mixed anti-tank(AT)/AP mine systems.  The Tech base community has been charged with investigating alternatives that will provide equal or better operational capability than that provided by AP mines.   To support the investigation and evaluation of concepts for anti-personnel (AP) landmine alternatives, a simulation environment is being created to  allow a first operational evaluation of  the alternatives to traditional AP mines and the impact of these alternatives to real world scenarios.  The Comprehensive Mine Simulator (CMS) is a legacy DIS application originally developed as part of the Joint Countermine Operational Simulation ( JCOS) program  to provide an entity level, high fidelity, representation of landmines.  This paper discusses how the CMS application is being modified to also support the representation of command-detonated munitions and other AP landmine alternatives.  Additionally, we discuss the development of a “notional”control station for the command-detonated mines which gives the exercise participants, namely the soldier, the type of interface and information he would have in the field. Next we discuss the other legacy applications that are being utilized to create a realistic environment for the minefield operator and facilitate analysis of the results.  This environment will require the soldier to perform the same mission with new components not fielded or utilized today.  Finally we talk about the exercises that will be run to 1) analyze landmine alternative concepts, 2) develop tactics, techniques and procedures (TTPs) and 3) provide training for using these landmine alternatives.OverviewBased on the Presidential Directive of 23 June 1998, the Unites States will end all use of Anti-Personnel Landmines (APL) outside of Korea by 2003 and will mount an aggressive program to have APL alternatives (APL-A) ready for Korea by 2006. In addition, there will be a search for alternatives to APL in general and for mixed minefields,  i.e. AT and AP together, that are militarily advantageous, cost effective and safe.  The program to accomplish this goal consists of three Tracks: Track I is a quick reaction program to buy three possible short-term solutions to APL,; Track II is a DARPA sponsored effort for a “self-healing” minefield that refills itself after a breach,  Track III is an Advanced Concept Technology Demonstration (ACTD) to look at near, mid, and far term alternatives to  mixed mine  and  APL systems for fielding in the 2006-2015 period.  The concepts for Track III can be materiel solutions that involve new developments, as well as non-materiel solutions that utilize existing or soon to be fielded items in new ways, to replace the APL functions.NVESD and ARDEC will be supporting Modeling & Simulation for the Track I and Track III Programs. Our role is to support virtual training for Track I, perform virtual exercises incorporating the materiel solutions of Track III and excursions after the live exercise for the Track I concepts. To perform these activities, new tools and simulations are needed in addition to our existing simulation applications. The primary driver for this effort is that mines may no longer be indiscriminate or target activated, and there must be some method of man-in-the-loop (MITL) control. The  operator or local commander will be required to make decisions to activate and fire the munition based on visual identification of the target or situation awareness data.   The ramifications of this operational concept and the effects of the specific materiel solutions are not known.  Our efforts will be focused on examining the MITL interaction and what changes in Tactics, Techniques and Procedures (TTPs) may be required to optimize use of a given materiel concept. The results of our experiments will be given to other agencies for incorporation in high level models and the results of all these M&S efforts will support the selection of  alternatives to APLs and APL components of mixed mine systems.The M&S effort began with a series of exercises in late 1998 and early 1999 to evaluate the state of the tools that might be required for this program.  As a result of this test effort, we identified several key areas upon which to focus our simulation developments: development of materiel solution specific capabilities, such as command detonation; development of mine/minefield control stations, both generic and contractor specific; visual sensor support for realistic portrayal of an IR-Sensor view of the battlefield and particularly of the human entities on that battlefield;  incorporation of new communications effects models, particularly between the minefield and its control station.  Details of these developments are described in the following paragraphs. Landmine Alternatives SimulationThe initial effort involved development of capabilities specific to several of  the possible material alternatives.  This effort focused on creation of Command Detonated Mines, both generic and specific to proposed  alternatives.  ARDEC chose to use the Comprehensive Mine Simulator (CMS), an existing DIS mine simulation application developed as part of the Top Level Demonstration (TLD) with continuing expansion to support Countermine Programs, as the platform for development of this capability.  The CMS simulates mines at the entity level, allowing for a high fidelity representation of a wide variety of mines and  is interoperable with ModSAF and other simulation tools.  CMS is also an open source application freely available to the government.ARDEC first developed a general capability for the representation of Command Detonated or MITL mines, which were later incorporated into the CMS baseline by NVESD and further developed.  These command detonated mines provide for basic MITL operations.  Once emplaced, the operator is able to detonate the mines by using a toggle button.  The mines can also be detonated by selecting it on a Plan View Display (PVD)   The initial concepts fell into three categories:Bounding Disk Mines.   I.e., , anM16A2 Anti-Personnel mine equipped with a command detonation fuze.Directional Command Detonated Mines.  I.e., Claymore mine.Area Denial Mines.  I.e., munitions that  the operator can fire to several locations within a specified radius.Each of the above mine types can also be given multiple shot capability.  To incorporate these new munition effects, several modifications to ModSAF were also required.  The DIS protocol does not allow for directional or area detonations, such as the type required to represent a Claymore.  Therefore, to simulate the lethality effects of this mine, CMS looks for any targets inside the footprint of the mine detonation and individually targets those entities with a Detonation PDU.  Typically ModSAF represents the targets.  However, ModSAF will assess indirect fire damage to entities in proximity of a direct fire detonation.  Therefore a new munition needed to be inserted into ModSAF that did not cause indirect fire damage to any entities.  Thus, only those entities targeted by CMS would be damaged by the directional mines.To support use of command detonated mines and facilitate target identification, several Stand Alone Sensors were also developed inside CMS.  These sensors revolved around the concept of acoustically triggered sensors that would send a proximity alarm to the minefield operator.  The sensors can also be configured to transmit an approximate target position. A remote image sensor is also incorporated into CMS.  When activated, this sensor will control the display location of an external 3D viewer, such as MaK Stealth.  The remote imaging sensors can be configured with time delays to account for transmission bandwidth.  However, to date we have not incorporated effects to account for bandwidth limitations on the frame rate for transmission of these images.To command all these mine and sensor types, the operator uses the CMS GUI.  Typically the display of entities is turned off to more realistically portray the amount of information the operator would have on the battlefield.  Also,  a pop-up window was added that alerts the operator when a command detonated mine is tripped.  Since the exact locations of the munitions are not necessarily known by the operator, this window only states that a mine had been tripped in a field, but does not indicate which mine. The display of these mines can also be hidden on the CMS PVD.After the excursion runs in December and January, we began developments  to accurately represent the behavior of the Track I contractor’s   Anti-Personnel Landmine Alternatives.  To represent these systems, we first needed to add a more robust definition of tripwires within the CMS.   Previously, tripwires were not explicitly defined in CMS, since the focus had traditionally been on Anti-Tank mines.  The tripwires were designed as radiating outward from the center of the mine.  In order to accommodate current and future concepts, additions were made to the mine parameters file that allow the user to specify the number of trip lines attached to a particular mine as well as the angular displacement between adjacent lines.Second, a capability to place mines in several different modes needed to be developed.  This capability allows the operator to dynamically switch how the mines react to activation during an exercise.  As with all the developments for the CMS, efforts were made to keep the capability as flexible as possible.  Hence the modes available were not dictated, but depended upon the concept model for the particular mine.Finally, a new editor window was developed to give a more realistic style interface for controlling Command Detonated Mines or postulated remote sensor fields.  The editor can control a single minefield at a time.  This window allows an operator to set the mode of mines in a particular minefield and contains a “Fire” button.  This button will become active when any mines in the particular minefield are activated.  The operator can choose to detonate all tripped mines by using this button.Remote Command and ControlAllowing for command and control of the CMS Command Detonated Mines only through the CMS GUI became ultimately inflexible.   This approach was limiting since any interface concept would be constrained by the CMS GUI design and still presented more information than the soldier could normally receive, even though attempts were made to limit that information. .  For instance, the application needed to be modified during excursion runs when indirect fire (artillery) detonations started appearing on the minefield operators display.   In addition, with the CMS GUI as the minefield control station, the exercise did not accurately represent the communication complexity between the operator and the mines.  Thus, NVESD began developing a separate remote Minefield Control Station, which would speak to the CMS command detonated mines over the DIS network. Shortly after, other government groups and contractors expressed an interest in developing separate control stations that could interface to the CMS.  In order to allow for the use of various minefield control stations the  CMS, NVESD, ARDEC and TSI developed the  “CMS Interface Specification to  Command Detonated Mines” to allow for command and control of munitions through DIS.  The interface specification consists of nine messages.  Four types of messages are sent from the CMS mines to a control station, namelythe Configuration Status, Fire Event, Activation and Invalid Command Received messages and  five messages are sent from a controller to the CMS mines, namely the Set Controller, Set Mode, Fire Command, Status Request and Set Self-Destruct Time messages.  These messages then are packaged inside the data portion of a Signal PDU. [3]Currently two minefield control stations are under development.  The first, being developed by ARDEC, will be placed on a PC platform and consistent with the Control Station being proposed by one of the contractors.  The other is being developed by NVESD as a generic controller containing the ability to communicate with more than one contractor’s proposed alternative concept.  Additionally, TSI is developing an interface application which will translate the above CMS interface messages to the form used by the actual LandWarrior control station.  This station is used by the Alliant Corp. mine concept.  In this manner, CMS will be used as a training tool for using the LandWarrior controller in the upcoming exercises.Communications ModelingOne of the most important and complex effects of using a Man-In-The-Loop system alternative to traditional anti-personnel landmines are the effects of communication routing and propagation between the minefield control station and the command detonated mines or remote sensors on the battlefield.  The reliability of this communication traffic can have significant influence on the effectiveness of proposed alternative mine schemes, both in the arrival and latency of the messages.  NVESD began working on a method to use  physics based models to predict the transport of  minefield command and control messages over various existing radio systems.  NVESD chose to use the Communications Effects Simulator (CES) as the model.  The CES was developed by CECOM North and originally used as part of the STORM project.  NVESD was also able to have CECOM modify the CES in order to be compatible with CMS.The goal is to insert this model between the NVESD generic control station, discussed in the previous section, and the CMS mines.  First, CMS required the development a radio attached part,  capable of sending the interface messages using the DIS Transmitter and Signal PDUs.  The CMS radio would also need to be flexible, allowing the user to configure the parameters for each radio.  Currently, a radio database is being developed in CMS from which one can be selected to attach to mines and sensors when creating them in CMS.  Therefore, minefield designers will have a lot of flexibility in the types of communication devices that are employed as part of the minefield.   The Transmitter PDU can then pass the radio type and configuration information to the CES.The integration of CMS with the CES required developing a communication protocol which would allow the CES, residing on a separate platform, to receive the location of the transmitting and receiving entities.   The insertion of additional data, which included the sender’s id and location along with the receiver’s id and location, into the data portion of the Signal PDU is then necessary since many of the entities sending and receiving the messages are mines.   Mines do not send Entity State PDUs and there was no method to communicate to the model where the various entities are located. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1 shows the format of the Signal PDU, which is modified to contain sender and receiver information for the CES.The protocol also differs from traditional use of the Transmitter PDU, as the mine radios only send the Transmitter PDU when a message is sent rather than on a heartbeat.  The heartbeat concept is avoided since there potentially could be thousands of mines on the battlefield with associated radios and these PDUs would unduly increase the amount of network traffic.  The other change is the use of the radio ID.  When CMS or the Control Station sends a transmission, an odd radio ID is used.  The CES uses the information in the beginning of the data portion of the Signal PDU to determine which of the receiving entities, if any, can successfully receive the message.  The receiver list is then modified to reflect only those entities and the message is re-transmitted with an even Radio ID.  The CMS or Control Station will then only receive transmissions with a valid Radio ID and only those entities specified on the receiver list will process the message. Figure 2 shows the transmission of these messages over the DIS network.Terrain Representation and Visual SupportThe Paint-the-Night capabilities were incorporated to the LACE program for two purposes: to present the Minefield Operator with realistic visual information for performing target acquisition and to insure the presence of a high resolution, correlated, synthetic terrain across ModSAF, CMS and the 3D scene.  The PTN program has tools to create a 3D-terrain skin from Digital Terrain Elevation Data (DTED) and a topographic imagery to extract terrain features.  The correlated ModSAF c7b terrain files can be created from the same data. [2] The CMS application also uses the c7b terrain file.  This terrain creation process ensures terrain correlation and that entities do not need to be “clamped” to the ground in the 3D scene in order for them to appear to be on the terrain skin.  This correlation also helps provide more of a “Fair Fight” situation, where human operators using a 3D display are not given more or less advantage with intervisibility than the simulated forces. [2] Another advantage of PTN is the capability to build high-resolution terrains.  The nature of infantry encounters with close combat situations necessitates the use of a higher resolution terrain for the troops to maneuver in a realistic and more concealed manner.  The higher fidelity terrain also presents the human observer with a more realistic and complex scene in which to acquire targets.  For the initial excursion runs, an 8-meter post spacing terrain was utilized.  Even given the density of the elevation data, a JCOS variation of ModSAF 4.0 was able to handle troop movement and intervisibility calculations readily.For visual sensor support, PTN also provides a synthetic 8-12 micron, 3D, infrared (IR) terrain and IR vehicle and infantry models.  For the excursion runs the actual scene was shown through MåK Stealth, running on a 4 processor SGI Onyx with Infinite-Reality graphics board.  Due to the high fidelity nature of the scene, only a small patch could be loaded into the viewer, however this limitation did not present any problems as the battle was largely confined to this area. The PTN scene provides the soldier with a realistic view of the engagement area as either a remote sensor feed or from an overwatch position on the battlefield.  The viewpoint can be slaved to a CMS imaging sensor, allowing the operator control of this view through the CMS interface.  This control capability will also be incorporated into the NVESD generic minefield controller application.    These tools will help evaluate the utility of imagery being provided to the minefield operator. The current limitation in the PTN display is the representation of individual civilians and combatants and the representation of obscuration smoke.  The infantry models are static: they do not assume various stances of individuals nor do the models articulate.  The operator often then was presented with a target which was too easily acquired, as they soldiers always stood fully upright.  To correct this representation, Boston Dynamic’s DI-GUY package will be incorporated into the PTN scene.  This effort will be accompanied by an IR sensor data collection of various military and civilian targets to give realistic textured appearance to the DI-GUY model in PTN.A simple smoke representation will be incorporated into the scene for the next set of exercises.  This smoke will essentially consist of a persistent plume around smoke munition detonations.  The viewer will be switched to Centric’s EasyScene software to handle this smoke.  The EasyScene viewer is also capable of handling the high fidelity terrain more efficiently, allowing larger terrain patches to be loaded during an exercise.The longer term solution to smoke will come as part of a new viewer for the Paint -the -Night scene.  The PTN group at NVESD is in the process of writing an HLA compliant, SGI Performer based viewer.  The viewer will incorporate the DI-GUY infantry model as well smoke obscurant effects. This viewer will also have the advantage of being freely available to government agencies.Computer Generated ForcesModSAF provides the friendly (blue) support forces along with enemy (red) forces.  The ModSAF Plan View Display (PVD) also provides the situational awareness for the Blue and Red force commanders during exercises.  For the excursion runs, a JCOS variant of ModSAF 4.0 was used.  This version provided the capabilities of ModSAF 4.0 along with a reliable representation of the sweep team breach behavior, necessary to support the Red force once encountering the minefield.  This version of SAF also had already been configured to run with CMS and was the most widely tested with CMS. While this version of ModSAF worked adequately for evaluation of the simulation representation of the AP mine alternatives and the minefield control interface presented to the soldier participant, there were several limitations.  The most glaring limitation was the inability to represent individual soldiers in close formation moving on the battlefield.  For this reason, the number of Blue and Red force troops was limited during the excursion runs.  The small number of troops likely oversimplified the situation that would be presented to the minefield operator during an actual battle.  The operator did not have to deal with a large number of troops moving through the minefield simultaneously.  Currently, both JSAF 3.4 and ModSAF 5.0 are being investigated to provide individual soldier representation during future exercises.Another limitation with ModSAF is intervisibility.  While ModSAF uses the Johnson Criteria, developed at NVESD, for predicting how entities can visually acquire other entities, the data driving the model allows entities to see each other far too easily.  A test scenario showed a dismounted US soldier (M224) could detect another soldier at well over 75 meters on a starlit night without any light amplification device or infrared sensor.  Before future exercises will be run, the sensor modeling division at NVESD will provide performance data for a selected set of visual sensors, including the naked eye.  Further, detection is represented inaccurately on the ModSAF PVD.  When a troop detects a target of the opposite force, the target’s exact position and affiliation is displayed on the PVD even if the simulated entity can not identify the target as friendly or enemy.  Therefore the Blue or Red force commander is aware instantly of any detected targets and receives ground truth data on that target, adversely affecting the flow of the battle.  The compromise solution to this problem is to make target acquisition more difficult for the SAF forces in the data files.  Therefore, detected targets would not appear on the PVD until their affiliation could actually be determined.Finally, the effects of obscuration smoke on visibility do not behave realistically.  A similar intervisibility test as above was run, this time during a brightly-lit day with no wind.  Debugging output was added to the ModSAF code to print the effect of the obscurant on intervisibility between the US Soldier looking at a target across a flat area.  A round of 60-mm WP smoke was dropped between the two entities and would predictably partially or fully block intervisibility for 20 seconds.  Only for 7 to 8 seconds was the target fully obscured, even though real world measurements of the same munition predict an effect lasting for 1.5 to 10 minutes.  Even the largest WP round, 155mm had an effect only lasting 3 to 5 minutes.  However, after long term use of this particular munition, a “black out” condition would occasionally occur where intervisibility would be blocked for 15 to 30 minutes.  This occurrence was unpredictable.  Nevertheless, we hypothesize that the ineffective smoke munitions is mainly due to ModSAF referencing Phase 1 of the COMBIC smoke using pre-computed tables to predict the movement of the smoke.[4] (Note: OpenScene contains the capability to dynamically calculate the various phases of the COMBIC smoke model.)  As many of the soldier participants feel the use of obscuration smoke is important during battlefield simulation, we suggest that the ModSAF/OneSAF development program improve the representation of COMBIC smoke and its effects on intervisibility.  Also, a means to correlate this smoke to its representation in a 3D viewer should be supported.ExercisesThe first activity utilizing the CMS and the other components in support of the mine alternatives program will be training the troops that will participate in the live test of the mine systems delivered to PM-MCD. This training, in August 1999, will give the troops hands on experience with the minefield controllers and the operational concept for these mines and will give them an opportunity to modify the TTP’s if necessary. From August until the live test in October, a series of experiments will be run at NVESD/ARDEC to perform a baseline set and do a limited number of TTP excursions from the planned live test. Following the live test, simulation to duplicate the live will be run and additional excursions if necessary. These first experiments will also be the start of the Track III exercises.  Added runs will be made utilizing the PM-MCD concepts in the mixed-minefield context, followed by the new material concepts proposed by a panel of experts. Experiments for the mixed mine alternatives will continue through the 1st and 2nd quarter of FY00. Troops stationed at NVESD/ARDEC and the Engineer School, as well as other Battlespace Battlelabs will be brought in as needed to participate in these experiments. References[1] J. Roberts, L. Kennedy: `` The Communications Effects Federate (CEF) Interface to the Advanced Distributed Simulation Landmine Alternative Concept Exploration (ADS-LACE) Simulation ''. Presentation Slides, 1999.[2] M. Lorenzo: “ModSAF Terrain Support for Sensor Modeling in Virtual Environments”.  99S-SIW-207, March 1999.[3] “Interface Specification to CMS Command Detonated Mines”. 1999.[4] S. H. Suliman: “Dynamic Virtual World Simulation for STOW”.  97f-SIW-104, September 1997.Author’s BiographiesKeith Snively is a Senior Analyst/Engineer at EOIR Measurements, Inc., located in Spotsylvania, VA.  He holds a M.S. degree in Mathematics from the University of Virginia.  He works with the U.S. Army Night Vision and Electronics Sensors Directorate’s (NVESD) Simulation Execution Team in Fort Belvior, VA to model land mines in a DIS/HLA environment.  Mr. Snively is currently developing and integrating simulation applications to support the Advanced Distributed Simulation (ADS) Landmine Alternative Concept Exploration (LACE) program.Picot Chappell is a Senior Programmer/Computer Analyst at EOIR Measurements, Inc.  Ms. Chappell received her B.S .degree in Computer Science from the College of William and Mary. And is currently in studies towards her Master of Computer Science degree at George Mason University.  She is working with the U.S. Army Night Vision and Electronics Sensors Directorate’s (NVESD) Simulation Execution Team in Fort Belvior, VA to support the ADS-LACE program.Pamela Jacobs is Project Leader for M&S Exercise Execution and Deputy Manager for the Joint Countermine Operational Simulation component of the Joint Countermine Advanced Concepts Technology Demonstration. She holds a B.S. in Metallurgical Engineering and an M.S. in Applied Mechanics from Michigan State University.  She works for the U.S. Army CECOM Night Vision & Electronic Sensors Directorate to develop virtual and constructive modeling capabilities to support operational evaluations of developmental hardware, including countermine, mine and night vision devices. PDUHeaderOther PDU FieldsData PortionSender/ReceiverID’s and LocationsActual MessageFigure 1: Signal PDU [1]- Transmitter PDU- Signal PDU(s)- Transmitter PDU- Transmitter PDU- Signal PDU(s)- Transmitter PDUEthernet/DISCESControlStationCMS- Transmitter PDU- Signal PDU(s)- Transmitter PDU- Transmitter PDU- Signal PDU(s)- Transmitter PDUFigure 2: Transmission Model [1]CESControlStationCMS