Improving Modeling and Simulation Support in Systems Acquisition:The Linking ApproachRobert B. AldermanDr. Warren H. SwitzerModeling and Simulation Operational Support Activity1901 N. Beauregard Street, Suite 400Alexandria, VA  22311-1705703-575-2826, 703-575-3281 HYPERLINK mailto:ralderma@msosa.dmso.mil ralderma@msosa.dmso.mil,  HYPERLINK mailto:wswitzer@msosa.dmso.mil wswitzer@msosa.dmso.milKeywords:Acquisition, Linking Approach, MSIP, SBAABSTRACT: Modeling and simulation (M&S) has become an essential tool in all phases of the systems acquisition process.  From concept exploration to systems engineering and operation and support, M&S applications have expanded their relevancy.  However, applications of M&S have not always been successful.  Historically, the benefits of M&S parallel the alignment of M&S to acquisition program activities.  This paper presents one approach aiming at achieving the close, successful alignment of efforts.This approach suggests mating a high-level M&S acquisition framework to the life cycle phase of a major acquisition activity.  Essentially, M&S efforts are organized in parallel.  This process ensures M&S efforts are linked to acquisition activities and products.  Applying this technique provides a basis developing the M&S support requirements to be included in the contract.  This approach requires the contractor to address specific M&S requirements in his proposal by way of an M&S Implementation Plan.  This plan is evaluated as part of the proposal process for technical approach, cost and schedule.  While more closely aligning M&S efforts to acquisition activities, this approach encourages innovation and forces early identification of cost and schedule issues.  Focused on the actual procurement of M&S products and services, the Linking Approach serves as an enabler for the DoD’s Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) initiative.1.	IntroductionThe use of M&S has proven a viable tool in the acquisition process.  When used as part of Integrated Product and Process Development (IPPD), significant improvements in system quality, reduced development time and lower life cycle costs have been reported.  In some cases, overall development time has been reduced in half with some individual activity time reduced by 3,000% [1].However, recent studies indicate that full benefits and acceptance of M&S may be unachievable without better integration of M&S efforts [2], [3].  Given the advances in M&S technology and declining program resources, finding better ways to field weapon systems has become imperative.  In searching for more effective methods, M&S tools are used that have strong functional application.  But often these tools do not easily integrate with other M&S tools.  As a result, many program managers are applying M&S tools to their acquisition process in piecemeal fashion.  This creates a “stove piped” environment.  M&S benefits could be improved through a stronger linkage with acquisition activities.  This paper presents one such approach.1.1	The Need for a Linking ApproachExisting DoD initiatives, such as Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA), focus on high level environment, management and cultural issues.  The Linking Approach, presented here, expands on and complements SBA by focusing on the mechanics of obtaining M&S products and services.  As such, the Linking Approach serves as an enabler for SBA, ensuring M&S requirements are consistent with SBA principles and support acquisition activities.In addition to providing a closer alignment of M&S efforts with acquisition activities, the Linking Approach improves integration of M&S efforts and reuse of the M&S tools.  The M&S Reference Model supports this integration.  The Reference Model provides the framework for applying M&S throughout the program life cycle.  Outputs from one M&S activity feed subsequent efforts, ultimately helping to refine the Distributed Product Description (DPD).  In this way, stand alone M&S activities are minimized while the program benefits from the maturing of M&S tools and a more accurate DPD.There are four main characteristics driving the use of the Linking Approach methodology.  These are:The M&S acquisition field is very fluid with evolving policy guidance.M&S products and services tend to be purchased rather than done in-house.There is a high reliance on the prime contractor for technical skills and data.The proprietary nature of M&S tools limit sharing and interoperability.The above characteristics drive the overall Linking Approach methodology in the following ways.  First, since policy guidance is evolving, the methodology must be significantly flexible to accommodate policy changes and differences in military service policy and procedures.  Second, as most M&S support is procured, the development of requirements that form the basis for contractual actions linked to acquisition activities becomes a necessity.  Relying on the prime contractor forces a collaborative environment to better support planning and execution of M&S activities and encourage innovation.  Finally, the proprietary nature of M&S tools must be addressed to ensure appropriate access and successful application.1.2	An Overview of the Linking Approach MethodologyThe Linking Approach uses a top-down planning methodology.  First, to manage the M&S support function, an organization is established within the program office.  Second, this organization conducts strategic planning for the weapon system’s M&S support requirements. The results of the planning process are documented in a simulation support plan.  This plan forms the program’s M&S strategy, and provides the high-level link between M&S activities and acquisition activities.  Following development of the M&S strategy, M&S support requirements are linked to acquisition products through the program and contract work breakdown structures.  The work breakdown structures form the basis for acquisition planning and the resulting contractual actions.  Finally, M&S requirements are highlighted in the solicitation as a separately evaluated element.2.	Organizing the M&S Support FunctionOrganization of the planning effort is critical to successful use of M&S in acquisition.  As an acquisition-related effort, M&S planning could benefit through the use of Integrated Product and Process Development (IPPD).  IPPD is a management technique integrating all acquisition activities starting with requirements definition through production, fielding/deployment and operational support.  It’s goal is optimizing the design, manufacturing, business, and supportability processes.  Integrated Product Teams (IPTs) serve as the core for IPPD implementation [4].An M&S IPT should be established early in the acquisition process.  The IPT membership should represent a cross-section of functional disciplines, and may include contractor personnel.  Since M&S efforts must support acquisition activities, the IPT membership should include people directly involved in these activities to include mission area analysis, concept exploration, and acquisition strategy development.  The IPT members should receive special training in applying M&S in acquisition processes.  The primary IPT purpose is to develop and maintain the program simulation support plan, but other duties such as training and consulting support also should be included.  Additionally, the IPT should be appropriately placed within the organization so M&S requirements are reviewed prior to execution for conformity with the M&S strategy.  Finally, the IPT should provide a collaborative environment where ideas are freely exchanged and innovation is encouraged.3.	Planning M&S Support: Linking M&S to Acquisition ActivitiesSuccessful M&S support planning does not occur in a vacuum.  Where possible, planning activities should parallel acquisition planning.  This parallelism provides the capability of linking acquisition activities with related M&S activities.  For example, as the analysis of alternative strategies is defined, various cost and operational effectiveness models are evaluated.  Currently, the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) is developing guidelines for selecting M&S tools.  (General considerations for source selection are provided later in this paper.)  In the interim, the guidelines established for conducting Verification, Validation and Accreditation (VV&A) [5] may serve as a good starting point in developing such a methodology. Once M&S tools are selected and linked, individual M&S activities can be scheduled to support the related activity. Since M&S activities are usually “hidden” as part of “engineering services” or another higher-level element, this will require adding more detail to the program schedule.  Care should be taken to identify and associate M&S activities to the level specificity necessary to ensure proper sequencing.  Ideally, major M&S activities should be included in the Acquisition Program Baseline (APB).3.1	The Reference Model: A Framework for ApplyingM&S in Systems AcquisitionThe Reference Model, shown in Figure 1.1, provides a framework for applying M&S throughout the program life cycle.  It is based on the Modeling and Simulation Activities in Acquisition model developed by the U. S. Air Force [6].  The Reference Model shows high-level acquisition activities by phase with related M&S activities.  The Model stresses functions to be performed without advocating specific M&S toolsets for performing these functions.  Additionally, the Model is very flexible, and can be applied in different acquisition environments.The Reference Model is used to support planning activities and develop the program acquisition strategy, the simulation support plan, and other program documentation.  As a planning tool, the Model is used to plan and schedule M&S activities both within a life cycle phase and between phases.  Through better integration of  M&S activities, outputs from one activity are available for use as inputs to another.  Since M&S efforts are better at staying on track and producing desired end products, risk is reduced.  Moreover, the program benefits from the maturing and reuse of M&S resources. Linking M&S activities within a life cycle phase is difficult enough, but linking activities between phases presents added complexity.  A program’s life cycle may extend over several years and involve many contractor and government organizations.  While technical compatibility issues can be addressed by specifying a Common Technical Framework (CTF), the CTF will not ensure that M&S results or data can be used in subsequent activities, especially in later life cycle phases.The Distributed Product Description (DPD) solves this problem by providing a linking mechanism for M&S activities between life cycle phases.  The SBA Road Map provides the following definition of a DPD:“A DPD is a distributed collection of product-centric information that is interconnected via Web technology into what appears (to the user) to be a single, logically unified data base.  DPDs are composed primarily of three types of information: product data, product models, and process models.  Product data specifies the characteristics of a product at any point in its development cycle, including requirements, program management data, cost data, engineering data, manufacturing data, and test data. [3]”The DPD is an integral part of the SBA systems architecture.  The DPD concept requires the use of collaborative environments, and Data Interchange Formats (DIFs) “to the greatest practical degree” to provide a common, intermediate format for describing the semantics and syntax of shared data.  The DPD concept seeks to avoid the lack of commonality/interoperability experienced in many implementations of Digital System Models (DSMs) (offer unique product representations).Multiple DPDs may be maintained during the early formative phases of the product life cycle, each describing an alternative concept or design.  This process is supported by the Linking Approach, since M&S activities and products are traceable to a specific DPD.Since the DPD is the ultimate M&S end product for each life cycle phase, the focus of all M&S activities must be toward improving the accuracy and use of the DPD in acquisition activities. The DPD is fed from the results of subordinate M&S activities and matures as the product design matures throughout the acquisition life cycle process.  In this way, the DPD links life cycle phases. 3.2	The Simulation Support Plan: Documenting theM&S Planning ProcessThe Simulation Support Plan (SSP) documents the results of the M&S planning process and serves as the program M&S strategic plan.  Originally conceived by the U. S. Army as a mandatory program document for Acquisition Category (ACAT) I and II programs, the SSP concept is being adopted by the other Services.  Using the SSP in other ACAT programs is being encouraged through judicious application.The success of the SSP development effort depends on the methodology used.  Higher success rates have been reported through use of the before-mentioned IPPD process.  Regardless of the methodology selected, the most effective approach allows the planner to start from a “big picture” perspective and work successively into the details of the actual data produced from M&S applications supporting acquisition program decision-making.  An effective SSP should address the following issues:Conducting VV&A of the models used for program decision-making.Integrating M&S applications throughout program planning activities and functional disciplines.Using M&S throughout the life cycle.Reusing and supporting M&S resources in other programs.Coordination with, and early involvement of interested program support organizations (test and evaluation, logistics support, etc.) is essential during the SSP development process.  The SSP is a dynamic document and should be updated as the acquisition strategy changes.4.	Linking M&S Support to AcquisitionProductsThe previous section discussed the methodology for linking M&S activities with acquisition activities.  This section presents a method for linking M&S activities to acquisition products.  The Program and Contract Work Breakdown Structures (WBSs) are used for this purpose.A WBS is defined as “a product-oriented family tree composed of hardware, software, services, data, and facilities.  The family tree results from systems engineering efforts during the acquisition of a defense materiel item.  A WBS displays and defines the product, or products, to be developed and/or produced.  It relates the elements of work to be accomplished to each other and to the end product [7].”Both the Program and Contract WBSs provide the basis for work planning and management control.  They differ on their level of focus.  However, both are normally defined to three levels of detail and both are product oriented.Product orientation is an important characteristic of the WBS.  Each WBS element should identify a product or deliverable.  In the case of M&S, “systems engineering” or “M&S support” are activities and would not be acceptable WBS elements.  However, the outputs of these activities would qualify as acceptable elements.  Examples of acceptable outputs include products or deliverables such as mockups, Computer Software Configuration Items (CSCIs), and databases.4.1	The Program Work Breakdown StructureThe Program WBS serves as a powerful tool in the Linking Approach.  The Program WBS provides a framework for specifying the objectives of the program and defines the program in terms of hierarchically related product-oriented elements.  In the Program WBS, the major end item is separated into its component parts.  Relationships between components are clarified along with the tasks to be completed.  WBS templates and examples are provided for major commodity items (aircraft, missile, ship, etc.).The development of the Program WBS evolves throughout the program life cycle.  To ensure conformity with other acquisition efforts, M&S planning follows standard WBS development methodology.  First, defined M&S activities from the SSP are associated with related WBS elements.  M&S products or deliverables resulting from these activities are identified and included in the appropriate level of the WBS.  Management and technical responsibilities for completing the M&S element are then assigned.  Finally, resources are allocated and cost and performance status is tracked through the WBS structure.In addition to providing the overall program framework, the Program WBS serves as the basis for the Contract WBS.  As discussed in the next section, the Program WBS is used in the Linking Approach for developing and extending a Contract WBS to include M&S products and deliverables.4.2	The Contract Work Breakdown StructureThe Contract WBS is “the government-approved work breakdown structure for reporting purposes and its discretionary extension to lower levels by the contractor, in accordance with government direction and the contract work statement.  It includes all the elements for the products (hardware, software, data, or services) which are the responsibility of the contractor [7].”The Contract WBS is the complete WBS for a contract.  It is used to structure the solicitation and resulting contract for M&S products and deliverables in the same way that procurements are developed for other acquisition products.  Selected elements from the approved Program WBS are used in developing the Contract WBS, which is then used to develop the solicitation.  Care is taken to ensure that Contract WBS elements can be traced to statement of work tasks and contract line items.  In this way, linkage is maintained between acquisition elements and related M&S products or deliverables.  Although not required, a one-to-one relationship between Contract WBS elements and contract line items is highly desirable. 5.	Contracting for M&S Products andServicesNormally, contracting for M&S products and services will follow current agency procedures with some changes effected by the Linking Approach.The Contract WBS defines M&S products, activities and services for inclusion in the statement of work. The SSP provides the basis for specifying M&S activities, and defines the infrastructure and interoperability requirements to be included in the statement of work or local agency clauses.   M&S data requirements, as necessary, are developed and included in appropriate Contract Data Requirements Lists (CDRLs).  The Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) and Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement (DFARS) are consulted to obtain appropriate clauses related to software licensing and data rights.  Other Government Furnished Information (GFI) is included as necessary for the contractor to respond effectively to the solicitation.Under the Linking Approach, the SSP can be used as an effective component of the solicitation.  The SSP can “fill-in the holes” of M&S requirements and improve the overall quality of the procurement action.  This approach entails including the SSP as GFI in the solicitation.  The SSP, in effect, provides the government concept of operations for using M&S in program acquisition.  If included as GFI, care should be taken to remove sensitive government information, such as budgetary data, from the SSP.The Contract WBS is provided as part of the solicitation and the contractor is encouraged to extend it to appropriate levels for management purposes.  The statement of work is developed to ensure that links are maintained between Contract WBS elements and M&S products and services specified in statement of work.  In developing the statement of work, care is taken to minimize constraints on the contractor.  Incentives should be provided to encourage innovation in finding new applications for M&S to reduce cost, schedule and performance risk.5.1	The M&S Implementation PlanM&S planning does not end following contract award.  The evolving nature of M&S support should benefit from continuous improvements to the M&S resources, infrastructure, and methods from new technology developments and “lessons learned” gained throughout the program life cycle.  The continued efficacy of M&S tools and infrastructure depends on technology refreshment and new methods.To ensure effective M&S support during a program’s life cycle, the Linking Approach includes a Modeling and Simulation Implementation Plan (MSIP).  The MSIP is a contractor-developed and maintained plan that is included in his proposal.  It is evaluated separately as part of the source selection process.  The MSIP is revised through mutual agreement between the government and the contractor, and may be extended to support numerous contracting actions.  This aspect is especially desirable for large contracts where multiple options are executed or delivery orders placed over a long time frame.  The MSIP process is depicted in Figure 1.2.The MSIP is the contractor’s plan to use and manage the M&S support function during the life of the contract or program.  The MSIP addresses the government’s requirements identified in the solicitation, with focus on specific issues of interoperability, reuse, and integration of M&S efforts between acquisition activities and phases.  The revised SSP, if provided as GFI in the solicitation, provides the government’s M&S concept of operations and can assist the contractor in structuring his MSIP.In addition to providing a more proactive role for the contractor in implementing the Linking Approach, the MSIP improves risk allocation between the government and the contractor.  As a contractual document, the MSIP defines roles and responsibilities for M&S activities, products and deliverables.  The MSIP establishes firm relationships for conducting M&S activities through a negotiation process.  M&S projects are developed, scheduled and specified in the MSIP.  Links between M&S projects and acquisition activities are identified and sequenced.  Finally, management actions are assigned to  reduce ambiguities and improve chances for success.While the actual format for the MSIP is not specified, existing Data Item Descriptions (DIDs) may be used or combined to provide the desired format.  Potential candidates include the Data Management Plan, the IDE Implementation Plan, and the CALS Implementation Plan.5.2	Source Selection ConsiderationsA major element of the Linking Approach is the evaluation of M&S as a separate factor in the source selection process.  M&S support should not be “hidden” as part of “systems engineering” or some other acquisition element.  This requires addressing M&S requirements in the solicitation and in evaluating the proposal.  In general, this approach should consider:Ensuring the technical approach facilitates M&S use.Encouraging innovative use of M&S by contractors in the “Instructions to Offerors” section of the solicitation.Ensuring M&S awareness on the part of the source selection evaluation board.Making M&S an explicit element of the source selection plan.Providing positive incentives in the “Evaluation Criteria” section of the solicitation.Pending more definitive guidance on this subject from DMSO, these general guidelines can be used in selecting a source for M&S support:A business case is established for using M&S.The technical approach effectively employs M&S.M&S are applied early in the design and development process.The proposed M&S infrastructure fully supports CTF (High Level Architecture, Conceptual Models of the Mission Space, data standards).Reuse and interoperability opportunities are identified.An effective plan for maintaining models and simulations, and associated data is provided (ongoing VV&A and Configuration Management).On-line access to contractor’s M&S resources is provided.Of the above, the first two guidelines are the most important for successful use of M&S in the acquisition process.  In meeting these requirements, the Linking Approach can provide a high level of assurance that the selected M&S alternative is capable of producing the desired results.  This assurance is based in the fact that M&S efforts are properly linked to acquisition activities and products.5.3	The Engineering Change Proposal (ECP) ProcessThe ECP process is another method to apply M&S resources in the acquisition process.  This method is most effectively used in production programs under configuration management.  ECPs are used to incorporate product changes for operational improvements, safety, and correction of deficiencies.  M&S may support development of an ECP package (such as engineering studies), or may result from incorporating the ECP change in the product design (such as a revised spare parts forecasting model).  The contractor also may propose engineering changes by way of a Value Engineering Change Proposal (VECP).  Under the VECP process, the contractor identifies potential areas for reducing costs, without degrading required performance.  The contractor realizes a share of the savings that accrues.  In either case, the ECP/VECP serves as the basis for the resulting contractual action.The ECP process is not a substitute for proper M&S planning.  ECP/VECP actions should be evaluated for conformance with the program’s M&S strategy to ensure that proposed M&S products and services support the overall acquisition strategy.6.	SummaryThe Linking Approach provides an effective method to ensure that M&S efforts are closely aligned with related program acquisition activities.  The Approach provides a consistent, yet flexible, planning framework that can be applied across life cycle phases.  The Linking Approach focuses on the planning and acquiring of M&S products and services from the perspective of the program office, and serves as an enabler for Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA).References[1]	Zittel, Randy C., “Simulation, IPPD & Systems Engineering: To The Next Level,” The Proceedings of the 1998 Symposium of the International Council on Systems Engineering, July 28, 1998.  As found in Zittel, Randy C., Technical Perspectives Modeling and Simulation, (Fort Belvoir, VA,: Defense Systems Management College, July 1998).[2]	Patenaude, Annie, et. al.,“Study on the Effectiveness of Modeling and Simulation in the Weapon System Acquisition Process, Final Report,” October 1996, Deputy Director, Test, Systems Engineering and Evaluation.[3]	Stelling, Joe, et. al., “A Road Map for Simulation Based Acquisition, Report of the Joint Simulation Based Acquisition Task Force,” September 1, 1998, The Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory.[4]	Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Acquisition and Technology), DoD 5000.2-R, “Mandatory Procedures for Major Defense Acquisition Programs and Major Automated Information Systems,” March 23, 1998.  (DoD, Under Secretary of Defense (A&T): Washington, DC, 1998)[5]	Office of the Director of Defense Research and Engineering, and Director, Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, “Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) Recommended Practices Guide,” November 1996. (DoD, Director of Defense Research and Engineering: Washington, DC, 1996)[6]	Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Acquisition), “Modeling and Simulation in Support of the Air Force Acquisition Process,” Acquisition Policy 97A-004, November 28, 1997.  (Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (SAF/AQ): Washington, DC, 1997)[7]	Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Acquisition and Technology), “Department of Defense Handbook Work Breakdown Structure,” MIL-HDBK-881, January 2, 1998. (DoD, Under Secretary of Defense (A&T): Washington, DC, 1998)Author BiographiesROBERT B. ALDERMAN is a Senior Systems Analyst at the Modeling and Simulation Operational Support Activity.  He provides management and technical support to the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office for SBA implementation, and is currently leading the development of an M&S workshop for program management offices.  His other acquisition-related assignments include Standard Procurement System (SPS) implementation planning at the Naval Air Systems Command, and management support to the Navy Program Executive Officer for Acquisition Related Business Systems.  Mr. Alderman holds a bachelors degree in commerce from the University of Virginia, and a masters degree in information systems from the Naval Postgraduate School.  Mr. Alderman is a Navy acquisition professional in the Communications and Computers career field.DR. WARREN H. SWITZER is a Senior Program Analyst at the Modeling and Simulation Operational Support Activity.  He has a Ph.D. from The Catholic University of America.  In addition to being a 25 year veteran Army officer, he is a non-resident professor at the University of Sarajevo, and has been a consultant to the Ministry of Defense and Joint Command for the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, guest lecturer and invited panelist at US and foreign  universities, and author of articles dealing with socio-economic strategy. Specializing in complex emergencies, he currently is working on a project aimed at uniting interagency and international efforts addressing the spectrum of operations ranging from tension through low intensity conflict. The contractor may extend the Contract WBS to lower levels to meet reporting requirements or other purposes.Figure 1.1The M&S Reference ModelFigure 1.2The MSIP Process