Simulation Based Acquisition,The Road MapRobin FrostUSD (A&T) DTSE&E/SEPentagon, Rm. 3D1075Washington, DC 20301-3000frostrl@acq.osd.milDave ThomenScience Applications International Corporation8301 Greensboro Drive, Suite 209McLean, VA 22102thomend@mail.etas.comKEYWORDSSimulation Based Acquisition; SBA, SBA Road Map, Collaborative Environments, Distributed Product Description, DPDABSTRACT:  Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) is a joint Industry and Department of Defense initiative to define an acquisition process that employs a robust, collaborative use of simulation technology to integrate the process across acquisition phases and programs.  The intent of the initiative is to reduce the time, resources and risk associated with acquisition, enable the integrated product and process development (IPPD) and improve the quality of the product. In 1998 a Joint SBA Task Force was created to draft a road map to implement SBA.  This document, the SBA Road Map, was delivered in September 1998.  Since that time, the Acquisition Council of the Executive Council for Modeling and Simulation (EXCIMS) has taken ownership of the Road Map.  The Council has sought to refine the document and seek DoD and Industry’s buy-in of this approach to their original vision.  A key event in this process was the NDIA SBA Workshop held in Dallas in November 1998.  Incorporating comments from the various stakeholders, the document is now in the process of formal coordination.  This paper updates actions that have taken place since the Fall SIW and presents information on the next step to follow.1.	IntroductionThere are several revolutions underway today within the Department of Defense.  The Revolution in Military Affairs challenges us to be prepared for uncertainty; to be prepared to fight differently, and in different conflicts than we have fought before.  Our focus has shifted to such things as information dominance, rapid force projection, and smart self-contained weapons.  As we modernize our armed forces, this revolution is defining what we must buy.  Likewise, the Revolution in Business Affairs directs that we place management emphasis on core competencies.  There is an emphasis to reduce overhead, leverage computer technology and implement integrated products.  This revolution is impacting how we buy.It is becoming clear that modeling and simulation (M&S) will become core resources as we face these multiple fronts and their implications for the future of acquisition within DoD.  In response to the changes in military affairs, we must replace existing equipment with fewer systems having greater flexibility and complexity.  For all those involved in the acquisition of these new systems (whether determining the requirements or how the new weapons will contribute in a system of systems environment), the use of M&S early and throughout the acquisition process will become essential.  To fully implement the acquisition reforms, the members of the integrated product teams (IPTs) will need to communicate their ideas in a collaborative environment and share a common vision and understanding of the proposed system.  M&S will be the catalyst that will make that happen. [Ref. 1]OSD has undertaken a new initiative, called Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA), that addresses, through robust use of simulation, what we buy and how we buy it.2.	What Is SBA?2.1	BackgroundTo understand the need for SBA, we need to look at how we conduct acquisition today.  On an average, weapon systems take 8 to 10 years to design, and 15 to 20 years to field.  The current environment is characterized by the fact that the full potential of IPPD and the IPTs are not realized, solution decisions are made too early, the majority of system costs are locked in by milestone II of a program’s life, and our operation and support costs have become the proverbial tail wagging the dog.  In many cases, M&S continues to be characterized by highly specialized, one-time use models with unique data requirements, and limited reusability.  [Figure 1]Figure 1The Vice President has directed, as part of the National Performance Review goals, that cycle time for our new systems is to be cut by 25%.  Our DoD leadership has stretched this goal to make an even more aggressive target of 50%. The Defense Systems Affordability Council has recognized the potential that M&S brings to acquisition and has tapped SBA to be one of the three top initiatives to help realize the stretch goal they have set before themselves.2.2	VisionToday, SBA is still a concept.  Although pockets of SBA can be found to exist in current programs, the entire concept has yet to be defined and implemented.  SBA is more than just the use of M&S in the acquisition process.  SBA is the envisioned future operating concept of the DoD acquisition system [Figure 2]. Specifically, the Acquisition Council of the DoD Executive Council for Modeling and Simulation (EXCIMS) has stated that the vision of SBA is:An acquisition process in which DoD and Industry are enabled by robust, collaborative use of simulation technology that is integrated across acquisition phases and programs.  The goals of SBA are to:Substantially reduce the time, resources, and risk associated with the entire acquisition process;Increase the quality, military worth and supportability of fielded systems while reducing total ownership costs throughout the total life cycle;Enable Integrated Product and Process Development (IPPD) across the entire acquisition life cycle.Figure 22.3	Evidence for Confidence in SBAThe confidence the DoD leadership has placed in SBA is based on strong and compelling evidence found in recent acquisition programs.  In the Study on the Effectiveness of Modeling and Simulation in the Weapon System Acquisition Process, instances are cited that illustrate the potential benefits of SBA [Ref. 2].  Examples include how M&S tools have permitted the Navy to reduce the standard parts list from 95,000 for the Seawolf class submarine to about 16,000 for the NSSN.  The Army Tank and Automotive Research Development and Engineering Center was able to design a new, low silhouette tank prototype using 14 engineers for 16 months, whereas it previously took 55 engineers 36 months.  Using CAD on the Air Force B-2 permitted them to achieve first-time correct tube bending of expensive titanium electronic cable conduits.The evidence from programs such as these, combined with examples from industry (e.g., the automotive and aircraft manufacturers) and the research initiatives of DARPA and other agencies (e.g., Simulation Based Design) illustrates the potential contribution of a comprehensive, integrated simulation-based approach to defense acquisition.  SBA entails deliberate and coordinated use of M&S across the many acquisition domains, over all phases of a program’s life cycle.  It further promotes the reuse of M&S between programs.2.4	SBA is InevitableIn fact, given the evidence of what can now be done with M&S in acquisition, and the number of independent initiatives currently underway indicates that, eventually, the acquisition process will evolve into a simulation-based approach.  The issue is whether we can afford to wait for this to evolve naturally over time, or if there are some deliberate steps we can take now to accelerate its realization in, say,  2007 rather than 2027.3.	SBA Joint Task ForceOSD is committed to making SBA a reality, and recognizes the need for change in the acquisition process if we are to modernize the force.  A joint task force was created to develop the SBA Road Map that presents an approach of how DoD can move from its current process to that which fulfills the vision set forth earlier.  Composed of representatives from all the DoD components, under the leadership of Dr. Sanders, Director, Test, Systems Engineering and Evaluation and the M&S community’s Acquisition Council, and working in close cooperation with industry, the task force wrote a draft SBA Road Map in six months.  What follows are several of the observations that have emerged.3.1  Not just TechnologyAlthough it has been the advances in computer and other M&S enabling technologies in recent years that has made the concept of SBA feasible, it is not the technological advances that offer us the biggest hurdles in the next few years, rather it is the cultural and process changes that pose the greatest challenges to implementing SBA.  The demands on what we must buy together with the constraints on time and resources will necessitate changes in how we procure our future systems.  It may means changes in processes, policies and even organizational structures.  SBA will define new relationships between government and industry, between industries, and within government itself.3.2	Shared Use of Data, Tools and Techniques is EssentialSharing must occur between all participants of the process.  In many cases the most significant barriers are the legal, bureaucratic and social barriers that stand in the way.  This issue goes beyond proprietary data rights.  Although we have seen examples (e.g., a “model marketplace” established at Boeing’s Defense and Space Group) where they are making headway in this area, we may need changes to existing policy or the creation of new policy.  Other changes, however, are not precluded by policy, but simply need to be instituted to overcome existing cultural or process obstacles.3.3	Cultural ChangesCultural resistance to change is a significant barrier.  A recent industry survey on acquisition reform implementation revealed “cultural resistance”, for the most part ascribed to government, as being the most frequently cited barrier to acquisition reform implementation [Ref. 3].  The test community, for example, is currently undergoing a cultural shift with the evolution of the Simulation Test and Evaluation Process (STEP), a sub-process of SBA.  This new paradigm is a collaboration of simulation and test as part of an effective evaluation strategy.  The traditional “test-fix-test” approach becomes a “model-simulate-fix-test-iterate approach”.  As further evidence of the significance of overcoming existing cultural barriers, an American Defense Preparedness Association (ADPA) study in 1996 indicated that there are no technical showstoppers to implementing SBA, rather the primary issues associated with SBA were largely cultural [Ref. 4].3.4	IncentivesProgram Managers will need incentives to change from the traditional approach of weapon system acquisition to a new approach that incorporates the tenets of SBA.  Given the extensive use of modeling and virtual prototyping early in the program, it is likely that future programs will experience even greater costs earlier in the acquisition process.  (The savings comes when total ownership costs are examined.)  The challenge is to identify the incentives needed to motivate the acquisition community to alter current acquisition processes and budgets, and to accelerate adoption of the SBA initiatives.3.5   Components of SBAUnder SBA, there will be a need to bring together the tools and technologies, people and processes into collaborative environments.  Whether these are created at the traditional product level, or are created to define and encompass different domains, they are formed to exploit the benefits to be gained through interoperability and reuse.  Within these collaborative environments the individual tool selection will focus on not only the specific attribute of the tool, but its ability to readily support the process through the exchange of information and through being of added value on multiple occasions. In essence, together these tools will become a system of models and simulations.  Another component of SBA is the introduction of distributed product descriptions (DPDs). As described in the Road Map, the DPD is “a distributed collection of product-centric information that is interconnected via web technology into what appears (to the user) to be a single, logically unified product representation.” [Ref. 5]  As a product is developed during its initial stages, the DPD associated with the product matures in parallel. The acquisition process is acquiring both the product and the associated representations of the product at the same time. When provided the appropriate automated support tools and schema, the members will have access to and work with the same information resident in the DPD.  Figure 3To construct a collaborative environment and institute DPDs requires the establishment of a framework or architecture.  As envisioned in Figure 3, this entails thinking of it in three levels. At the top is an Operational Architecture, defining such elements as the organizations, activities, and processes involved.  Next, is a System Architecture including platforms, components and data flow.  Finally, the standards, rules and conventions are defined in a Technical Architecture at the bottom.To facilitate the introduction of SBA across the acquisition initiatives within DoD, the Joint SBA Task Force recommended that a reference system architecture be adopted.  This would assist in implementing individual collaborative environments and facilitate the adoption of necessary standards.  4.  Status4.1  M&S Community InputThe draft SBA Road Map was presented to the Acquisition Council in September 1998.  An initial review was conducted over the next month and a revised version of the Road Map was distributed in late October 1998.  On 2-5 November 1998, the National Defense Industrial Association held an SBA workshop in Dallas, Texas to discuss the document and the 25 recommendations it proposed.   The meeting was attended by representative of both Government and Industry.  Each recommendation was analyzed in detail, and the workshop ended with a briefing of their assessment to an executive panel composed primarily of members of the Acquisition Council.  Based on the workshop, additional changes were made to the draft Road Map.  These included refining the proposed management structure and organizational relationship to make them more streamlined, proposing the preparation of a business case, revising the rough order of magnitude estimates, broadening the education and training recommendations to include industry, revising the Operational, Systems and Technical architectures, and defining a phased approach to implementation.  On 9 December 1998, the SBA Road Map was routed for formal staffing to the DoD M&S Community and the Industry Steering Group.  Their comments are due the end of January 1999.  At that point the Acquisition Council will publish a final version of the document, and forward it to the senior leadership of both the M&S and acquisition communities.4.2  The Way AheadSBA can leverage the tools and technologies currently being developed in both government and industry.  For example, SBA can benefit from and build upon the investment that the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office has made in establishing a common technical architecture for the entire DoD M&S community.According to the phased approach proposed in the SBA Road Map, a series of experiments will be conducted, to identify the issues and further refine SBA.  Many of these experiments will be done in collaboration with existing programs.  The focus of these experiments will, among others,  be on development of the architecture and the creation of collaborative environments.Similar to the work done in the development of the High Level Architect (HLA), a body will be created to define and develop the architecture upon which SBA is built. A series of war games are proposed to uncover the unknowns and explore alternative solutions under SBA.  They could also be used to examine many of the cultural issues that must be addressed if SBA is to become a reality.Finally, the community must develop and vet the standards and reference system architecture that will permit SBA to become an enterprise-wide approach.6.	SummaryThere continues to be rapid development within the SBA initiative. The principal challenges that remain are primarily cultural and procedural.  Although technical challenges lie ahead, there are no real technical showstoppers.  Identifying the specific changes in how we do business, and undertaking those changes is the real work in the months and years ahead.  The revolutions in military affairs and business affairs are changing what and how we buy.  The continued involvement of both the acquisition community and the M&S community will be needed to make SBA a reality.7.	References[1]	Dr. Patricia Sanders, Simulation Based Acquisition, Program Manager, Vol. 26 No. 140 (pp. 72-76), September - October 1997[2]	DTSE&E study: “Study on the Effectiveness of Modeling and Simulation in the Weapon System Acquisition Process”, October 1996[3]	Coopers & Lybrand study “Acquisition Reform Implementation, An Industry Survey”, October 1997[4]	ADPA, “Study on the Application of Modeling and Simulation to the Acquisition of Major Weapons Systems”, September 1996 [5] Acquisition Council draft A Road Map for Simulation Based Acquisition, 4 December 1998.Author BiographiesROBIN FROST is a Systems Engineer in the Systems Engineering Directorate of Office of the USD (A&T).  Ms Frost holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Systems Engineering from the University of Virginia.  She has worked as an engineer and an engineering supervisor for IBM and the US Navy, and has served in the Office of the Secretary of Defense since 1995.  She oversees OSD policies on M&S in Acquisition, Chairs the Acquisition Functional Working Group under the Acquisition Council and heads the Industry Government team researching SBA.DAVE THOMEN, a Senior Analyst with SAIC, provides technical support to USD (A&T) DTSE&E on M&S in Acquisition.  He holds a Master of Science degree in Operations Research from the Naval Postgraduate School.  He supported the development of the Simulation, Test and Evaluation Process (STEP) Guidelines and has participated on the Government Industry Team researching SBA.