The Fixed Tactical Internet; Integrating Live and Virtual C4I Systems to Train the SoldierWilliam C. Hopkinson, Ph.D., Kevin MuellerScience Applications International Corp 12479 Research ParkwayOrlando, FL 32826-3248 HYPERLINK mailto:William.C.Hopkinson@cpmx.saic.com,Kevin.Mueller@cpmx.saic.com William.C.Hopkinson@cpmx.saic.com,  Kevin.Mueller@cpmx.saic.comChristopher J. Metevier, Thomas M. KelsoU.S. Army Simulation, Training, & Instrumentation Command(STRICOM)12350 Research ParkwayOrlando, FL 32826-3276 HYPERLINK mailto:Chris_Metevier@stricom.army.mil Chris_Metevier@stricom.army.mil,  Thomas_M._Kelso@stricom.army.milABSTRACT: The Fixed Tactical Internet is a concept developed by the US Army Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM) to support training of the warfighter in their digital C4I system in an integrated live and virtual environment. The Fixed Tactical Internet will provide a robust digital training capability at Fort Hood which will allow Battalion, Brigade and Division staffs to train battle management skills on live C4I systems utilizing a fixed EPLRS network augmented by virtual simulations providing stimulus of surrounding units.A demonstration of the Fixed Tactical Internet concept is ongoing at Fort Hood focusing initially on the lower Tactical Internet. A live unit will conduct company size lane operations utilizing the Fort Hood Range area. A fixed tactical internet, utilizing prepositioned EPLRS radios mounted on radio towers will provide the connectivity for the live systems. Virtual simulation will provide the feed for adjacent units utilizing ModSAF to create the entities and the Situational Awareness Tactical Internet Data Server (SATIDS) to provide situational awareness and C2 messaging capability from the virtual to the live. Successful demonstration of this concept is anticipated to lead to a similar demonstration for a live-virtual linkage of the upper tactical internet. The purpose of this paper is to discuss the technical implementation of the ongoing Fixed Tactical Internet Concept, present lessons learned from the November demonstration, and discuss the future of a permanent fixed tactical internet at Fort Hood.						1  INTRODUCTIONThe integration of real world systems with simulations for both the training and analytical domains has been developed and explored extensively during the past several years. STRICOM, supported by SAIC, has lead the integration of FBCB2 with virtual and constructive simulations and their interface with C4I systems. entity state The Fixed Tactical Internet is a concept developed by the US Army Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM) to support training of the warfighter in their digital C4I system in an integrated live and virtual environment. The Fixed Tactical Internet will provide a robust digital training capability at Fort Hood which will allow Battalion, Brigade and Division staffs to train battle management skills on live C4I systems utilizing a fixed EPLRS network augmented by virtual simulations providing stimulus of surrounding units.Fort Hood requires the capability to deploy units to gunnery and training/maneuver areas and allow them to communicate digitally without having to deploy any signal slice element to support communications.  This architecture must be capable of meeting requirements of the tactical internet and ultimately integrate units in the training areas with simulations and other digital facilities on the Fort Hood cantonment area.  Included must be the Fort Hood Range Complexes, maneuver training areas, and the garrison training areas to include BSC, JANUS facility, Sanctuary CP, CCTT, SDC, and Scaled Range Complexes. The Fixed Tactical Internet Concept is a proposed spiral development approach to support this training requirement.The Fixed Tactical Internet concept was demonstrated at Fort Hood focusing initially on the lower Tactical Internet. A live unit conducted company size lane operations utilizing the Fort Hood Range area. A fixed tactical internet, utilizing prepositioned EPLRS radios mounted on radio towers provided the connectivity for the live systems. Virtual simulation provided the feed for adjacent units utilizing ModSAF to create the entities and the Situational Awareness Tactical Internet Data Server (SATIDS) provided situational awareness and C2 messaging capability from the virtual to the live. The successful demonstration of this concept is anticipated to lead to a similar demonstration for a live-virtual linkage of the upper tactical internet. The purpose of this paper is to discuss the technical implementation of the ongoing Fixed Tactical Internet Concept, present lessons learned from the November demonstration, and discuss the future of a permanent fixed tactical internet at Fort Hood.Technical ImplementationC4I systems provide the commander and staff with the ability to plan and execute orders rapidly over time and space. Figure 1 depicts a version of the desired end state for the C4I architecture. This is a system of C4I systems with interoperability requirements across multiple platforms and levels of command. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1 Evolving Digital C4I SystemsThe training requirement to support this complex system of systems must be developed with modeling and simulation in an open architecture to allow for flexibility and growth as the digital systems develop and simulations improve. The Fixed Tactical Internet proposes an open architecture relying on the C4I systems themselves to provide much of the routing and connectivity.Figure 2 depicts the system architecture for the recently completed phase I demonstration of the fixed tactical internet.  EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2 Fixed Tactical Internet Phase I Demonstration Architecture Modeling and Simulation challengesThe left side of the figure depicts the modeling and simulation cell used to stimulate the FBCB2 tactical systems. The scenario for the exercise limited the simulation to a supporting role of providing the friendly and enemy situations for the adjacent companies while having the actual company man their vehicles and receive SA and C2 messages on their associated FBCB2. The live FBCB2 systems were able to receive and display situational awareness information about their relative positions and those of their adjacent units. This eliminated the need to address the live to virtual interactions as it was not an objective of this demonstration (yet remains a significant problem for high resolution exercises).ModSAF versions 4.0 provide the simulation entities, both red and blue, of the associated supporting forces. Approximately 120 entities (both red and blue) were depicted in the simulation. The DIS entity state information from these forces was passed to the Situational Awareness Tactical Information Data Server (SATIDS).SATIDS provided situational awareness data to the  FBCB2 surrogate via ethernet port. Each simulated entity, virtual and SAF, was represented as a node within SATIDS. SATIDS, running on a dual ethernet SUN Ultra Sparc, received entity state information from the DIS network depicting the location or situational awareness for each member of the Tactical Internet.  The communications and routing nodes simulated the effects of the Tactical Internet. Each node then generated a Variable Message Format (VMF) message, which was then routed to the appropriate FBCB2.The FBCB2 surrogate served as the gateway between the simulated and live world. This FBCB2, hosted on a PC with dual ethernet ports, connected to a live Internet Controller (INC) to a live EPLRS and subsequently to the fixed tactical internet. The FBCB2 surrogate was configured as a secondary server within the lower tactical internet for the live FBCB2 systems. As a secondary server, the FBCB2 surrogate provided routing to the VMF messages received from SATIDS. From this point forward, the live C4I systems began exchanging data as they normally would in a live situation.The location and orientation for the fixed EPLRS radio towers was determined by use of the  Radio Frequency Mission Planner (RFMP). The RFMP, developed by STRICOM, provides a means to predict the optimal location for fixed EPLRS radios. It provides a planview display as well as a 3-dimensional representation of Basic Transmission Loss (BTL). LESSONS LEARNED AND OBSERVATIONSThe phase I Fixed tactical Internet demonstration was conducted at Fort Hood in November 1998. This was conducted as a rapid prototype as the period from concept to demonstration lasted 6 weeks. The following are specific lessons learned and observations to phase I of the fixed tactical internet demonstration;All technical objectives (connectivity and message passing) were met during the demonstration.The fixed tactical internet network operated the 1BCT EPLRS network for two hours with no degradation of performance.ModSAF and SATIDS were able to stimulate the live FBCB2 systems displaying 120 entities for both friendly and enemy icons. Live FBCB operators were not able to differentiate live from simulated entities on the battlefield.The following are general observations on integrating live C4I systems and simulation;The traditional modeling and simulation problem of adjudicating interactions between live warfighters and simulated entities remains at the lower tactical internet level. However, as the fixed tactical internet moves into the upper tactical internet world, this problem should be diminished as Tactical Operations Centers (TOC) are typically not “shooters” on the battlefield and there would be no need for interactions between live TOCs and simulated entities.Simulations need to be more robust in their ability to generate reports and respond to C4I systems. At the lower tactical internet level, the set of messages is fairly limited and a C4I surrogate capability, as exists in SATIDS, can generate the situational awareness information and basic C2 messaging at the entity level. At the upper tactical internet level, the number and complexity of messages that a simulation must generate to properly stimulate a battalion, brigade, or division TOC increases dramatically. Simulations must be able to generate information required for the TOC planning cycle and to support course of action analysis. In addition, simulations must be able to receive orders from the TOC and react accordingly in a seamless interaction with little or no user interaction.Live C4I systems need to provide a viable porthole for simulations. Currently the lack of a server role in the UTO (Unit Task Organization) database for FBCB2leads to “stealing” real world roles for the simulation devices to use as their entrance into the C4I devices.FIXED TACTICAL INTERNET FUTURE DEVELOPMENTFigure three defines the proposed phases II and II for the FTI project. The objective of the follow on phases is to provide a robust training environment initially at Fort Hood and subsequently at additional installations. Phase II calls for an establishment of a permanent fixed tactical internet at Fort Hood consistent with the demonstration architecture. This system will be capable of supporting FBCB2 installation and trainup as well as the FBCB2 FDTE and IOTE. In addition, phase II will begin exploring concepts of supporting the ATCCS systems in the upper tactical internet, and integration of CCTT. Phase II will conclude with a permanent site checkout as well as a demonstration of stimulating the upper tactical internet. The proposed phase III calls for installation of the objective fixed tactical internet system at Fort Bragg and other installations to be determined.CONCLUSIONThe integration of C4I systems with simulation systems continues to be an evolving problem. Gateway solutions provide an immediate answer to the problem. Long term solutions most likely involve changes to simulations design with C4I systems able to adapt to simulation networks. Work needs to be performed in the area of developing intelligent simulations able to receive messages from C4I systems and respond as a commander. JSIMS and its family of simulations provides an opportunity for solving many of these issues. The Fixed Tactical Internet is a Requisite Component of the Live Training and Instrumentation Environment and represents a cost-effective solution for enhanced live digital training. The success  of the Fixed Tactical Internet Demonstration at Fort Hood provides the basis for establishing a permanent, flexible, digital training capability for the warfighterFigure  3  Fixed Tactical Internet Phase II Objective SystemREFERENCESADST II CDRL VIE 9800030 (1998), Version Description Document, Situational Awareness Tactical Internet Data Server.ADST II CDRL VIE 9800031 (1998), Final Report, Virtual Integration Exercise.ADST II CDRL 018R 9600438 (1997), Version Description Document, FPEIII Appliqué Interface.Brennan, J.M., 1998 “The Army Experiment 4 Simulation to Army Battle Command System Experiments”, Paper 98S-SIW-002, 1998 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop.Carr, F.H. and Roberts,J.D., (1998), “Mitre Appliqué Interface: Closing the Gap Between Battlefield C4I Systems and Simulations”, Proceedings of the Seventh Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation..Department of the Army 1993. Army Regulation 5-11, Models and Simulations.Hopkinson,W., Metevier, C., Mueller, K., and (1998) Situational Awareness Tactical Internet Data Server (SATIDS): Integrating C4I with the Virtual World, 98F-SIW-038, Fall 1998 Simulation Interoperability Workshop.Lacetera, J. (1993), M&S Support for the Combined Arms Command and Control ATD, Eighth Workshop on Interoperability of Distributed Interactive Simulations.Lacetera, J., Torres, E. (1997), Evolution to a Common C4ISR M&S Environment via a Communications Effects Federate Approach, Spring '97 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Paper 97S-SIW-032Manoski, S., McConnell, J., Riehl, M., Tafoni T., Vogel, J. (1997), The Tactical Internet Model Provides Realistic Communications for Task Force XXI Training, 97S-SIW-044, Spring 1997 Simulation Interoperability WorkshopRoberts, J., Carr, F. (1997), Incorporating Command and Control (C2) into the High Level Architecture (HLA): An Architecture for Realistic Communications Effects, Fall ’97 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Paper 97F-SIW-076.Steigerwald, A., Silva, W., Cosby, M., Hieb, M, Lacetera, J. (1997), Real-World Communications Emulation in the HLA, Spring ’97 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Paper 97S-SIW-199AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIESWILLIAM C. HOPKINSON is a Senior Systems Engineer with SAIC. DR Hopkinson is a graduate of the United States Military Academy. He received his Ph.D. in Industrial Engineering from the University of Central Florida and Masters in Operations Research from the Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, California. His research interests are in the areas of military modeling, simulation systems integration, and C4I interfacing. He is a retired US Army officer.THOMAS KELSO is a Lead Systems Engineer and Project Director with the US Army’s Simulation, Training, & Instrumentation Command (STRICOM) in the PM C4ISS office. He received his Bachelor’s of Science degree from the United States Military Academy. His experience includes development and integration of numerous distributed simulation efforts in support of the training, research, and advanced concepts areas.  He has been involved in multiple efforts interfacing C4I systems and simulation and was the Project Director for the Fixed Tactical Internet demonstration.CHRISTOPHER J. METEVIER is a Lead Systems Engineer with the US Army’s Simulation, Training, & Instrumentation Command (STRICOM).  He received his Bachelor’s of Science degree in Electrical Engineering from the University of Central Florida.  His experience includes development and integration of numerous distributed simulation efforts in support of the training, research, and advanced concepts areas.  He has been involved in multiple efforts interfacing C4I systems and simulation.KEVIN MUELLER is a principal Software Engineer with SAIC.  He received his Master in Computer science at the University of Central Florida after serving in the US Army as a signal Officer.  His experience is varied from developing UNIX kernals, 3D graphics and Virtual reality, as well as semi automated Forces. He was the lead engineer for the Fixed Tactical Internet demonstration. EMBED Word.Picture.8   EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  