Air Force Distributed Mission Training UpdateDianne L. ParrishAir Force Agency for Modeling and Simulation12350 Research ParkwayOrlando, Fl 32826407-208-5771dianne.parrish@afams.af.milhttp://www.afams.af.mil/programs/projects/dmt.htmRobert A. HeinleinAir Force Research LaboratoryWarfighter Training Research DivisionOrlando Operating Location12350 Research ParkwayOrlando, Fl 32826407-208-5724robert.heinlein@williams.af.milMaj. Justine GoodAir Force Research LaboratoryWarfighter Training Research Division6001 S. Power RdMesa, AZ  85212-0904602-988-6561justine.good@williams.af.milKeywords:Distributed Mission Training (DMT), DMT IPT, ROADRUNNER, COYOTEABSTRACT: Distributed Mission Training (DMT) is a concept for training in a common integrated operational global battlespace environment comprised of real, virtual and constructive weapon systems, allowing all warfighters to train individually or collectively at all levels of war.  Training in a DMT capable environment facilitates the goal of the warfighters to “train as they intend to fight”, by enabling them to interoperate and employ their high end individual, team and inter-team capabilities--in a high fidelity integrated mission operating environment--on a daily basis.  Aerospace Expeditionary Forces will consist of attack/bomber aircraft, air superiority fighters, electronic combat platforms, off-board sensors, other force protection assets, airborne and ground base command and control elements, airlift, tanker, special operations and search and rescue forces.  All force components must operate with a common accurate real-time global battlespace picture provided by surveillance and intelligence assets and supported by other space assets providing navigation, information and communications.  All of the above must be supported by the acquisition, logistics and analysis forces.  For the aerospace team, success in modern, precision warfare depends on the ability of all components to effectively operate as an integrated team.  Success therefore is dependent upon the aerospace force’s ability to train as an integrated team.  The DMT concept, and associated Air Force initiatives, will ultimately provide the environment to ensure the success of the entire aerospace team. Just as successful mission outcomes require the ability to operate as an effective team, implementation of the environment that guarantees mission success requires an integrated team effort.  The USAF has begun the task of producing that integrated team effort, starting with the creation of an inter-organizational DMT integrated product team (DMT-IPT).  This paper will provide the SIW community with background information and status reports on the progress of the Air Force efforts. The paper solicits the support of  the SISO community at large and provides information to help determine where and how that support could most effectively be offered.  1.  Introduction.The label of Distributed Mission Training (DMT) often means different things to different people.  DMT can be simultaneously viewed as an environment for training, a concept for training, and as an Air Force program to network simulators for training and mission rehearsal.  This is akin to the earlier multiple meaning of Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) to the Army, in which DIS was a new way of doing business, as well as the joint distributed system of simulations, and the network interoperability standards [1]. DMT is a concept for training that facilitates the goal of the warfighters to “train as they intend to fight”, by enabling them to interoperate and employ their high end individual, team and inter-team capabilities--in a high fidelity integrated mission operating environment--on a daily basis. [2]The DMT environment is a common integrated operational global battlespace environment through which real, virtual and constructive weapon systems are interconnected using standard architectures and protocols. Perhaps the more common, albeit limited, view of DMT is that it is an Air Force program to network virtual simulators for the purpose of aircrew training and mission rehearsal.  Specifically, most people think of a program for purchasing the services of providers of networked 4 ships of F-15 and F-16 simulators, under the current Air Combat Command (ACC) initiative launched in December 1996 by General Hawley, Commander, ACC (COMACC).  In reality, the current ACC program referenced above is most likely the embryonic beginning of an evolutionary path leading to a future DMT that includes live, virtual, and constructive assets integrated through a common shared global battlespace environment.  Such an environment would be used for training, rehearsal, experimentation, research and development, acquisition, analysis, decision-making and operations—ultimately the goal of the DoD Master Plan and the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) community. In contrast to the Army approach to DIS earlier in the decade, currently there is no official Headquarters (HQ) USAF approach to implementation of DMT.  A Capstone Requirements Document describes the overall Combat Air Forces requirement for DMT [3].  However, there is no USAF DMT program, per-se, nor is there currently an Air Force budget line item called DMT, or a unified overarching HQ USAF DMT vision or implementation approach.  Implementation of DMT is currently an individual major command prerogative.  Integration and coordination of the individual command initiatives for implementing DMT is a major challenge. The purpose of this paper is provide the modeling and simulation community with an explanation of the Air Force approach to DMT, as it currently exists, rather than to advocate or recommend a particular USAF approach to implementation of DMT.  The main objective is to provide information to the community at large to help them decide where their efforts would be useful in furthering the implementation of DMT. BackgroundThe current initiatives related to DMT were predicted back in 1985 (circa SIMNET) by the then AF Human Resources Laboratory, Operations Training Division (now AF Research Laboratory Warfighter Training Research Division (AFRL/HEA)). It was predicted then that simulation would become a major training system resource for the support of tactical aircrew training in the 1990s, with technology driven by the desire to extend the traditional notion of a simulator to that of a multi-cockpit, multi-sensor device capability cost effectively fielded at the unit level [4]. AFRL simulator development activities were focused on making the above prediction a reality.  The development of the Multi-Task Trainer ultimately led to the development and fielding of the Unit Training Devices (UTDs).  Networking technology and the development of the DIS standards and protocols enabled the interconnection of MTT devices in the DARPA War Breaker Program, and a host of other programs and projects, including Synthetic Theater of War – Europe (STOW-E), STOW ‘97, Joint Combat Search and Rescue (JCSAR), and Multi-Service Distributed Training Testbed (MDT2) to name a few.  The concept of DMT was formulated from these experiences, culminating in the deployment and demonstration of a DMT capability at the Air Force 50th Anniversary celebration in April 97.  Following on the heels of the 1995 Air Force Four Star Modeling and Simulation Summit, in which the Air Force adopted the vision of a Joint Synthetic Battlespace, then Chief of Staff General Fogleman issued a call to the Air Force Major Command (MAJCOM) commanders to support the Air Staff in addressing the future training requirements in light of the available and developing modeling and simulation technology [5].  In December 1996, COMACC directed his staff to develop “a simulator training initiative to put forward in the next budget cycle that would implement linked, mission level simulation training for the command.  The end state would be a four ship of high fidelity visual sims at each wing for each MDS [mission-design-series (type of aircraft)], linked to [Airborne Warning and Control System] AWACS, [Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System] JSTARS, [Airborne Battlefield Command and Control Center] ABCCC, [Ground Theater Air Communications System] GTACS, [Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance] C4ISR and other simulators such as bomber and rescue MDS simulators as appropriate, as well as a dedicated set of adversary work stations that could present a manned threat, and to C2 [command and control] agencies.” [6].  This marked the beginning of the current ACC DMT Program.At about the same time, the Air Education and Training Command (AETC) was in the process of developing and fielding a DMT system to link AWACS and F-15 simulators at Tyndall AFB for training.  At that time, AETC and Air Force Special Operations Command (AFSOC) had already been operating simulators over their network at Kirtland AFB for training and mission rehearsal.  Since then, AFSOC has fielded similar capabilities at Hurlburt Field FL, and routinely interoperates with live and virtual assets of the 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment (SOAR) at Fort Campbell, KY, over their network [7]. Although there have been a number of projects and activities related to DMT, as discussed above, most of the AF major operating commands have undertaken more formal approaches to DMT, following the lead established by ACC.  The balance of this paper will discuss the requirements, activities, and current/proposed management structure to integrate the initiatives of our major commands. Rationale for DMTThe case for an updated training solution is succinctly stated in the ACC Concept of Operation (CONOPS) for DMT [8].  Today’s military forces operate within a battlefield that is increasingly lethal and complex.  The range and performance of modern air and space weapons systems enable domination of extensive areas.  Increasingly, integrated teams relying on tighter linkages between sensors (e.g., AWACS, JSTARS) and shooters (e.g., F-15Cs and F-16s) execute both offensive and defensive missions.  While the dimensions and complexity of the modern battlefield are expanding, the ability to train integrated teams in a realistic combat environment is increasingly constrained.  Providing an environment suitable for training to the demands of the modern battlefield is restricted by these factors:3.1  Funding and resources Flying time is costly and training areas are smaller and more restricted than combat battlefields.  Range availability is limited and constrained by civil airspace users, environmental considerations, and lack of access from many units’ home bases.  Even where ranges exist, replication of complex adversary offensive and defensive systems is minimal. Safety and security There are practical peacetime limitations to providing realistic combat training.  Live air-to-air missiles are not fired at adversaries.  Work-arounds such as kill removal require additional distracting procedures and are often ineffective in large, complex scenarios.  Many systems must be operated in training modes rather than wartime settings.  Developing tactics for classified weapons and systems requires extraordinary efforts; continuation training for units equipped with these systems is an even bigger challenge. Personnel and equipmentMaintaining readiness using operational resources and current training methods imposes wear and tear on personnel and equipment.  Flight training reduces the service life of aircraft for other operations.  Large, realistic combat training exercises often require unit deployment to training sites and increase the fiscal, operational, and personnel burdens of operational units. DMT Needs and RequirementsExpeditionary Aerospace Force.  The move to an Expeditionary Aerospace Force (EAF), consisting or Aerospace Expeditionary Forces (AEFs), exacerbates the training environment problem and underscores the requirement for units from bases all over the world to train together prior to deployment.  An AEF will consist of geographically separated, but operationally-linked units to provide both rotational support to ongoing operations and rapid response to crises.  A typical AEF will consist of pre-designated active, Guard and Reserve units that offer a wide range of aerospace capabilities and support functions.  These capabilities will provide packages of fighter, bomber, tanker, airlift, command and control, radar and electronic-warfare aircraft, and space, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance assets, with the appropriate complement of support people (e.g., security, medical, and mission support).  At any time, 2 of the approximately 10 AEFs will have forces available to deploy.  Each AEF will move through a rotational cycle of  training, deployment work-ups, on-call for deployment, and standdown.  During the AEF deployment preparation period, geographically-separated units will conduct integrated AEF training.  At the end of this approximately one-year training cycle, an AEF will be fully prepared for its next deployment [9].The high-speed nature of modern, precision warfare places increased importance on the functionally integrated application of aerospace forces within a theater of operations.  The Air Force requires the capability to “train as it intends to fight”.  This includes training with the same force mix and command and control structure against the same types and density of opponents as would be encountered during actual operations.  In short, the Air Force needs to train in a complex environment as a cohesive and synchronized force, and when required, as part of a Joint/Combined team.  To develop the required skills, this training must be available at home stations on a regular basis, not limited to special exercises.  Additionally, the Air Force needs to conduct mission rehearsal, tactics development and validation, and operational testing in a synthetic environment.  DMT capabilities could also be used to meet these needs [10].In a recent speech, General Hawley, COMACC, stated that “It is almost impossible during peacetime to pull all of those disparate elements of our warfighting team together to train in the same place at the same time…It rarely happens…Occasionally, at…Red Flag…we achieve a degree of that.  But even there, it is the exception rather than the rule.”  Faced with severe pressures on the combat training environment, and an emerging new Air Expeditionary Force (AEF) employment concept, General Hawley stated, “There is no other way that we will be able to adequately prepare forces for the job that we’ve given them.  Distributed Mission Training is going to be a key enabler of the Air Expeditionary Force concept.” [11]. DMT Environment Requirements The ACC CONOPS for DMT again provides an excellent statement of the battlespace environment requirements:  The DMT environment will begin with team training and grow to support mission rehearsal.  Initially, team training will require a common synthetic environment so that participating warfighters share the same view of battlespace activities.  Mission rehearsal will require not only a common environment but also a robust rep-resentation of mission-critical factors.  A robust environ-ment is essential because mission rehearsal will be used to make decisions about the real-world courses of action.  Outcomes and results of the warfighter’s DMT mission rehearsal should be as predictive as possible.  For example, results of friendly and adversary weapons exchanges or collateral effects should be based on detailed, physics-based modeling.  Stochastic approx-imations used in most current wargaming simulations are not acceptable for DMT mission rehearsal.  The common DMT environment must provide high fidelity, geo-specific terrain (photo quality, 1meter resolution or better preferred) and have the ability to accept 3D target insets.  The 3D targets must be interactive (can change state – be destroyed or damaged) and dynamic (can move).  The environment must support multi-spectral sensors and representations.  The environment should support weather (environmental) effects (smoke, cloud cover, snow, diurnal changes, etc.).  Space forces may also require endo- and exo-atmospheric and space weather effects.  Table 1 compares the capabilities needed for team training with those required for mission rehearsal [8].  Table 1 Comparison of Capabilities Needed for Team Training and Mission Rehearsal (ACC Conops)Team TrainingMission RehearsalFocusUnitAEF/JFACCData Fidelity CredibleAuthoritativeData CurrencyMonthsHoursEnvironmentCorrelatedCommonSimulationsRealisticPreciseOutcomesAccuratePredictiveThe following documents provide more detailed information regarding Air Force DMT needs and requirements:  Draft Air Force Multi-Command Mission Needs Statement 307-98, for Distributed Mission Training, 19 Oct 98 [10], Final Combat Air Forces (CAF) Operational Requirements Document (ORD) 009-93-I-A for Distributed Mission Training (DMT), signed by COMACC 7 Nov 98 [12], and Draft Air Mobility Command (AMC) ORD 009-93-I-B for DMT [13]. DMT Concept of Operations (CONOPS) The following discussion is necessarily based upon the ACC CONOPS [8] as the apparent default model for inter-command DMT activities at this time.  Other commands may develop different internal DMT policies and procedures and utilize different acquisition and sustainment strategies to implement DMT within their commands.  It is anticipated that other command solutions will be able to inter-operate in the evolving DMT network, using the ACC construct, directly or as a baseline. As ACC has outlined in their CONOPS, DMT will be established incrementally with team training as the initial focus.  Team Training as defined here includes high-end individual, team (4-ship), and inter-team (composite force) warfighter skills.  A network suitable for mission rehearsal will be established as other platform and command and control units join the DMT network.5.1  Mission Training Center The principal component of the DMT network are the Mission Training Centers (MTCs) located at each operational unit. The MTC will house the unit’s simulators, briefing and debriefing systems, threat stations and synthetic environments, and the infrastructure needed for local and wide area networking. MTCs will conduct stand-alone and distributed training and mission rehearsal activities.  Under the current ACC approach, the MTC capabilities will be provided and supported by contractors.  Separate CONOPS for each weapons system will be written to describe specific MTC characteristics and uses.  All DMT MTCs will be linked into a wide-area DMT network.  5.2  Distributed Warfighting Center.The Distributed Warfighting Center (DWC) will be the support nexus of the DMT network.  Like the MTCs, the DWC is a military operations and training organization supported by contractors.  The purpose of the DWC is to support the DMT wide area network.   The DWC will help construct and schedule distributed events.  It will manage and schedule access to system-wide resources such the Adversary Training Center.  The DWC will also maintain a library of common scenarios, databases, and models for use by the MTCs.  As a military operational training organization, the DWC will administer DMT network services and standards for all users through an Operations and Integration (O&I) contractor.  The O&I contractor will provide integration and network services for distributed activities and will be responsible for: a) leading efforts associated with defining the network interoperability and interface requirements, including hardware and software required for interoperability of dissimilar systems; b) definition of synthetic environment standards that apply to all participant systems in the DMT network; c) Federated Object Model (FOM) development and management; technical support (scenario and database preparation/distribution); d) monitoring and trouble-shooting performance problems associated with DMT federations; and e) providing network infrastructure and operations to all participants [14].In addition, the DWC will provide the Combat Air Forces (CAF) with team training and mission rehearsal services.  Other DMT users, such as Air Mobility Command (AMC) and AETC, may use DWC services but will probably retain responsibility for their unique internal training and rehearsal capabilities [13]. DMT Programs and InitiativesIn order to meet the Air Force’s training and mission rehearsal requirements,  several MAJCOMs have developed DMT implementation plans to meet the challenging warfighting environment of the  21st  century. 6.1  Air Combat Command (ACC)ACC DMT capability will be developed incrementally, continually growing and evolving as MTCs and systems join the network.  The goal is to place an MTC equipped with advanced simulators for each Mission Design Series (MDS) aircraft at each ACC unit.  The unit simulators will be linked locally and between units into a common environment.  Initially, some fighter and attack aircraft (F15, F16, F22, and A10) and the command and control platforms they interface with (AWACS, JSTARS) will join DMT.  The schedule for bringing other systems such as bombers, reconnaissance, Combat Search and Rescue (CSAR) platforms, and intelligence ground stations into DMT will be developed based on training, fiscal, and program considerations. ACC’s goal is a robust mission environment by FY06.  Figure 1 is a notional depiction of the ACC DMT network evolution.The first DMT segment will consist of F15C MTCs at Eglin AFB and Langley AFB and an AWACS MTC at Tinker AFB.  Each F15C MTC will host advanced simulators with 360o visual displays, operator/instructor stations, manned threat stations, and a brief/debrief station.  The AWACS MTC will provide a mission crew trainer with 14 crew consoles and full fidelity sensor displays and controls.  It will also have five instructor positions and brief/debrief facilities.  This F-15C part of the initial segment will be used to validate the DMT concept and to determine the effectiveness of training transfer from the simulator into the aircraft. In order to expedite the development and implementation of DMT for ACC, that command, with the support of the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Acquisition and Air Force Materiel Command (AFMC), decided to acquire training services using a strategy called Commercial Training Simulation Services (CTSS).  With CTSS, the Air Force will not own or maintain the MTC equipment.  Instead, training services will be purchased from a contractor.  Successful operation of the MTCs will require integration of unit training requirements and plans with contracted services.  It should be emphasized here that CTSS is an acquisition strategy, not a DMT strategy.  Other MAJCOMS may very well elect to use a different acquisition strategy in their internal approach to DMT.  However, it is anticipated that all MAJCOMS will adopt the basic ACC construct of MTCs interconnected via a contractor supported DWC when they interoperate with other MAJCOM assets. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure. 1.  ACC DMT Roadmap [7]Current ACC plans call for F-15C MTCs to be in place at Eglin AFB, FL and Langley AFB, VA, in Mar and Aug 99 respectively.  As of this writing, an AWACS DMT contract was to be awarded in Dec 98 to provide 4 AWACS MTCs at Tinker and one each at Kadena AB Japan, and Elmendorf AFB, AK.  Initial AWACS MTC capability is scheduled for the first quarter of FY01.  Current plans also call for award of an F-16 DMT contract in the second quarter of FY99.  A Block 50 F-16 MTC will be fielded at Shaw AFB SC in FY01 [15]. 6.1.1 DMT Evaluation A brief overview of the ACC approach to evaluating DMT components outlined in the ACC DMT CONOPS [8] is included here.  This exact approach may not be applicable to other MAJCOMS.   The F15C MTC will be evaluated to determine its capability to perform team training, mission rehearsal and miscellaneous uses such as instrument procedures.  This evaluation will be conducted during initial system development and installation and when major changes are made to MTC components (e.g., upgraded visual displays, new combat simulations, etc.).  The initial evaluation will consist of 3 integrated efforts:  Simulation Certification (SIMCERT), System Evaluation (SYSEVAL) and a Training Effectiveness Evaluation (TEE).  The 29 Training Systems Squadron (TSS) is responsible for accomplishing the SIMCERT and SYSEVAL.  AFRL/HEA will conduct the TEE. The primary objective of the F15C MTC SIMCERT is to certify the MTC’s ability to support traditional simulator-based training such as:  emergency procedures, instrument check-rides, engine run training for maintenance personnel, etc.  The primary objective of the SYSEVAL is to evaluate the ability of the MTC to fulfill ACC team training and mission rehearsal needs.  A secondary objective of the SYSEVAL is to identify MTC training capabilities not available in standard live-flight training operations due to safety concerns or other limiting factors.  The potential utility of the F15C MTC to perform additional activities (experimentation, acquisition, etc.) will also be addressed as resources permit.  The TEE was directed by COMACC to “…validate the thesis that there is some portion of our current flying program that produces lower quality training than could be produced from a 4-ship of high fidelity visual simulators linked together and to AWACS and to aggressor sims [simulators].”  The evaluation will consist of a series of studies conducted by AFRL/HEA, Mesa AZ.  The first study, conducted at the 33FW beginning in mid-1999 during the SYSEVAL, will measure and compare the performance of combat ready F15C pilots in the air and in the MTC. Study results will be presented to COMACC by December 1999.  A separate later study will also address the psychological and physiological effects and limitations of MTC-based training.6.2  Air Mobility Command (AMC)Like ACC, AMC DMT plans call for a phased program with each phase building on the preceding ones. Phase I consists of a network of similarly configured training devices.  Phase I was divided into sub-phases A and B.  Phase IA consists of a network of two C-5 Weapon System Trainers (WSTs) at Dover AFB, DE.  In phase IB, the Dover network will be expanded to include two additional C-5 WSTs at Travis AFB, CA.  Phase II is to be a network of dissimilar training devices.  Initially the plan is to network the Travis C-5 WSTs with the KC-10 Boom Operator Trainer (BOT) also located at Travis AFB.  If this is successful, the Dover C-5 WSTs will be included in the network.  AMC intends to offer refueling services over the DMT networks following completion of Phase II. Building on Phase II, Phase III would see AMC network its remaining trainers into an AMC-wide training system.  In Phase IV the AMC network would be integrated with other Air Force networks and simulations into a multi-command training system.At present Phase I and Phase II are fairly well defined.  Phase 1A is on schedule starting in the 1st quarter of FY 99.  Phase IB is scheduled for the 1st quarter of FY 00. Phase II is scheduled to occur in the 1st quarter of FY 01.  C-17s have been moved up in the schedule, with current plans to connect two C-17 simulators at Charleston AFB in FY99, two at Altus AFB in FY00, network Charleston and Altus in FY00, and add McChord AFB C-17 simulators in FY01.  A preliminary schedule has been worked for Phase III, beginning in 1st quarter of FY 01 and concluding in FY 06 with the addition of the C-130s.  The plans for Phase IV will depend to a large extent on developments in agencies outside of AMC [16].6.3	Air Education and Training Command (AETC) In addition to the SOF training systems at Kirtland, AETC has established a DMT capability at Tyndall AFB, FL.  An AWACS Modeling and Simulation System (AMS) became operational in April 1998.  The AMS provides student weapons directors with basic combat principles, concepts, procedures and tactics.  A four-ship of F-15 full mission trainers (FMT)s is networked to the AMS.  The AMS is also capable of receiving live radar data feeds.  Ultimately, the USAF plans to have up to six AMS-like facilities linked to F-15 FMTs across the US.  This connectivity will allow students, AWACS crews, and fighter pilots to train together in a simulated environment from their home bases.  The AMS, seving as a surrogate weapon system, will also permit AWACS crews to control live missions from the ground, with associated savings in training dollars [17].  AETC conducts the vast majority of its training at the individual level, adding in team training at the very end as a capstone.  Hence, AETC requirements for a large DMT network are significantly less than the operational commands.  In addition, since AETC owns and operates training systems similar or identical to the operational training systems of the other MAJCOMS, the AETC DMT program is heavily dependent upon the DMT initiatives, programs, and funding of the lead operational commands.  Future AETC DMT activities are primarily dependent upon resolution of management and funding issues rather than technology or training philosophy issues [18].6.4  Air Force Special Operations Command (AFSOC)As stated previously, AFSOC has been active in distributed networked simulation training activities since the early 1990’s, before the label of DMT was coined.  Between the SOF training facilities at Kirtland AFB (which are now operated by AETC) and the training and mission rehearsal facilities at Hurlburt Field FL, AFSOC stands out as probably the only current operational unit equivalent of a networked MTC.  All AFSOC simulators are DIS compliant and the AC-130U simulator is High Level Architecture (HLA) certified (Run Time Infrastructure (RTI) 1.3).  Their remaining simulators will be HLA certified by end of summer 99.  AFSOC is permanently connected to the Battlestaff Training School which provides a connection to the current AF distributed simulation backbone.  Through this connection, AFSOC networked within the Expeditionary Force Experiment (EFX) 98 and plans are underway to run weekly connection tests with the Theater Air Command and Control Simulation Facility (TACCSF) at Kirtland.  AFSOC also has a connection with the 160th SOAR.  Through this connection AFSOC conducts tactical level training exercises with the 160th SOAR (virtual simulators and at least 1 live-fly aircraft) and US Army Rangers (operating constructive simulations).All of the AFSOC weapon system trainer requirements documents state the need for high-fidelity crew training (equivalent to ACC DMT's team training definition) and for long-haul networking for mission rehearsal.  The CV-22 device currently being procured also has this type of language in the requirements documentation.In sum, the AFSOC equivalent of the ACC DMT program is very robust, and will continue to mature with the technology.  The focus of its future efforts with respect to DMT will be related to inter-operability with ACC and other MAJCOMS as the DMT network expands.  To that end, AFSOC has now joined the Aeronautical Systems Center (ASC) DMT Operations and Integration Working Group, the first MAJCOM outside ACC to do so.  Database correlation issues are AFSOC’s primary DMT related concern, and their addition to the O&I WG should provide valuable contributions in this area [8]. Air Force Space Command (AFSPC)The primary focus in AFSPC for DMT is command and control of space forces, both within 14th AF and for the Space Operations Center (SOC) interface with Air Operations Centers (AOCs).  DMT requirements are currently incorporated in a draft Space Command and Control ORD for the joint United States Space Command USSPACECOM and the 14th AF SOC [19]. AFSPC has developed it’s DMT plans and roadmap consistent with and in support of the framework developed by ACC.  Their plans include a Space DWC to support the MTCs for training, exercise, mission rehearsal, and in addition includes a MTC at each AFSPC unit, all with links to AOC(s), JFACCs, and the Commander in Chief, USSPACECOM (CINCSPACE)/North American Air Defense Command (NORAD).  AFSPC’s goal is to provide a robust mission environment to support AF training and mission rehearsal by FY10.[20] AFRL has funded two Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) topics for FY99, and the AFSPC Space DMT input for the FY02-07 POM is currently being developed [21].7.0  TechnologyThe Air Force Research Laboratory Warfighter Training Research Division (AFRL/HEA) provides the focus for DMT related technology development.  AFRL uses a concept referred to as a “Collaboratory” as the primary vehicle for integration of technology components within a testbed environment.  This entrepreneurial concept allows industry, academia, and other government agencies to integrate their tools, components, technologies, and concepts into the AFRL DMT testbed for proof of concept, demonstration of capability, or developmental/operational evaluation [2].  In addition, other testbeds specific to other domains (e.g., C2) can be connected to form a robust DMT testbed environment.In conjunction with the Training Systems Product Group (TSPG), AFRL/HEA is collaborating with the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, USAF MAJCOMS, Air National Guard (ANG), and industry to develop and directly transition technologies and improved training methods to the user. Training enhancements will be developed and validated in the DMT testbed or on fielded systems to assist the major commands in making training procurement, implementation, and utilization decisions [22].  AFRL serves as the science and technology engine feeding DMT in general and MTC specific programs.  Their work involves development and transfer of training concepts, methods, and technologies for DMT customers.  7.1  DMT Technical Emphasis AreasCurrent technical emphasis areas of interest include Human Systems Integration, Information, Interconnection, Visual, and Representation technologies [23].  Human systems technology includes weapons controllers, control station, cueing, cockpit technologies and testbeds, physics-based modeling, and wing command and control systems. Information technology includes performance feedback, advanced brief and debrief, mission planning, real-time intelligence data fusion, and live/virtual/constructive interfaces. Interconnection Technology includes HLA, DIS protocols, multi-level security management, bandwidth, and latency.  Visual technology includes visual displays, microlaser projection systems, helmet mounted displays, 3D monitors, image generation, target generation unit, and visual interface unit.  Representation technology includes synthetic environments, semi-automated forces, STOW technology, human computer interfaces, databases, correlated sensor imagery, digital radar land mass systems, electronic combat environment development, threat cockpits and modeling, and a virtual aggressor environment.7.2  DMT Behavioral Research Emphasis AreasCurrent behavioral areas of emphasis include Higher Order/Team Skills for Mission Success, Simulation of Friendly/Opponent Operations, and Realistic Models of Adaptive Nature of Behavior [23].  Higher order/team skills for mission success includes training requirements, training shortfalls, and skill requirements, and training effectiveness criteria/measures. Simulation of friendly/ opponent operations includes computer generated semi- and fully-automated forces, sophisticated human behavioral models, logistics operations and constraints.  Realistic models of adaptive nature of behavior includes training level and experience, fatigue, cultural differences, and strategic/ tactical decision-making.7.3  DMT Technical Challenges and SuccessesCurrent DMT technical challenges being addressed via the collaboratory testbed concept include advanced cockpits, advanced visual systems, databases, threat/electronic combat systems, control station, networks, multilevel security, HLA, and STOW technologies. Results of the collaborative efforts of the lab, industry and academia were showcased during two events over the past year:  ROADRUNNER ’98, a training oriented event, in July and COYOTE’ 98, a technical oriented event in November 1998.7.3.1 ROADRUNNER ’98 ROADRUNNER '98, a DMT exercise sponsored by the USAF Directorate of Command and Control (AF/XOC), was conducted at various operational and research and development facilities across the US from 13-17 July 1998.  ROADRUNNER '98 was conducted to demonstrate the training potential of DMT for improving higher order individual and collective warfighter skills, which are difficult to acquire and maintain.  ROADRUNNER served as a validation of the approach to be used during the upcoming DMT training effectiveness evaluation of  the ACC Eglin MTC capability discussed earlier in this paper [24].Participants in ROADRUNNER '98 formed several mission teams, each consisting of F-16, F-15, and A-10 pilots, plus Weapons Directors (WD) and Air Surveillance Technicians (AST) from AWACS.  Training was focused on the pilots in the manned virtual cockpits at both AFRL/HEA and TACCSF, as well as the WDs and ASTs at Tinker AFB.  F-16 pilots from Cannon AFB, NM and the Iowa ANG flew four AFRL/HEA F-16 Multi-Task Trainers (MTT).  The MTT is equipped with a Modular Miniraster Display for Advanced Research Technology (M2DART), which provides a 360-degree, out-the-window visual display.  The A-10 pilots from Davis-Monthan AFB, AZ, served as Forward Air Controllers and flew an AFRL/HEA A-10 MTT, equipped with an earlier generation DART visual display. At TACCSF, pilots from Eglin AFB, FL, Pacific Air Forces, TACCSF, and AFRL/HEA flew Boeing F-15 Weapons and Tactics Trainers (WTT) equipped with a single-channel, forward visual display system.  Additionally, TACCSF provided two MiG-29 Virtual Red Air Stations flown by Adversary Tactics pilots from Nellis AFB, NV.  WDs and ASTs, using a virtual E-3 AWACS simulator, were assigned to each team and participated from their home station at Tinker AFB, OK.  White Cell and Intelligence Officers were also key players from the operational units and helped increase the realism of the training scenario.Constructive forces at AFRL/HEA included six F-16Cs, three AH-64s, three Mi-24 Hinds, all computer generated by STOW technology, three KC-135s, ten MiG-29s, and two SU-27s generated by the AFRL/HEA Automated Threat Engagement System, and M-1 and T-72 tanks from ModSAF.  TACCSF constructive forces included one E-3 AWACS.  A robust Integrated Air Defense System from the Air Force Information Warfare Center included one SA-2 Surface to Air Missile (SAM), two SA-6 SAMs, three SA-8 SAMs, a Height Finding Radar, and an Early Warning Radar.Several enhanced simulation techniques were used during ROADRUNNER '98.  One of the technologies demonstrated was a newly developed 160,000 square mile photo-realistic database comprised entirely of satellite imagery of the Nellis AFB range complex.  Image generators for this database were two Silicon Graphics, Incorporated (SGI) Onyx 2 Infinite Reality, Reality Monsters.  In addition, STOW technologies, developed by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), were successfully integrated for the first time in a high-fidelity, real-time (60 Hz), networked, DMT flight environment.  Specifically, two four-ships of F-16s from the STOW AirSF system using SOAR technology were integrated into the scenario.Critical feedback by the participants provided researchers valuable insights on the utility of evolving DMT technology in a synthetic environment designed to overcome training limitations.  ROADRUNNER '98 findings will be incorporated into further DMT research and development efforts at AFRL/HEA, where industry and other government agencies are working in a collaborative environment to further enhance training. A detailed training analysis and DMT engineering lessons learned report from ROADRUNNER '98 will be published by AFRL/HEA and TACCSF in early 1999.7.3.2  COYOTE ’98 AFRL conducted its first ever COoperative Yearly Operational Technology Evaluation, or COYOTE '98, from November 3-5, 1998, in conjunction with DARPA, HQ USAF/XOC, TSPG (ASC/YW), and TACCSF to highlight various DMT technologies, experiments, and distributed tests.  The focus of the exercise was an experiment to evaluate and demonstrate DARPA STOW developed simulation technologies for use in DMT.  The purpose was to show industry and DoD customers what the state of the art could accomplish [25].  This event provided a vehicle to share the results of the collaborative efforts supporting DMT conducted over the past year.COYOTE provided observers with a view of DARPA’s STOW technologies integrated into the DMT environment, with virtual simulators flying within the STOW synthetic battlespace, using HLA to connect over a wide area network.  In addition, STOW’s speech generation and recognition system, along with the synthetic environment, composed of a dynamic terrain database and atmospheric conditions were featured as part of the event.  High fidelity visual environments of current virtual cockpits using high-resolution, photo-realistic database development tools were also demonstrated [26]. The technology displayed included demonstration results of achievements in the following areas:  Integration of AirSF to Virtual SimulatorsCognition Oriented Emergent Behavior Architecture (COREBA)Distributed Exercise Manager (DEM) The DMT Integrated Threat Environment Project (DMTITE)HLA Interface Performance Characteristics during the DMT ExperimentHLA/STOW Interface DevelopmentIVOX – The Interactive Voice eXchange ApplicationIntegration of AirSF to the MCE: An Effective DMT Approach for C2 OperatorsHLA Compliant Improved Ordnance ServerPerfMETRICS Monitoring SystemSynthetic Environment (SE) Integration to DMTThe Simulation Execution EnvironmentSimulator Latency Measurement Using the Simulation Network Analysis Project (SNAP)SoarSpeak - Voice Control of Synthetic AircraftBoth ROADRUNNER and COYOTE are planned to be recurring events serving as snapshots of progress being made during the ongoing development and evaluation process under the collaboratory concept described earlier.  The technical papers and briefings provided during COYOTE 98, and their points of contact, are available on the AFRL/HEA website:  HYPERLINK http://www.alhra.af.mil/html/coyote98.htm http://www.alhra.af.mil/html/COYOTE98.htm. HLA Operations and ResearchAFRL/HEA began preparation for an expanded HLA research program in late 1997 in response to the DoD policy mandating HLA compliance of all simulators and simulations.  Initial efforts began in Mar 98 with the implementation of an HLA compliant network in the DMT testbed based on the BMH DIS/HLA gateway software using the DARPA/STOW RTI & Federation Object Model (FOM).  This Wide Area Network (WAN) HLA implementation in the real-time DMT environment was successfully demonstrated and evaluated during COYOTE ’98.  AFRL plans to continue HLA R&D activities with the DMSO VxWorks RTI beta version and re-engineering of their existing network interface unit to work on an HLA network.  Work has also begun with Army, Navy, Marine Corps, and industry to establish and demonstrate a prototype FOM that will ensure joint interoperability for virtual training and exercises [27].  The ultimate goal is to work through the HLA challenges for the high speed, high fidelity virtual simulator community and feed the results back to the community for implementation to meet the DoD policy direction.7.4  Total Warfighter DMT ProgramsAlthough the highly publicized DMT activities have been largely fighter aircrew oriented, AFRL/HEA is also actively working DMT issues in other important warfighter domains.  The following sections discuss those activities.7.4.1  SpaceAFRL is leveraging current R&D capabilities and developing innovative new technologies for space warfighter education and training, mission performance support, mission planning, mission rehearsal, and post-mission evaluation.  A major goal of this research and development program is to develop and demonstrate a variety of technology delivery and performance support options which will provide faster, better, cheaper, seamless training and mission performance support.  In keeping with the objective to develop technologies that can be used anytime and anywhere, a second goal is to facilitate the integration of products from this effort into the distributed mission training global battlespace. This will permit space command and control that includes the capacity to provide performance support and training to new operators within the context of mission planning and rehearsal [28].7.4.2  Airborne Command and Control The Command, Control, and Communications Simulation, Training, and Research System (C3STARS) facility offers the opportunity to investigate complex decision making among interdependent team members within a dynamic and realistic setting. The crew stations and scenarios simulate the air defense mission of an AWACS platform.  Realism is achieved through the functional representation of equipment and displays, experienced personnel playing the role of simulation pilots, and the use of operational scenarios.  This facility provides the capability to represent a wide variety of weapon systems and training scenarios to include: Rivet Joint, JSTARS, AWACS, Uninhabited Air Vehicles, and Satellite Tracking and Surveillance systems. These capabilities are available to perform research in DMT, Team Performance Measurement, Training Effectiveness Research and other areas [29].7.4.3  Distributed Command & ControlIn cooperation with the ANG, AFRL has successfully integrated the Air Synthetic Forces (AirSF) with the AN/TYQ-23 Modular Control Equipment (MCE), and demonstrated the potential for integration of the MCE with the DMT environment.  The MCE provides the Air Force with a transportable automated ground air command and control system for controlling and coordinating the employment of aircraft and air defense weapons. The MCE contains all the air command and control equipment and tactical data links to perform the air defense function.The use of the actual MCE in DMT will allow the operators to train or operate in regularly scheduled war games and exercises from their home bases or in the field via standardized communications links [30].8.0  ManagementThere are numerous DMT initiatives and projects being managed by different organizations in the Air Force.  To help ensure DMT is implemented effectively and efficiently across the Air Force, several management activities are in existence or being formed.  This section will outline the structure that is currently proposed at the corporate AF (cross service) level.  MAJCOM DMT management structures are beyond the scope of this paper.8.1  Air Force DMT IPTA DMT IPT has been established in response to a decision by the Air Force Requirements Oversight Council (AFROC).  The DMT IPT mission is to formulate and manage an integrated, multi-command strategy to achieve a fully interoperable, Air Force-wide training system.  It will set priorities for integrating core capabilities, ensuring inter-operability, and eliminating redundancy.  The DMT IPT provides synchronization, oversight and guidance for the development of the AF-wide DMT system-of-systems [31].  Currently, the DMT-IPT is in the process of initiation.  Information provided is therefore preliminary and subject to change.The DMT IPT focus is on ensuring that DMT operational concepts, technologies and priorities are appropriately defined.  Additionally, the IPT will focus on Planning, Programming, and Budgeting System (PPBS) inputs. The IPT structure (Fig. 2.) provides policy, guidance and oversight for the DMT program. This IPT brings the operational training requirements, training implementation plans, technology investment strategies, acquisition and the PPBS process together to achieve DMT goals and objectives.  DMT activities revolve around the IPT structure depicted above.  The DMT IPT provides the Air Force corporate structure with the integrated operational requirements and resource needs for incorporation into the PPBS process. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure 2. Proposed DMT-IPT StructureThe MAJCOM/DO’s (Operations Chiefs) form the DMT Steering Group with ACC/DO (two-star) as the initial lead. The membership on the IPT itself will include representation from each MAJCOM, ANG, ASC/YW, AFRL, AF/XOC, AF/XOR (Requirements), SAF/AQ and the Aerospace Command and Control and Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Center (AC2ISRC).  The DMT IPT will serve as an umbrella organization overseeing five working groups (WG): Operations & Training WG, Acquisition & Resources WG, Technology & Innovation WG, the Security WG, and the Architecture Management WG.  The IPT’s role will be to:a)  Review issues and recommendations from WGs and initiate appropriate action to bring about affordable solutions that support MAJCOM and other DMT Training Implementation Plans.b)  Provide a forum for information sharing and consensus building.c)  Identify cross-MAJCOM or cross-program issues and seek to resolve them at the lowest level possible.d) Oversee a consolidated AF DMT Roadmap that integrates a technology investment strategy, resources, and MAJCOM training implementation plans.The Operations & Training WG is responsible for consolidating operational training requirements for DMT. The Acquisition & Resource WG is responsible for acquisition strategies, monitoring acquisition status, providing updates, and promoting commonality for DMT programs and initiatives to include coordination between legacy efforts and new programs.  The Technology & Innovation WG is responsible for orchestrating efforts to develop and maintain the Technology Investment Strategy that supports the MAJCOM Training Implementation Plans.  The Security WG is responsible for orchestrating policy, guidance and implementation of security solutions to satisfy operational DMT training requirements.  Lastly, the Architecture Management WG is responsible for issues concerning the network and architecture requirements which can impact the effectiveness of AF DMT issues.8.2 AFMC DMT ForumThe TSPG is the organization responsible for contracting the products and services required by the users for aircrew and maintenance training.  For DMT, ASC currently is pursuing the acquisition of training services for ACC using a strategy called Commercial Training Simulation Services (CTSS).  ASC is also contracting for DMT training capability for AMC as their Aircrew Training Systems contracts are re-competed over the next few years.Finally, ASC is conducting the contracting actions for DMT O&I services.  The DMT O&I contractor will be responsible for the technical aspects of the DMT network.  The O&I contractor will manage the overall DMT network and procure wide area communication.  Additionally, the O&I contractor will establish and enforce interoperability standards of individual DMT participants and provide the federation and run time interface for the common wargaming environment [14]. Given the wide range of users with unique needs and requirements, ASC hosts a periodic forum for the exchange of information between Air Force users, referred to as the DMT forum (previously known as the DMT User’s Group).  This forum is used to address the unique needs and issues of the various programs to help ensure compatibility between the development efforts.  DMT forums provide updates on the status of  the various Air Force DMT programs and information exchange on other DMT applicable initiatives [32].  9.0  SummaryThis paper provided an update on the current status of activities related to the AF concept and implementation of DMT.  The Air Force is beginning to implement what may become a DoD wide shared environment for training, mission rehearsal, experimentation, analysis, and operations.  The ongoing work of the simulation community and SISO is critical to the successful implementation of this endeavor. There are many management and technical issues to be resolved and community efforts and contributions are welcomed.  This paper attempts to help identify where contributions would be most useful.  10.  References [1]	R. Tarr:  “Modeling & Simulation: MS 101”.  Tutorial presented at the 20th Interservice Industry Training, Simulation and Education Workshop, 30 Nov 1998, Orlando FL. [2]	L. Carroll, D. Andrews, & M. Wellik:  “Distributed Mission Training, US Air Force Links Diverse Aircraft Simulators at Different Locations to Revolutionize Its Aircrew Training.”  Armed Forces Journal International, Vol 136, No. 4, pp. 46-49, December 1998. [3]	Air Combat Command:  “FINAL Capstone Requirements Document CAF 9USAF) 009-93 for Distributed Mission Training”, 8 Oct 1997, Langley AFB VA.[4]	R. Hughes & L. Brown (March 1985):  “Trends shaping advanced aircrew training capabilities through the 1990’s.”  AFHRL-TP-84-52, AD-A152 277.  Williams AFB, AZ:  Operations Training Division.  Project 1123. NTIS. [5]	R. Fogleman:  “Revolutionizing Training in the Air Force.”  Air Force Chief of Staff Message 141957ZFEB96 14 Feb 1996, HQ USAF, Washington DC.[6]	J. Hawkins:  “Distributed Mission Training Update”  Briefing presented at DMT Status Review Meeting, 3-4 Sept 1997, Wright Patterson AFB, OH.[7]	J. Donald.  Personal communication, Dec 10, 1998.[8]	Air Combat Command:  “Concept of Operations for Distributed Mission Training”, 13 Oct 1998, Langley AFB VA.[9]	M. Ryan.  Commanders NOTAM 98-4, 28 July 1998, HQ USAF, Washington DC.[10]	Air Combat Command: “DRAFT multi-Command Mission Needs Statement 307-98 for Distributed Mission Training”, 19 Oct 1998, Langley AFB VA. [11]	R. Hawley:  “Remarks to the Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation, and Education Conference” (Keynote Speaker).  1 Dec 1998, Orlando FL. [12]	Air Combat Command:  “FINAL Operational Requirements Document (ORD) CAF USAF 009-93-I-A for Distributed Mission Training”, 8 Oct 1997, Langley AFB VA[13]	Air Mobility Command:  “DRAFT Operational Requirements Document AMC (USAF) 009-93-I-B, Distributed Mission Training (DMT)”.  In Simulator Networking Requirements Analysis, 1 Mar 1998, Scott AFB IL.[14]	R. Honeywell:  “Distributed Mission Training”  In The Training Systems Product Group Journal, Dec 1998, Wright Patterson AFB, OH.[15]	Bromley:  “Bullet Background Paper on Distributed Mission Training”, 21 Sep 98, Air Combat Command, Langley AFB VA.[16]	Air Mobility Command: Simulator Networking Requirements Analysis, 1 Mar 1998, Scott AFB IL.[17]	325 Training Squadron: “The AMS Story,” 325 Training Squadron Newsletter, Issue 2, Dec 1998: Tyndall AFB, FL. [18]	G. Selix:  Personal Communication, 23 Dec 1998[19]	C. Arnold:  Point Paper on Distributed Mission Training (DMT) for Space Forces, undated:  Space and Missile Systems Center, Los Angeles Air Force Station, CA. [20]	P. Karraker:  Distributed Mission Training, Space Training to the Next Level.  Briefing presented at AFMC/AFSPC Space Day, 25 Jan 1999.  Air Force Space Command, Peterson AFB, CO.[21]	C. Arnold:  Distributed Mission Training for Space Forces.   Briefing presented at AFMC/AFSPC Space Day, 25 Jan 1999: Space and Missile Systems Center, Los Angeles Air Force Station, CA.[22]	J. Good:  “Technology Engineering Development” In The Training Systems Product Group Journal, Dec 1998, Wright Patterson AFB, OH.[23]	J. Good: “DMT Technical Forum” Briefing presented at COYOTE ‘98/AFRL Industry Days, 3-5 Nov 1998, Air Force Research Laboratory, Williams Gateway Airport, Mesa AZ.[24]	P. Crane:  “ROADRUNNER ’98: A Distributed Mission Training Exercise”  Paper and briefing presented at COYOTE ‘98/AFRL Industry Days, 3-5 Nov 1998, Air Force Research Laboratory, Williams Gateway Airport, Mesa AZ.[25]	Air Force Research Laboratory:  “DARPA/STOW Experiment” In The Training Systems Product Group Journal, Dec 1998, Wright Patterson AFB, OH.[26]	Air Force Research Laboratory:  “COYOTE ’98  A Distributed Mission Training Experience”  HYPERLINK http://www.alhra.af.mil/html/coyote98.htm http://www.alhra.af.mil/html/COYOTE98.htm Dec 1998, Williams Gateway Airport, Mesa AZ.[27]	G. Barbier:  “High Level Architecture Operations and Research”, 3 Nov 1998, Air Force Research Laboratory, Williams Gateway Airport, Mesa AZ.[28]	B. Sorensen:  “Space Warfighter Mission Rehearsal and Training Technologies”  In The Training Systems Product Group Journal, Dec 1998, Wright Patterson AFB, OH.[29]	S. Schifflett:  “Command, Control, Communications Simulation, Training, and Research System (C3STARS) In The Training Systems Product Group Journal, Dec 1998, Wright Patterson AFB, OH.[30]	R. Brooks: “Integration of AirSF to the Modular Control Equipment: An Effective Distributed Mission Training Approach for C2 Operators”  Paper provided at COYOTE ‘98/AFRL Industry Days, 3-5 Nov 1998, Air Force Research Laboratory, Williams Gateway Airport, Mesa AZ.[31]	HQ United States Air Force:  “DRAFT Air Force Distributed Mission Training, Integrated Process Team (IPT) Charters”.  Undated document, HQ USAF, Washington DC.[32]	M. Nenninger:  Personal Communication.  24 Nov 1998.Author BiographiesDIANNE PARRISH  is a Modeling and Simulation Program Officer at the Air Force Agency for Modeling and Simulation(AFAMS), Orlando, FL. She is the AFAMS lead for DMT and HLA.ROBERT A. HEINLEIN (Lt Col USAF, Ret) serves as a liaison in Orlando FL between the AFRL Warfighter Training Research Division, AFAMS, and other Service organizations in Orlando. JUSTINE GOOD (Major, USAF) is the program manager for Distributed Mission Training at the Air Force Research Laboratory, Warfighter Training Research Division, Mesa, AZ.   