An Incremental Approach to Development of a C4ISR Analysis FederationGregory M. RoszykGary L. WaagBooz(Allen & Hamilton, Inc.1953 Gallows RdSuite 500Vienna, VA  22182703-902-7162 703-902-7166roszyk_greg@bah.com, waag_gary@bah.com Keywords:C4ISR, C4I, ISR, Intelligence, HLA, Analysis ABSTRACT:  Many recent and on-going Department of Defense studies have a need to be able to analyze the impact of intelligence community-derived information upon the battle in terms of quality, quantity and timeliness of related products.  Current analytic approaches do not enable detailed insight nor tradeoffs within this fairly complex Intelligence, Surveillance & Reconnaissance (ISR) cycle.This paper discusses how the High Level Architecture (HLA) provides a framework for the incremental development of a federation of simulation models to support such a need.  This federation will provide the capability to perform more detailed trade studies and performance assessments of and within the ISR cycle.Utilizing existing ‘legacy’ simulations, a federation can be created within a specific intelligence discipline (-INT) such that individual federates possess the following functionality:Requirement/Concept of Operations (CONOPS) Analysis and GenerationMission PlanningISR Sensor CollectionTasking, Processing, Exploitation and Dissemination (TPED)Ground TruthSuccessive builds may add additional –INT capabilities or tie the federation to ‘proven’ command and control (C2) and combat models to provide high fidelity sensor-to-shooter models.The resulting analytic federation provides a detailed representation of the process within the ISR cycle enabling improved decision making to support acquisition and force structure decisions.  Additionally, this federation provides a cohesive environment for accurately representing the value of independent and fused sources of intelligence data.This paper describes the details of each of the ISR functional areas and provides a strategy for how successive intelligence disciplines can be represented and then integrated into an overall C4ISR Analysis Federation.Background and RationaleMany recent and on-going Department of Defense (DoD) studies have a need to be able to analyze the impact of intelligence community-derived information upon the battle in terms of quality, quantity and timeliness of related products.  For instance, within the Joint Vision 2010 construct, our forces’ success in waging war is intimately tied to their ability to develop and sustain Dominant Battlespace Awareness (DBA) [1].  Although precise metrics for calculating DBA have yet to be fully developed, it is clear that more timely and accurate images of the battlefield, as just one example of an intelligence product, can lead to improvements in DBA.Within the U.S. intelligence community and military-industrial complex, there are numerous intelligence disciplines, commonly referred to as ‘INTs,’ that provide such intelligence products.  The most common intelligence disciplines are:IMINT - Imagery IntelligenceSIGINT - Signals Intelligence (consisting primarily of Communications Intelligence (COMINT) and Electronics Intelligence (ELINT) products)MASINT - Measures and Signatures IntelligenceHUMINT - Human IntelligenceOSINT - Open Source IntelligenceAlthough one may think of each of these INTs in terms of their resulting products, each INT discipline consists, among other things, of its own unique set of processes, procedures, organizations, systems and chains of command that result in the respective end product. This overall cycle, nominally depicted in Figure 1, is referred to as the Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR) cycle. (The overall process, where the commander’s Command, Control, Communications and Computers (C4) systems are linked to the ISR cycle is referred to as the C4ISR process.)At a very aggregate level, one can think of each of these INTs in terms of the time delay associated with the request for information and the receipt of a product. Considering the Warfighter as the primary ‘end-user’ of the ISR Cycle’s products, his input is a ‘requirement’ for intelligence products, and the output he receives is the actual product.  His main concern is the quantity, quality and timeliness with which he receives the products he needs.Given this Warfighter perspective, many analytic approaches, which have attempted to assess the impact of intelligence upon the battle, have traditionally provided little insight into the details across the ISR cycle.  Rather, they focused on individual steps of the cycle, primarily collection.  That is to say, the typical intelligence community studies have developed measures of the quantity of intelligence  products collected over time, with little attention paid to how much of this volume actually makes it through the rest of the ISR cycle and out to the Warfighter.To perform such studies today, there currently are various stand-alone models of different steps of the ISR cycle for multiple INTs that can be ‘sneaker-netted’ together.  However, this approach typically lacks the more detailed representation of the processes across the ISR cycle and also lacks an integration, or fusion, of the different INTs. Overview of ApproachTo fill such a gap, it is the premise of this paper that with the maturation of the DoD High Level Architecture (HLA), now is the time to investigate the development of a federation of simulations which provides detailed analysis of the various segments across the ISR cycle.   Booz(Allen & Hamilton has embarked upon the development of this C4ISR Analysis Federation (CAF).  An HLA C4ISR Analysis Federation is being created where separate Federates address different detailed aspects of the ISR cycle.  This concept allows for more detailed models of the various steps of the ISR cycle to be ‘plugged-in’ as necessary.  Separate Federations would address the ISR cycle for each of the various INTs.  These federations could be combined as needed to compose tailored views of the overall ISR capability.This C4ISR Analysis Federation will provide a cohesive environment for accurately representing the value of independent and fused sources of intelligence data and performing detailed trade studies within the ISR cycle of the various INT disciplines to assess the impact upon resulting products. It is envisioned that this resulting federation will then be tied to proven  command and control (C2) and force-on-force combat models to provide high fidelity sensor-to-shooter analytic capabilities.The Benefit of the HLAThe concept of integrating or blending the results of multiple INT models or simulations is not new.  In the past, it has been achieved by sequentially running individual models and passing the results from one to the next using ‘sneaker-net’ techniques. The High Level Architecture provides a framework for the development of single and/or multi INT federations that provide numerous benefits over this previous approach. Among such benefits, perhaps most important are the following:data consistency, execution timeliness, and the emergence of a persistent analytical capability (e.g. a persistent federation [3]) to support recurring analyses in a consistent manner.In terms of data consistency, the Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) provides rational, step-by-step planning guidance for federation design and execution.  Following the steps outlined within the Federation Execution Planner’s Workbook (FEPW) [4], data consistency is addressed within the areas of ‘federate responsibilities for objects and interactions’ and ‘data representation.’  Following these guidelines, simulation developers must demonstrate a thorough understanding of the data they will share and the effects of their interactions.  Within the ‘sneaker-netted’ solution, in which data is handed from one simulation operator to another, these results and their interactions with the next simulation(s) may not be clearly understood.As for execution timeliness, the speed at which the HLA-based federation is executed is expected to be reduced over current sequential operations.  Currently, as each federate simulation is typically event-based, the events are recorded and passed between simulations sequentially.  Using the HLA Runtime Infrastructure (RTI), as an event occurs in the first simulation, its results will be passed, as characterized within the federation object model (FOM), to the next simulation for operation(s) to begin.  All simulations will be able to operate in parallel, based on proper computer hardware and communication architectures, reducing overall execution time.Perhaps the most significant benefit which the HLA will provide is the emergence of a persistent federation, populated with the current best-of-breed models of intelligence assets, activities, and infrastructure components.  A comprehensive C4ISR Analysis Federation would consist of models of the ISR cycle, C4 processes at multiple echelons, human assets, communications assets, computer assets and networks, and traditional force-on-force combat models.  With shrinking development budgets and growing analytical requirements, the DoD analysis and acquisition  communities can not continue to invest in the building of new models to answer each new question.  Rather, the limited development dollars available should be used to extend the capabiltiies of individual models in non-redundant ways.In each such instance, the federation’s requirements as a whole would not change, however subsets of the federation could be used as necessary to meet the specific goals of a study.  An example of this would be a desire to examine the influence of different exploitation Concepts of Operations (CONOPS) on the overall C4ISR process.CAF Phase 1: An IMINT Analysis Federation The approach described above is such that an analysis federation of a single individual intelligence discipline, or INT, will be developed first.  Lessons learned from this development will be used to assist in the development of federations for other INTs.  Also, where ISR cycle processes and procedures are similar from one INT to another, opportunities to re-use Federates across several INTs will be leveraged to the maximum extent possible. Why IMINT?The first intelligence discipline for which an analysis federation will be developed is that of IMINT.   This discipline has been chosen for several reasons:Among the various IMINT products, electro-optical and infra-red imagery photographs are products with which people are most familiar.  Timely snapshots of a conflict can be a tremendous asset in attempting to perform Battle Damage Assessment (BDA).  Proper BDA helps vector future operations and provides potentially invaluable public relations.  Accordingly, the ability to provide detailed analysis of the IMINT cycle, identify choke points, and perform trade studies can provide the necessary rationale to sustain and optimize continued support and investment.Booz(Allen has provided key support to the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA), as well as one of its predecessor organizations, the Central Imagery Office (CIO), in the architectural definition and implementation of the U.S. Imagery and Geospatial System (USIGS).  The USIGS architecture has overarching responsibility for the timely delivery of all imagery and geospatial products to our Warfighters.  This knowledge can be leveraged in the development of such an IMINT Analysis Federation. Booz(Allen has recently provided IMINT architecture performance analysis support to the NIMA, CIO, C4ISR DSC, and Joint Staff, J-2.  As such, familiarity has been developed with the current state of available IMINT architecture analysis tools.IMINT Analysis Federation: OverviewThe approach to the federation development in all cases will be to re-use existing legacy simulations to the maximum extent possible and convert them to HLA-compliant Federates.  New Federates will be developed only for processes where no suitable legacy simulation can be identified.  The essential steps in the IMINT cycle that are sufficiently distinct as to be candidates for separate Federates and for which candidate legacy simulations can be identified are as follows:Requirement/CONOPS Analysis and GenerationMission PlanningISR Sensor CollectionTasking, Processing, Exploitation and Dissemination (TPED)Ground TruthFigure 2 depicts this proposed IMINT federation graphically.IMINT Analysis Federation: Federate DesignWithin the IMINT ISR cycle there is a series of sequential activities that occur repeatedly.  The first step, Requirement/Concept of Operations (CONOPS) Analysis and Generation (RCAG), requires the ability to create and/or visualize the information collection requirements.  Within this process, it is necessary to be able to ‘view’ the IMINT cycle in its entirety.  The particular user requirements, which initiate the process, must be considered in light of the various end-users that will receive the products. Accordingly, this RCAG Federate will enable optimal strategies to be developed for selecting which sensor should collect the information; similarly, strategies will also be able to be developed to optimize the path the product takes through the TPED process.  This portion of the fFederation will additionally display data generated by other fFederates such as sensor track and way point data, as well as unit ground truth information.  It is through this Federate that the intelligence analyst will primarily interact.The next Federate, Mission Planning, will provide for the planning of ISR collection assets.  This planning includes the definition of satellite orbits and the specification of aircraft tracks, to include data such as way points and orbit duration.  Mission planning will provide scheduling data to the ISR Sensor Collection Federate.The ISR Sensor Collection Federate will provide detailed sensor modeling specifics.  Given time and location data provided by the mission planner, the collection simulation will take into account target priorities, geographic and environmental constraints to determine collection opportunities.  In addition to providing sensor characterizations, the collection simulation will optimize sensor allocations against potential re-tasking and sensor priorities against specific collection requirements.The next Federate, the TPED Federate, will provide a representation and detailed insight into the bottleneck and utilization problems within this ‘system of systems.’  Tasking focuses on the time and systems required to assign requirements to ISR assets.  Processing represents the time and systems associated with translating raw collected data into human and/or machine-readable format.  Exploitation represents the extraction of information and possible creation of intelligence products from collected data.  Dissemination represents the distribution of exploited and unexploited information over communication networks.  Policy, security, physical connectivity and/or military doctrine, each of which will be accounted for in this TPED Federate, inextricably interconnect each of these steps.Lastly, to provide realistic and accurate representations of ground forces and target activity, ground truth will likely be provided to the IMINT Analysis Federation from a traditional force-on-force model.  Depending on the fidelity and the analytic requirements, ground truth could also be provided by traditional mission planning and rehearsal tools.CAF Phase 2 and beyond: Successive BuildsFuture expansion of this CAF is envisioned in two different dimensions.  First, as depicted in Figure 3, Federations will be developed that provide detailed Federates of the processes associated with different INTs.  As discussed previously, where Federate processes from one INT have similarity to like processes in other INTs, capabilities will be re-used to the maximum extent possible, all the way up to reusing the same Federate from one INT to another.A second dimension for expansion of this effort, as depicted in Figure 4, shows the CAF acting as a Federate, interacting with a Ccommand and Ccontrol (C2) simulation and a force-on-force combat model.  Such a federation construct would thereby provide a high fidelity ‘sensor-to-shooter’ analysis capability.  These two dimensions of expansion do not need to be, and are not planned to be performed sequentially.  Indeed, an iterative, spiral development is envisioned.  Once the IMINT Analysis Federation development has been completed, tested and validated, it is currently envisioned that this Federation would be federated with a C2 model and a combat model to provide an ability to perform analyses of imagery timelines upon battle outcomes. As successive INT Analysis Federations are developed, there will be a need to develop an intelligence fusion fFederate to help tie together these various Federations.  This fusion process will need to replicate the manner in which intelligence fusion is performed today, as well as provide for analytic excursions and trade studies of the impact of the fusion process upon intelligence timelines and battle outcomes.Lastly, as these successive INT Analysis Federations are developed, tested, validated and then integrated with the intelligence fusion fFederate, they will be added to the overall C4ISR Analysis Federation, linking them with the C2 and combat models.  This approach will provide a continuously increasingly robust capability to the C4ISR Analysis Federation.ConclusionIt is clear that there is a need in the DoD analysis and acquisition communities for a more robust analytic capability to study the details of the processes embedded within various intelligence disciplines.  Such a capability needs to enable trade studies which shed light on the impact of these intelligence processes upon the quantity, quality and timeliness of intelligence information which is provided to our Warfighters.  Ultimately, such analyses must be able to translate resulting impacts into our ability to ‘win the war.’  The DoD High Level Architecture (HLA) for simulation development provides a framework for the incremental development of a federation of simulation models to support such a need.  Furthermore, HLA provides the benefits of data consistency, execution timeliness, and the emergence of a persistent analytical capability.This paper has provided a description of an effort that Booz(Allen has recently embarked upon to develop such a capability.  The initial focus is upon the development of an analysis capability for the Imagery Intelligence (IMINT) ISR cycle.  Later efforts will expand on this initial effort in two dimensions - by developing analysis federations of additional intelligence disciplines, as well as by iteratively integrating the evolving intelligence federation with appropriate C2 and combat models.References[1]	Joint Vision 2010, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Washington DC (Pamphlet).[2]	Central Intelligence Agency, “Factbook on Intelligence”, 15 October 1997.[3]	Dahmann, J., Lutz, R., “Persistent Federation”, Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW), September 1998. [4]	Federation Execution Planner’s Workbook (FEPW) Version 1.3 Draft 7, Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO), Alexandria VA 1998.Author BiographiesGREGORY ROSZYK is an Associate at Booz(Allen & Hamilton, Inc. in Vienna, VA.  He has spent the last 5five years assisting NIMA and the intelligence community building simulations and conducting C4ISR analysis studies.GARY L. WAAG is a Senior Associate at Booz(Allen & Hamilton, Inc., in Vienna, VA.  He has twenty plus years of engineering experience supporting diverse DoD and NATO M&S activities, including design, development, employment and management of constructive and virtual simulations used for analysis, acquisition and training support.  He leverages this experience to help coordinate his firm’s modeling and simulation support to customers that span the U.S. national intelligence as well as defense communities.  He is a Co-Vice Chair of the SISO C4ISR Planning and Review Panel.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1 - The ISR Cycle [2]Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3 - Multi -INT FederationFigure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2 - IMINT FederationFigure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 4 - C2 Federation