Space Environment Models for Acquisition, Operations, and M&SGregory P. GinetKeith M. GrovesRobert V. HilmerMatthew SmithamAir Force Research LaboratoryAFRL/VSB29 Randolph Rd.Hanscom AFB, MA 01731781-377-3974, 781-377-3137 HYPERLINK mailto:ginet@plh.af.mil ginet@plh.af.mil, groves@plh.af.mil Keywords:Space Weather, Radiation Effects, Ionospheric Effects ABSTRACT: Models of the space environment supply crucial information needed in the design, operation, and simulation of a wide variety of communication, navigation, and surveillance systems. Space environment effects range from intermittent outages of navigation and communication links caused by ionospheric scintillation to total satellite system and subsystem failures caused by intense fluxes of magnetospheric particles. The AF-GEOSpace and Scintillation Network Decision Aide (SCINDA)  codes have been constructed to facilitate the assessment or simulation of such effects by bringing  often-used climatological, real-time specification, and forecast models together under the umbrella of a user-friendly and graphics intensive master program. Common input data sets, application modules (e.g., orbit and link generation), and visualization are provided to all the models. AF-GEOSpace can be used to provide data for simulations or to act as a server to provide effects to simulation objects. Efforts are currently  underway to merge SCINDA and AF-GEOSpace and to construct an OpenGEOSpace capable of running on several platforms, including Master Environmental Library (MEL) servers. New projects aimed at creating high-resolution scintillation and neutral density climatology models specifically for M&S applications have also been started. 1. IntroductionThe majority of space systems operate between 100 kilometers altitude and geosynchronous orbit (6.6 Earth radii) in a region of space that contains numerous environmental hazards. Space particle populations ranging from the low energy plasma responsible for spacecraft frame charging to high energy radiation belt protons responsible for microelectronic upsets vary over many spatial and temporal scales. Large variations in the Earth’s ionosphere driven by solar, magnetospheric, and thermospheric activity cause problems for HF radio transmission, radars, and ground-to-satellite communications and navigation links. Changes in the thermospheric neutral density driven by geophysical and solar activity alter the drag on, and consequently the lifetime of low Earth orbiting satellites. Though much remains to be understood about the fundamental processes driving magnetospheric, ionospheric, and thermospheric dynamics, space scientists have constructed a variety of empirical, statistical, and physics-based models which supply needed space environmental information to systems engineers and operators. As research progresses newer models will become available yielding better climatology, real-time specification, and eventually, forecasts.To facilitate the assessment of space environment effects on satellite and C3I systems, the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) has brought together many often-used models under the umbrella of a user-friendly, graphics intensive master program called AF-GEOSpace. In addition to a standardized user interface, GEOSpace provides the user with common  input databases, applications modules (e.g., orbit generation), and visualization tools. Included in GEOSpace are climatological models of the cosmic rays, radiation belts, aurora, ionospheric electron density, and ionospheric scintillation; real-time DMSP satellite data driven models of the auroral boundary , energy spectra,  and the outer-zone energetic electrons; and forecast models for solar disturbances, solar energetic particles, and magnetospheric plasma. The satellite design community has been a major user of GEOSpace, applying it to estimate the effects of space particle flux and dose on advanced microelectronics and optical devices for design and orbit trade-off studies. Versions of GEOSpace that access real-time data bases and include forecast models not cleared for public release have been created for the USAF 55 SWXS and are currently in prototype operation.The Scintillation Network Decision Aide (SCINDA) system has been developed by AFRL to meet the real-time specification and forecast needs of DoD. Scintillation of satellite signals in the VHF/UHF range of frequencies is caused by nighttime irregularities in the equatorial ionosphere and can severely impact satellite communication, Global Positioning System navigation, and radar systems. The SCINDA system comprises both sensors and software. Data from remote scintillation receivers located near the magnetic equator is fed via the Internet into a central computer program which then produces easy-to-understand graphical products that are distributed to satellite communication users. Though real-time operational needs have been the main driver for developing SCINDA, data sets being collected now will be used to greatly improve scintillation climatology and give mission planners and simulators realistically dynamic nightly profiles (see Section 3).In Section 2 the GEOSpace and SCINDA codes are described in more detail. Section 3 outlines the current and future development work planned for these codes and in Section 4 we summarize.2. Code Description2.1 GEOSpaceGEOSpace is an objected oriented code written in the C++ language for operating on a UNIX operating system, in particular a Silicon Graphics workstation with X-Windows Motif and OpenGL graphics libraries. Efforts to port GEOSpace to other platforms are discussed in Section 3. The division of the software into explicit science, data, applications, graphics, and worksheet modules simplifies the model integration process and enhances both portability and expandability.  Each type of module has a specific task:Science Modules are the core of GEOSpace. Each science module encapsulates an environmental feature model (for example, the CRRESRAD radiation dosage model) which can be written in C++, C, or FORTRAN.Application Modules supply various functions and tools needed to determine environmental effects on space systems. Tasks performed by applications modules include generating spacecraft orbits, integrating radiation dosages and estimating energy transfer in solid-state devices, and calculating HF ray traces in the ionosphere.Data Modules provide a means of reading files and externally produced data sets and analyzing them in useful ways.Graphics Modules operate on data sets produced by the Science, Application, or Data Modules. Each graphic module allows a given data set to be displayed a different way in either one, two, or three dimensional graphics windows. Examples of graphics modules include isocontours, plane slices, and line plots.Worksheet Modules provide a set of tools to aid the user in completing often performed analytic tasks such as coordinate and time conversions.The versatility of GEOSpace is illustrated in Figure 1 with a geophysically consistent snapshot of the near-Earth space environment as rendered in a GEOSpace 3D graphics window. Included are models of  the Earth’s radiation belts, aurora, peak density of the ionospheric F layer, and several satellites, detector fields-of-view, and communication and navigation links.Different versions of GEOSpace have been constructed to satisfy a variety of DoD and civilian user needs. A Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1. GEOspace rendering of the near-Earth space environmentbrief description of each version is given below. Version 1.21 is the only version cleared for public release and has been distributed to over 60 users in government, industry, and academia.  With the exception of the capability to animate satellite orbits, V1.21 is static. That is, the user supplies a fixed date, time, and set of geophysical parameters and receives output valid at the input time. Models contained in V1.21 include:CRRESRAD – the radiation belt dose model derived from CRRES satellite data [1].CRRESPRO – the radiation belt proton flux model derived from CRRES satellite data [2]. CRRESELE – the radiation belt electron flux model derived from CRRES satellite data [3].AURORA – a model giving distributions of auroral particle number flux, energy flux, and conductivities based on DMSP satellite data [4,5].PIM – the Parameterized Ionospheric Model specifying ionospheric quantities over the entire globe [6].WBMOD – the Wide-Band climatological scintillation Model determining ionospheric scintillation effects over the entire globe (release of WBMOD is currently controlled by AFSPC) [7].Version 1.33 is available to DoD only or by special approval. V1.33 includes all the capabilities of V1.21 plus includes the ability to access real-time data bases at the USAF 55 SWXS. Additional models and data display capabilities include: PPS – the Proton Prediction System used for forecasting the intensity and duration of solar proton events [8].ISPM – the Interplanetary Shock Propogation Model used for forecasting the arrival and intensity of solar disturbances [9].DMSP_Spectra – a data module to display real-time DMSP auroral particle data.HEEM – the High Energy Electron Monitor exploiting real-time DMSP data to specify the intensity of the outer zone MeV electrons.Version 1.4 is scheduled for release to DoD in Feb 99 and will be submitted for clearance for public release with restrictions. All the capabilities of Version 1.33 are included with the additions of:CHIME – the CRRES Heavy Ion Model of the Environment specifying cosmic rays and solar protons [10].APEXRAD – a low-Earth orbit radiation dose model using data from the APEX satellite [11].LET and SEU rate estimators – modules that use CHIME and CRRESPRO data to estimate the linear energy transfer and single event upset rate in solid state devices [10]. SEE Maps – maps of the relative probability of satellite Single Event Effects based on APEX and CRRES satellite data [12]. Satellite Applications Module – provides visualization of satellite detector cones and links for communication or navigation. Version 2 of GEOSpace, currently running only at AFRL, is a truly dynamic tool in that it can generate and animate quasi-static models over a user-specified time interval and run time-dependent simulation codes. Version 2 includes the Magnetospheric Specification and Forecast Model (MSFM) and the Parameterized Real-time Ionospheric Specification Model (PRISM). This version will also be available on a variety of platforms as is discussed in Section 3.2.2 SCINDABecause of the variable and unpredicatable nature of ionospheric scintillation, SCINDA has been developed to provide the ever-growing community of satellite communication and navigation users with real-time regional specification and short-term forecasts of 250 MHz scintillation [13]. A fundamental objective of the SCINDA program has been to distill complex scintillation data into simplified, operationally accurate products which can be readily understood by nontechnical satellite link users. The SCINDA system consists of a network of ground-based receivers which monitor satellite transmissions and provide scintillation data in near real-time to drive a computer model which integrates the measurements and generates physically consistent graphical representations of scintillation features. The model is designed to function well with a data stream from a minimum of two ground-based receivers separated in latitude; ideally, one should be situated at the magnetic equator and the other close to 15 degrees North or South magnetic latitude.In the current implementation, satellite receiving stations have been established at Ancon, Peru and Antofagasta, Chile to monitor 250 MHz transmissions from two geostationary satellites. The receiving systems perform online processing of the signal intensity and compute key scintillation parameters every 90 seconds. The data are then retrieved automatically by the remote SCINDA operator. At the operator terminal the observed parameters are combined with an empirical model of equatorial bubble dynamics in order to generate three-dimensional maps of irregularity structures such as those shown in Figure 2. Further analysis produces two-dimensional communication outage maps, such as that shown in Figure 3, which give easily communicated ‘warning’ and ‘watch’ alerts for specific satellites. SCINDA data is used to adjust the level of the climatological scintillation model WBMOD to give coverage over an area wider then the that available from the real-time receivers.The SCINDA software is written in C and runs on a Silicon Graphics workstation running X-Windows Motif and OpenGL graphics libraries. Indeed, SCINDA  was designed to have the same ‘look and feel’ as GEOSpace. Plans are progressing to merge the two software products in order to achieve common input data bases, applications libraries, and a reduction in software development costs.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2. Ionospheric density irregularity structures as modeled by SCINDA. Red, yellow, and green hazards levels are shown with affected satellite links. Several extensions to the existing system are planned in the near future that include deployment of additional stations to improve coverage beyond the South American sector, the implementation of an algorithm to predict globally the onset of scintillation based on the ion density data from sensors on the DMSP satellite, and the extension of the frequency and spatial coverage of the observations by the addition of GPS receivers capable of recording amplitude and phase scintillations in the L-band of frequencies.3. Current Development EffortsVersion 2 of GEOSpace contains significantly more than just the transformation from a static to dynamic environment representation. The program has been rigorously separated into a platform-independent GEOSpace science and applications kernel (i.e., keeping strict C++ coding standards and removing the UNIX dependency), OpenGL based graphics libraries, and a platform dependent User Interface (UI). Porting GEOSpace to platforms running JAVA, X-Windows, or Microsoft Windows and OpenGL graphics will involve only modification of the UI. To support a wider customer base in the radiation effects and satellite design community AFRL will first port V2.1 to a Windows NT system. The newest version of GEOSpace is also being used to create new web-based space weather software products for the USAF 55th Space Weather Squadron.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3 Scintillation outage map produced by SCINDA.In the Modeling and Simulation community, interest in the space environment is growing as the reliance of the DoD on space systems for communications, surveillance, and navigation is increasing in almost all phases of operations. With support from the Air Force Combat Climatology Center (AFCCC), AFRL is working to make GEOSpace part of the Master Environmental Library (MEL). As part of MEL, GEOSpace will be able to provide M&S users with parameters and gridded field data representing many features of the space environment in formats consistent with what is being accomplished for the terrestrial environment. GEOSpace will first be transitioned to the prototype MEL site at AFRL and then to the operational sites.Two new science modules are also being developed for GEOSpace to support high-priority M&S needs. The first module is a high resolution climatology for ionospheric scintillation. This project will use high-resolution SCINDA data to improve the WBMOD scintillation model which currently contains only seasonal variations of scintillation intensity. Scintillation, like rainfall, has a well defined seasonal dependence on average but can vary substantially on a day-by-day basis. A high-resolution climatology varying on a 15 minute time scale with a large dynamic range will allow for much more realistic training and mission simulations for satellite communications and navigation operations. The second new science module is a high-resolution, physics-based neutral density model.  Variations in the neutral density caused by geomagnetic storms and changing solar UV flux can effect the drag on low Earth orbiting satellites in large and sudden ways. Large changes in satellite drag can lead to tracking losses and  substantial effort  to regain knowledge of the position of both friendly and hostile space assets. A high-resolution neutral density model will allow satellite operators and mission planners to realistically simulate changes in satellite locations during large geomagnetic storms occurring on the time scales of hours to days. This capability is not possible with today’s low resolution climatological models.4. SummaryWith the GEOSpace and SCINDA software suites AFRL has brought together many useful space environment models and applications for use by the acquisition, operations, and M&S community. Increasing user accesses to these models is the focus of current development activities and will be accomplished by porting the code to several platforms and providing web-based access through 55 SWXS for operations and the MEL for M&S applications. New high-resolution scintillation and neutral density climatology models are being added to meet high priority M&S needs. 5. References[1]	K.J. Kerns and M.S. Gussenhoven: “CRRESRAD Documentation”  PL-TR-92-2201, Phillips Laboratory, Hanscom AFB, MA 1992.[2]	J.D. Meffert and M.S. Gussenhoven: “CRRESPRO Documentation”  PL-TR-94-2218, Phillips Laboratory, Hanscom AFB, MA 1994.[3]	D.H. Brautigam and J.T. Bell: “CRRESELE Documentation”  PL-TR-95-2128, Phillips Laboratory, Hanscom AFB, MA 1994.[4]  D.A. Hardy, W. McNeil, M.S. Gussenhoven, and D. Brautigam: “A Statistical Model of Auroral Ion Precipitation 2. Functional Representation of the Average Patterns”, J. Geophys. Res., 96, 5539, 1991.[5]	D.A. Hardy, M.S. Gussenhoven, and E. Holeman, “A Statistical Model of Aurora Electron Precipitation”,  J. Geophys. Res., 90, 4229, 1985.[6]	R.E. Daniell, L.D. Brown, D.N. Anderson, M.W. Fox, P.H. Doherty, D.T. Decker, J.J. Sojka, and R.W. Schunck: “ PIM: A Global Ionospheric Parameterization Based on First Principles Models”, Radio Sci., 30, 1499, 1995.[7] 	J.M. Secan and R.M. Bussey: “An Improved Model of High-Latitude F-Region Scintillation”, PL-TR-94-2254, Phillips Laboratory, Hanscom AFB, MA 1994.[8]	D.F. Smart and M.A. Shea; “PPS76 – A Computerized ‘Event Mode’ Solar Proton Forecasting Technique”, Solar Terrestrial Predictions and Proceedings, R. Donnelly, ed., NOAA Tech. Mem., NOAA/ERL 1, 406, 1979.[9] 	Z. Smith and M. Dryer: “The Interplanetary Shock Propagation Model: A Model for Predicting Solar-Flare-Caused Geomagnetic Storms Based on the 2 ½ D MHD Numerical Simulation Results from the Interplanetary Global Model (2D IGM)”, NOAA Tech. Mem., NOAA/ERL 89, 1995.[10]	D.J. Chenette, J.D. Tobin, and S.P. Geller: “CRRES/Spacerad Heavy Ion Model of the Near-Earth Space Environment: CHIME User’s Manual”, PL-TR-95-2152, Phillips Laboratory, Hanscom AFB, MA 1995.[11] J.T. Bell and M. S. Gussenhoven: “APEXRAD Documentation”, PL-TR-97-2117, Phillips Laboratory, Hanscom AFB, MA 1997.[12] E.G. Mullen, G. Ginet, M.S. Gussenhoven, and D. Madden: “SEE Relative Probability Maps for Space Operations”, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 45, 2954, 1998.[13] K.M. Groves, S. Basu, E.J. Weber, M. Smitham, H. Kuenzler, C.E. Valladares, R. Sheehan, E. MacKenzie, J.A. Secan, P. Ning, W.J. McNeil, D.W. Moonan, and M.J. Kendra: “Equatorial  Scintillation and Systems Support”, Radio Sci., 32 2047, 1997.Author BiographiesGregory Ginet is a supervisory research physicist at the Air Force Research Laboratory. He is the originator of the GEOSpace programKeith Groves is a research physicist at the Air Force Research Laboratory investigating the impacts of ionsopheric scintillation on C3I systems. He is responsible for the development of the scintillation specification algorithms used in SCINDA.Robert Hilmer is a research physicist at the Air Force Reserach Laboratory and a member of the Magnetospheric Specification and Forecast Model development team. He is program manager for GEOSpace. Matthew Smitham is a captain in the Air Force and a research scientist at the Air Force Research Laboratory. He is program manager for SCINDA. 