Using Standard Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I) Components to Interface to SimulationsLieutenant Colonel Donald H. TimianArmy Model and Simulation Office1111 Jefferson Davis HighwayCrystal Tower North, Suite 503EAlexandria, VA   22202(703) 601-0012 ext 32timiadh@hqda.army.milMichael R. Hieb, Ph.D.Modeling and Simulation DivisionAB Technologies, Inc.1901 N. Beauregard St.Alexandria, VA   22311-1705(703) 575-2800mhieb@abtechnologies.comJonathan GlassPM, WARSIM/C4ISSU.S. Army STRICOM12350 Research ParkwayOrlando, FL 32826(407) 384-3626Jonathan_Glass@stricom.army.milMajor Michael J. StaverTactical DirectorateNational Simulation Center422 Kearny AveFort Leavenworth, KS 66027-1306(913) 684-8231staverm@leav-emh1.army.milKeywords:Army Battle Command Systems (ABCS), Army Model and Simulation Office (AMSO), Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT) Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I) Interface, Common Operating Environment (COE) Message Processor (CMP), Defense Information Infrastructure (DII) Common Operating Environment (COE), Eagle, High Level Architecture (HLA), Joint Common Data Base (JCDB), Joint Technical Architecture-Army (JTA-Army), Maneuver Control System (MCS) Block IV, One Semi-Automated Forces (OneSAF), Warfighter Simulation 2000 (WARSIM), ABSTRACT:  Over the last six years a "cottage industry" has grown-up around the Army's need for Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I) interfaces to link "Live" C4I systems to simulations.  As one would expect, almost all of these interfaces have been developed as "add-ons" to link specific legacy simulations to specific C4I systems and typically handle a small subset of the messages or data necessary for interoperability.With the development the High Level Architecture (HLA) for all Department of Defense (DoD) simulations, the mandate that all DoD C4I systems be Defense Information Infrastructure (DII) Common Operating Environment (COE) compliant, and the requirement that the Warfighter Simulation (WARSIM) 2000, One Semi-Automated Forces (OneSAF), and the Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT) be capable of interfacing to Army Battle Command Systems, the Army has a unique opportunity to both build and define - using both the HLA and select DII COE components - a common M&S C4I interface standard.  Key to achieving common standard interfaces is the design of the Army’s C4I architecture, utilizing a common information strategy, the Army Common Information Infrastructure (ACII).  The ACII includes a DII COE compliant message processor (the COE Message Processor - CMP) and a common database for the Army Battle Command Systems (the Joint Common Database - JCDB).This paper will describe several Army initiatives that are focusing on using DII COE Components and C4I Databases in Simulation Interfaces.  The CMP and JCDB will be described and work on using them in a simulation interface will be reviewed.  Also discussed will be an M&S C4I interface Technical Reference Model (TRM) and emerging Joint Technical Architecture – Army (JTA-Army) M&S C4I interface standards.1.  IntroductionBeginning in 1993, with the third Army Tactical Command and Control Systems test, a small "cottage industry" of custom, point to point Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I) interfaces have grown-up around the Army's family of Command and Control (C2) systems.  Because reuse, standardization, and interoperability were often not key design criteria, most of these interfaces link a specific simulation to a specific C4I system and typically handle only a small sub-set of the messages or data the "target" – or stimulated – C4I system can accept and/or the simulation can pass.With the advent of the Joint Technical Architecture – Army (JTA-Army), the Army’s C4I community has defined a set of overarching standards that facilitate reuse and interoperability.  The Army’s Modeling and Simulation (M&S) community is also moving to standardize certain protocols and architectures, including the High Level Architecture (HLA), for certain classes of information in the M&S C4I interface Technical Reference Model (TRM) described in the next section.  If the Army (or for that matter the Department of Defense – DoD) is to achieve information dominance, it must have a set of low cost, interoperable M&S C4I interfaces that can support the needs of the its analytic, training, and acquisition communities.  Needless to say, this goal can only be achieved by defining a set of standards that apply to both the Army’s C4I systems and its simulations.The key to common, reusable M&S C4I interfaces is the design of the Army Common Information Infrastructure (ACII).  The ACII includes a DII COE compliant message processor (the COE Message Processor - CMP) and a common database for the Army Battle Command Systems (the Joint Common Database - JCDB).  Hieb and Staver [4] presented an architectural view of M&S C4I interfaces.  In this paper, we continue this architectural view by elaborating the C4I standard components that will be used in future Army M&S C4I Interfaces.  The intent of this paper is to give guidance to interface developers as they interface to Army Battle Command Systems (ABCS) in the future.The remaining of this paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 describes an M&S C4I interface TRM.  Section 3 introduces the Army’s Common Information Infrastructure (ACII).  Section 4 gives examples of using DII COE C4I components in Army M&S C4I interfaces for exchanging messages and data.  And Section 5 concludes with a brief description of a joint Army/DMSO effort and the Army’s M&S Standards Development Process.2.  An M&S C4I Interface Technical Reference ModelPrior to discussing specific M&S interfaces to C4I systems, it is desirable to identify and classify the information that an ideal interface must handle. This will not be possible until there is a common understanding of what constitutes such interfaces and the identification of one or more technical reference frameworks.  Second, in order for M&S developers to build internal interface features that will work across the C4I domain, the different types of information need to be standardized to some extent.  Various Data Interchange Formats (DIFs), such as the Command and Control Simulation Interchange Language (CCSIL), [1], [8], & [9], need to be created for specific information classes.  We identify three broad classes that are necessary to meet the requirements that would result in full interoperability:	Persistent Data;	Non-Persistent Data; and	Exercise Control.Persistent Data refers to the class of information that is stored during the operation of the simulation.  Information belonging to this class is typically initialized prior to execution and changes less frequently than Non-Persistent Data.Non-Persistent Data refers to the class of information that is transient, corresponding to interactions – during execution – between entities or objects in the simulation or C4I database, or updates to an entity’s state.A third class of information necessary for a complete interface is Exercise Control.  Simulations typically have a set of protocols that allow an operator to control their execution and synchronize their operation with other simulations. Current C4I systems do not have protocols that correspond to these, however future C4I systems must have such protocols to enable them to be fully interoperable with simulations.  One example is the requirement for After Action Review.  While simulations can typically replay a scenario that had previously occurred, it is desirable to synchronize C4I systems for decision making for particular events. Unless these requirements are specified to C4I developers, future C4I systems will not have the capability to perform such operations.Figure 1 shows a notional Computer Generated Forces (CGF) simulation with the types of information which a complete interface must accommodate. The interface design is not specified. The function of the interface is to 1) control the information flow between the C4I system and the Simulations and 2) to align the information among the systems so that the information is received in a system’s native format.  Note that all of the information may flow bi-directionally.  Thus M&S systems would need to have the capability built to accept initialization data from C4I systems, as well as being able to pass scenario data to initialize C4I systems.The notional CGF can be thought of an example of a current generation object-oriented simulation, having different modules for Exercise Control, Behaviors, Environment, and Physical Models tied together with a Run-time Framework.  Persistent data is stored in a Scenario Database.  Current Simulations, such as ModSAF [2], can be easily mapped to this notional CGF.  Hieb and Staver [4] describes each specific interface requirement, as well as provides a detailed description of each of the 11 separate information types.3.  The Army’s Common Information Infrastructure (ACII)Both the JTA [5] and the JTA-Army [6] have three mutually supporting objectives.  The first is to provide the foundation for a seamless flow of information and interoperability among all tactical, strategic, and sustaining base systems that produce, use or exchange information electronically.  The second objective is to provide guidelines and standards for system development and acquisition that will dramatically reduce cost, development time, and fielding time for improved systems.  The third objective is to influence the direction of the information industry’s technology development and research & development investment so that it can be more readily leveraged in Army systems.3.1  The Defense Information Infrastructure Common Operating Environment (DII COE)In JTA-Army Version 5.0 [6] the Army adopted the Defense Information Infrastructure (DII) Common Operating Environment (COE) concept and mandated the DII COE baseline specification and the DII COE integration and runtime specification.  The DII COE is mission application independent, as well as: 	an architecture, 	an approach, 	a collection of reusable software, 	a software infrastructure, and 	a set of guidelines and standards.Per the DII COE Architecture Oversight Charter [3], portions of the DII COE are being updated using requirements generated by 20 joint service Technical Working Groups (TWGs) (http://spider.osfl.disa.mil/- dii/aog_twg/twg/twg/page.html).  The Army is the lead for several TWGs that are critical to M&S C4I interface developers, such as:  COE Message Processing (CMP), Communications Services, Data Access Services, and Alerts.  There are also TWGs for the Common Operational Picture, Visualization & 3D, and Mapping, Charting, Geodesy, & Imagery.3.2  ACII Description In order to accomplish full interoperability with C4I systems, it is not sufficient for M&S developers to build in better messaging capabilities to their systems.  Future tactical C4I systems, will incorporate databases based upon the C2 Core Data Model (C2CDM).There are two areas where C4I systems will change in ways that make interoperability easier.  First, the C4I systems will increasingly utilize database updates as opposed to sending messages with a particular message protocol.  Second, the C4I system developers will increasingly use common data models that will utilize standard data elements.As an example of the future C4I system architecture, we describe an Army initiative to make the Army Battle Command Systems (ABCS) interoperable – the Army Common Interoperability Infrastructure (ACII).  This concept, developed by the Horizontal Integration Technology Office of the Army’s Program Executive Office, Command, Control, and Communication Systems is shown in Figure 2.  It is based upon products compliant with the DoD Joint Technical Architecture (JTA) and provides a flexible capability to achieve the Army, Joint, and combined interoperability required.  It is based on an information management model rather than a message transaction model, while still providing support for current formatted messages for data distribution.  The ability to use current and evolving message and data distribution technologies permit the implementation to support interoperability across a wide spectrum of operations and interfacing systems.The ACII  architecture is database centric with the database being the focus of all information operations.  It is based upon the Army’s Joint Common Database (JCDB) and two DII products (the CMP [10] and the DII COE Communications Server); thus, having a high degree of software reuse.The Army’s Joint Common Database is an implementation of the C2CDM and represents all data shared by two or more ABCS systems.  The JCDB uses standard data elements for exchange between databases, facilitating interoperability, and reducing the use of formatted messages.  The JCDB is both JTA and JTA-Army compliant and, like the ACII, will be in each of the ABCS systems in the future.3.3  Using the ACII in Simulation InterfacesThe ACII is a conceptual architecture.  It is currently being implemented using progressively improving versions of DII COE components and the JCDB.  The difficulty in constructing interfaces to the ACII is not in what the end state is seen to be, but in how to accomplish the transition. The next four figures show a phased plan of how to prototype and construct M&S interfaces to the ACII.  In these figures, the relationships and components are conceptual  -- no system architecture is implied.  In order to make this example more concrete, we use specific examples of systems.  MCS Block IV is the C4I system and the WARSIM Integrated System Prototype (ISP) is the Army simulation.  However, any ABCS system and any Army simulation would be able to be substituted, respectively.Figure 3 shows the first phase of interfacing to the ACII, by embedding the CMP in a M&S C4I interface. The translator is designed to pass information in two directions.  From the simulation to CMP, the translator converts the simulation representation into an appropriate message format; in this case – given that the “target”, or stimulated, C4I system is the Block IV Maneuver Control System (MSC) – a US Message Text Format (USMTF).  From the CMP to the simulation, the translator converts USMTF messages into a simulation representation.  The DII COE Comms Server (not shown) is used to pass USMTF messages between the CMPs embedded in the interface and Block IV MCS. The HLA may be used to pass information between the Army Simulation and the C4I translator.  In Figure 4 the second phase of the M&S interface to the ACII is shown.  Note that the translator is different.    Instead of simply converting interactions into USMTF messages or USMTF messages into interactions, Figure 4’s translator is designed to take the information from the simulation, translate it, and “post” it – via a Application Programming Interfaces (API) – in the JCDB or retrieve the incoming information from the JCDB and pass it on to the translator.  Depending on whether or not:the stimulated C4I system is JCDB compliant and that the information being passed between the simulation and the “target” C4I system is via the simulation center’s local area network (i.e., intra-TOC (Tactical Operations Center) vs inter-TOC), JCDB updates – whether originating at the C4I systems or the interface – are distributed to the other JCDBs and passed by the Comms Server.  If the stimulated C4I system is not JCDB compliant or not part of the simulation center’s local network, then all relevant information between the interface’s JCDB and the C4I system is:first converted by one or the other CMP into an appropriate message format (i.e., USMTF, Joint Variable Message Format (JVMF), Over The Horizon Gold (OTH Gold), etc.), passed to by the Comms Server, andthen provided by the appropriate CMP to it’s JCDB.Figure 5 shows the third and last phase of constructing an M&S interface to the ACII.  Here an interface that only passes information between itself and the stimulated C4I system via relevant data exchanges (assuming the intra-TOC limitation is no longer valid).  Thus, the CMP is not needed.Figure 6 depicts the potential to leverage the JCDB.  Instead of needing a set of M&S C4I interfaces (perhaps as many as one for each “target” C4I system), only one interface – that is both JCDB and HLA compliant – is needed.4.0  Using C4I Components in Army M&S InterfacesIn order to achieve the vision depicted in Figure 6 – as well as Figures 3, 4, and 5 – not only must interfaces be built to accepted standards [4], but simulation specific requirements must be incorporated into the CMP along with all the components of the ACII to include appropriate simulation APIs to the JCDB.4.1.1  DescriptionThe CMP is a multi-functional automated message processing system which contains state-of-the-art technology to process both inbound and outbound messages using a standard Graphical User Interface (GUI).  Functional capabilities include: internal routing, extraction of data from messages and their headers for forwarding to other applications or databases,standing request for information,automatic and interactive message generation,validation of inbound and outbound messages, andautofill of data from the database to a message or application.The CMP module is logically bounded by the communications module on one side and other supported processes and/or other COE modules on the other side.  Processing of inbound messages from the communications front end includes essential functions such as field/format validation, profiling, standing request for information, parsing, and routing.  The processing of messages for hand off to the communications module includes essential functions such as message and header preparation, validation, and coordination/release.  The message processor is capable of processing any formatted or unformatted message which is validated by tables derived from the Joint Interoperability Engineering Office (JIEO) Central Data Base System (CDBS).  The message processing module permits components to be employed independently, or in combination with other components, to perform a single, or group of, function(s).  Figure 7 provides a top level functional flow of the message processing module and identifies the three major subordinate areas within the message processing module.  The inbound and outbound processing components contain functionality specific to each of those processes.  The third component is support services which contains functionality used by both the inbound and outbound processing components [10].In August 1998 the Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation Command’s (STRICOM’s) Project Manager (PM), WARSIM/C4I Simulation Systems (C4ISS) submitted simulation requirements for the CMP.  This submission of requirements was preceded by a Technical Interchange Meeting (TIM) between PM, WARSIM and PM, CMP to exchange requirements information.  The requirements for simulations submitted included bi –directional messaging, multi-threaded messaging, auto messaging formatting without the CMP User Interface (CUP), multiple instances of CMP on single platform, and parsing to support C++ & Java data structures.These requirements since then have been incorporated in the CMP System Requirement Specification version 2.0 and functionally added to the Java version CMP.  Team WARSIM has been actively involved in Beta testing and prototyping with this version of CMP since September 1998.  The CMP is currently incorporated into the WARSIM development baseline for message processing and dependencies have been identified and placed upon CMP functionality.  Team WARSIM expects to continue to work with CMP through out it’s continued development.4.2  JCDBThe Army Common Database (ACDB) has been renamed the JCDB.  This decision was stimulated by on-going work between the DISC4 and the Defense Information Support Agency (DISA), and the incorporation of enemy tables and data elements from the Military Intelligence Database (MIDB – a Defense Intelligence Agency program) into the ACDB.  Currently, there are 293 tables in the JCDB, with an associated set of 1244 owned attributes (fields).4.2.1  JCDB ComponentsThe JCDB consists of the following:∑	JCDB Transformation Data Model (JTDM) – The JTDM is an IDEF1X (logical) data model of all Army and Joint shared data from which the Joint Common Database is derived.  The JTDM was developed by the Program Executive Office Command, Control, and Communication (PEO C3S) Horizontal Technology Integration Office and is based on the C2CDM as mandated by the JTA and JTA-A.∑	Joint Data Dictionary (JDD) – The JDD is a dictionary of all data elements set fort in the JCDB.  It includes the data element name, definition, datatype and domain values/enumerated types for each data element.  Use of the JDD results in the use of a common language by all ABCS systems.∑	Joint Common Database  (JCDB) – The JCDB is the (physical) database of all ABCS shared data and is derived from the JTDM.  The JCDB uses the standard elements set forth in the JDD.  The JCDB is currently represented in both Informix and Oracle RDBMS formats.∑	Subscribe and Receive (SR) – The SR is a data distribution mechanism used in conjunction with the Distributed Computing Environment (DCE) to distribute data among ABCS systems and between JCDBs at a TOC, over a LAN via Remote Procedure Calls (RPCs).∑	JCDB to CMP Interface – This interface is a set of software modules between the CMP and the JCDB.  Each module is designed and created for a specific USMTF or JVMF formatted message and performs “AutoFill” of outgoing messages from the JCDB and “AutoPost” of incoming messages to the JCDB.∑	JCDB APIs – These APIs simplify access and control input to the JCDB by user processes. They provide  a set of associated library routines to perform the Standard Query Language (SQL) queries for “get” , “put” and “utility’ functions”.4.2.2  JCDB Architecture at FDDCurrently, ABCS version 6.1 will be the version of ABCS software used by 4th Infantry Division (Mechanized) when it becomes – in early 2001 – the Army’s First Digital Division (FDD).  The JCDB will be present in all five Army Tactical Command and Control Systems (ATCCS):  the All Source Analysis System (ASAS) Remote Work Station (RWS), MCS, the Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data System (AFATDS), the Forward Area Air Defense Command, Control, and Intelligence (FAADC2I) system, and the Combat Service Support Control System (CSSCS);although not all five systems (most likely only MCS and ASAS RWS) will be configured to optimize it’s capability.  Figure 8 shows the JCDB implementation.5.  ConclusionBetter M&S and C4I interoperability standards are necessary, but not sufficient, to accomplish full and seamless interoperability between M&S and C4I.  Both simulations and C4I systems must also increase their functional capabilities [1].  Simulations must improve their reporting capabilities and C4I systems must become aware of simulation constructs like exercise control.  Clear and concise M&S and C4I interoperability standards will serve to institutionalize these requirements so that systems in the acquisition process can put these capabilities into their software requirements process.The Army Model and Simulation Office (AMSO) and DISC4 are participating in an experiment with the Defense Model and Simulation Office on a pair of prototype M&S C4I interfaces that will exchange information with MCS Block IV.  The WARSIM C4I interface is CMP based and will use the HLA to pass interactions between the WARSIM ISP and the interface.  Eagle, like WARSIM an aggregate-level combat simulation, will build on an existing interface with MCS Block III to develop a JCDB/HLA compliant M&S C4I interface.  The target date for completion of both prototypes is the third quarter of 1999.Over the next year, the Army’s M&S C4I Integration Standards Category will begin to define each of the TRM’s three specific interface requirements and enter them into the Army’s M&S Standards Nomination and Approval Process (SNAP) [7].  Potential data and lessons learned from the above mentioned experiment will also be included into SNAP.  Once approved by the Deputy Under Secretary of the Army for Operations Research, these standards will then be recommended by AMSO for adoption, as emerging standards, in the JTA-Army.6.  References [1]	Carr, F.H. and Hinton, L.G.:  “Stimulating C4I Systems and Achieving Control of the Simulated Battlefield”, Paper 97F-SIW-136, 1997 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1997. [2]	Ceranowicz, A.:  “ModSAF Capabilities”, 4th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavior Representation, 1994. [3]	Defense Information Infrastructure (DII COE) Architecture Oversight Charter, Office of the Defense Information Systems Agency, http://spider.osfl.disa.mil/dii/aog_twg/aog/970122_charter.html, January, 1997. [4]	Hieb, M.R. and Staver, M.J.:  “The Army’s Approach to Modeling and Simulation Standards For C4I Interfaces”, Paper 98F-SIW-259, 1998 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1998.[5]	Joint Technical Architecture, Version 2.0, Defense Information System Agency, http://www-jta.itsi.disa.mil, 26 May 1998.[6]	Joint Technical Architecture – Army, Version 5.0, Office of the Director, Information Systems for Command, Control, Communications and Computers, http://www.hqda.army.mil/techarch, September, 1997. [7]	McGlynn, L.E. and Timian, D.H.:  “Army Model and Simulation Standards – Tools in the SBA Kit Bag” Paper 98F-SIW-265, 1998 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1998. [8]	McKenzie, F.; Shumaker, G.; and Campbell, P.:  “An Architecture for Integrating Command and Control of Heterogeneous Simulations”, 6th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation, 1996. [9]	MITRE:  1997 DARPA CFOR/CCSIL WWW site at http://ms.ie.org/cfor.[10]	PEO C3S:  CMP WWW site at http:// www.monmouth.army.mil/peoc3s/atccs/CS/ cmp.html, 1998.Author BiographiesDON TIMIAN is a Lieutenant Colonel (LTC) with the U.S. Army and is currently assigned as the Deputy Chief, Policy and Technology Division of the U.S. Army Modeling and Simulation Office in Washington, DC.  He has over 19 years of service in the Army.  Since 1992, LTC Timian has served as an Operations Research and Systems Analyst/Simulation Specialist at the Training and Doctrine Command's (TRADOC's) Analysis Center (TRAC), Scenario and Wargaming Center; III Corps Plans and Exercises (Battle Simulation and Integration Center); and the Test and Experimentation Command (TEXCOM).  LTC Timian has a Bachelor of Arts degree in Chemistry from the University of Arizona and a Master of Science degree in Operations Research from Kansas State University.MICHAEL HIEB is a senior scientist at AB Technologies. Dr. Hieb was the architect of the MRCI interface project while at SAIC. He received his PhD in Information Technology at George Mason University in 1996, developing an instructable ModSAF agent. He performed his doctoral research at the Center for Excellence in Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence at GMU. He has published over 30 papers in the areas of learning agents, knowledge acquisition, interface technology and multistrategy learning. When working for IntelliTek, Dr. Hieb implemented a distributed problem-solving testbed at the Goddard Space Flight Center. Previously, he worked as a Nuclear Engineer for General Electric.JONATHAN GLASS is the WARSIM C4I Technical Lead for WARSIM 2000 at the U.S. Army’s STRICOM in Orlando, FL.  Mr. Glass has 9 years of experience in external systems engineering in both combat weapon systems and simulations.  Since 1995, Mr. Glass has been involved in developing WARSIM’s interface to ABCS.  Mr. Glass participated in the DMSO sponsored MRCI experiment and was on the DMSO selected MRCI technical review team.  He is a graduate of the University of Central Florida (UCF) with a BS EE degree.  Previously, he worked as an Inertial Navigation Systems Engineer for the Naval Undersea Warfare Center in Norfolk, VA.MICHAEL STAVER is a Major with the U.S. Army and is the Army’s M&S Standards Category Coordinator for C4I Integration.  Major Staver is a Simulation Development Officer in the Tactical Directorate at the National Simulation Center (NSC).  During his three years at the NSC, he has worked on numerous joint and combined, distributed, real time training exercises and experiments to include Prairie Warrior, Ulchi Focus Lens, Advanced Warfighting Experiment, and most recently Dessert Thunder in Kuwait.  He works closely with TPIO-ABCS and TPIO-TD to integrate M&S and C4I requirements.  He is a graduate of the Command and General Staff College, ORSA-MAC, and USMA where he received a BS.  His basic branch is artillery and has served at numerous fire support echelons to include battery command in the 6 ID(L), AK; 199th SIB(M), Ft. Lewis, WA; and the 2nd ACR, Ft. Polk, LA.Page  		1999 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop		Orlando, Florida, March 1999Page  		1999 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop		Orlando, Florida, March 1999 Figure 1.  An M&S C4I Technical Reference ModelFigure 7.  COE Message Processor Flow ChartFigure 2.  ACII ComponentsFigure 3.  Using the CMP in the InterfaceFigure 4.  Transition from Messages to DataFigure 5.  Data Replication in InterfaceFigure 6.  Potential to Leverage JCDB InterfaceFigure 9.  JCDB FDD Architecture