MODSAF TERRAIN SUPPORT FOR SENSOR MODELINGIN VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENTSMaximo LorenzoNight Vision and Electronic Sensors Directorate10221 Burbeck Rd. Stop 430Fort Belvoir VA 22060(v) 703-704-3185, (f) 703-704-1753 HYPERLINK mailto:Lorenzo@a.b.com lorenzo@nvl.army.milMatthew FadoulBashir Research14115 Asher ViewCentreville VA 20121703-222-1219 HYPERLINK mailto:Bashir@erols.com bashir3d@erols.comBill RiggsLNK Corporation, Inc.6811 Kenilworth Ave Ste 306Riverdale MD 20737-1333301-927-3223 HYPERLINK mailto:bill@lnk.com bill@lnk.comAustin StoudenmireMike BaldwinDave FlorekSAIC4301 N. Fairfax Dr Ste 370Arlington VA 22203703-704-3698/1715/1767 HYPERLINK mailto:eugene.a.stoudenmire.ii@cpmx.saic.com eugene.a.stoudenmire.ii@cpmx.saic.com  HYPERLINK mailto:michael.baldwin@cpmx.saic.com michael.baldwin@c pmx.saic.com HYPERLINK mailto:david.w.florek@cpmx.saic.com david.w.florek@cpmx.saic.comKeywords:ModSAF, Terrain Databases, Sensors, Virtual Testing EnvironmentsABSTRACT: Correlation of Computer Generated Forces and Visual Simulation is a recurring interoperability issue that affects SISO community standards development. In the past, ModSAF has generally been integrated only with legacy simulation systems, due to constraints of available formats and tools directly supported by, and supporting ModSAF. While the openness of ModSAF source code permits the development of ModSAF terrain database conversion tools from various visual simulation environments, standard write APIs have yet to be made availability to the community at large. As part of the "Paint the Night" (PTN) simulation program, the CECOM Night Vision Electronics and Sensor Directorate has developed ModSAF conversion tools to support ModSAF c5b and c7b terrain formats. Because PTN builds T-Mesh terrain directly from source elevation data with no loss of information, the ModSAF terrain build process must likewise preserve resolution and accuracy with no conversion artifacts, and optimized data structures. Current and projected tools convert elevation models and object files representing 3D terrain features and associated abstract data into ModSAF runtime format. This development has many benefits for the simulation community. It allows PTN to be closely integrated with live simulation as part of a "Virtual Proving Ground", and permits ground targets generated by ModSAF to depict realistic and repeatable behaviors in the sensor simulation. These ModSAF databases correlate exactly with high resolution PTN visual simulation, at 5 meter or better resolution. NVESD is using an AP Hill data set as a test bed to validate simulation performance, with an inter-visibility test to compare live and virtual simulation.  The conversion software, written in C++, supports improved NVESD tools and techniques to build high fidelity synthetic environments in support of sensor simulations for Search and Target Acquisition (STA). Future follow-on efforts will include support for GCS and database paging.Problem StatementCorrelation of visual simulation and CGFCorrelation of Computer Generated Forces and Visual Simulation is a recurring interoperability issue that affects SISO community standards development. In this paper, we address one of the crucial technical issues affecting the viability of advanced distributed simulation: the correlated production of visual and non-visual simulation terrain databases. This is a long-standing issue in Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) and its High Level Architecture (HLA) descendents, and has attracted both attention and debate within the M&S community since the first DIS Interoperability Demonstration in the fall of 1992. While the initial attempts to develop common terrain databases usable among all DIS host platforms focused on the use of the Project 2851 Standard Interchange Format (SIF), critics of SIF often grounded their arguments in terms of SIF’s incapacity to directly support CGF applications, most prominently ModSAF. At the same time, the terrain database formats used by CGF applications were characterized by constant evolution and close linkage to visual terrain database modeling tools and their native environments. Because many visual terrain database tools, such as Multigen, EASIEST, and Easy T did not directly support ModSAF, the ModSAF user community remained dependent on S1000 source databases and increasingly unreliable S1000 to ModSAF data conversion tools to support their terrain/scenario development needs. Some database producers, such as CECOM/NVESD, have developed their own conversion tools to support non-S1000 terrain databases. These producers generally must expend time and money to maintain the conversion tools they have developed. STRICOM, recognizing the impact of these costs, has funded development programs, including OneSAF and SEDRIS, to ease the burden on both producers and users of terrain databases.Nonetheless, a wide range of unanswered questions remains to be addressed, in part because the problem domain is quite large, and all-encompassing generalized solutions have proven elusive. Although the SEDRIS data model and related software tools represent an attractive solution which minimizes data loss during the conversion process, deeper concerns having to do with “how to” convert databases in an operational setting must be addressed, especially when legacy systems must be supported. Although there have been many daring experiments, such as the early stages of STOW/STOW-E/STOW-A, which have combined heterogeneous visual and nonvisual terrain representations, the results of these exercises have been rather inconclusive from the standpoint of demonstrating correlated CGF behavior in a “common synthetic environment”. In STOW Europe, for example, the BBS "terrain appreciation" data was extracted from S1000, with a maximum achievable correlation between virtual and constructive databases falling in the range of 50-100 meters. Decomposition of apparent terrain inconsistencies during that exercise proved elusive since most apparent problems were discerned visually from the perspective of SIMNET image generators. Due to these problems, the DARPA STOW program took a more conservative approach, supporting only two visual TDB formats (S1000/Vistaworks and FLT) together with a version of ModSAF CTDB format to support all simulation applications (including STOW CGF variants of ModSAF) to be used in STOW exercises.Broadly speaking, therefore, the complex of issues which need to be addressed any study of terrain correlation among CGF applications, must include the following:Database Reuse. Database conversion issues affect the reuse of existing databases. This paper addresses the reuse of PTN databases as well as the repeatability of database conversions among PTN databases, which have varying levels of resolution.Interoperability of CGF and Visual Simulation. This paper addresses lessons learned from the Paint the Night to ModSAF conversion effort.Behavioral realism of CGF applications. The impact that CGF terrain representation has on CGF behaviors should be considered, especially when “foreign” data from other terrain database production environments is incorporated. Increases in terrain database complexity and density may challenge the performance envelope of ModSAF and other CGF applications. This paper addresses the basic functionality supported by the PTN database production environment.Data loss during Conversion Process. While terrain database production processes often sample/oversample and filter terrain database content throughout the production pipeline, the PTN process uses minimal grid sampling and no feature filtering. This is a SEDRIS issue as well as an issue that affects all database conversion applications.Data Transformation during Conversion Process. PTN faces similar challenges as do other Visual Simulation applications which require correlated CGF databases. SEDRIS only partly addresses the issue; specific database conversion applications take up where SEDRIS leaves off.Integration of ModSAF with legacy simulationsIn the past, ModSAF has generally been integrated only with legacy simulation systems, due to constraints of available formats and tools directly supported by ModSAF. Most ModSAF terrain databases have been produced from an S1000 database production environment, and still have some artifacts of that environment (i.e. quad-tree data structure, S1000 feature attribute codes, use of triangulated irregular networks as micro-terrain, terrain polygons organized by load modules, UTM-like internal coordinates: either GCS or flat earth/world coordinates). While ModSAF itself is not constrained by S1000 conventions, the S1000 API serves as a “front end” to the ModSAF database processing functions. STRICOM disseminates ModSAF source code, which has made it possible to reverse-engineer this process, allowing terrain information to be processed and reformatted into ModSAF (CTDB) format. Because, ModSAF terrain formats are frequently changed, and no ModSAF terrain API is currently supported, conversion program maintenance is needed to keep pace with ModSAF updates.Openness of ModSAF source codeWhile the openness of ModSAF source code permits the development of ModSAF terrain database conversion tools from various visual simulation environments, standard write APIs have yet to be made available to the community at large. SEDRIS plans to disseminate such an API in the first quarter of CY 99.Paint the Night Visual SimulationCECOM NVESD has developed a 3-D simulation environment at Fort Belvoir, VA using a variety of hardware and software Commercial Off the Shelf/Government Off the Shelf (COTS/GOTS) products.  The simulation is intended to support Simulation Based Acquisition in the research and development as well as the testing and evaluation.  NVESD has used a variety of entities (dismounted infantry, tanks, etc.) driven by humans in a "man-in-the-loop" simulation environment.  The PTN terrain production environment supports correlated data and behaviors in a common 3-D environment, assuring that the terrain will be consistent for each entity in the environment, by enforcing the following methodology:Common Data Sources are used to build all runtime terrain databases.Equal and Standardized Sampling is done whenever required on source terrain data sets. This provides predictable output data that is easily transformed into runtime formats.Metadata is preserved and stored consistently, in order to ensure that runtime terrain databases are precisely calibrated and correlated.Spatially Correlated CGF with the visual environment is a critical requirement for the PTN simulation in a distributed simulation architecture. In the absence of precise correlation, a simulation may place ground vehicles underground or in the air because of discrepancies in the terrain databases when interacting with CGF simulators (ModSAF, for instance), unless ground clamping is used.  This clamping seriously affects inter-visibility, and diminishes the chances for a fair fight in a simulation..Up until recently, NVESD has not possessed the means to generate ModSAF terrain databases that correspond to the PTN visual simulation. In some cases, ModSAF databases generated elsewhere could be used in ModSAF to represent the same areas as PTN. Inevitably, this method required ModSAF vehicles to be clamped to the ground in Paint the Night. This technique was barely sufficient to allow ModSAF vehicles to be generated as ground targets in the Paint the Night system for simulated target detection and possibly acquisition.  The functions of target tracking and engagement could not be simulated credibly since ModSAF uses its own internal terrain database to generate entity level vehicular dynamics and behaviors, including terrain driving and local obstacle avoidance. Interactive simulations in which ModSAF and Paint the Night simulators fight in a common synthetic environment were also not supportable, for the same reason (i.e. that ModSAF uses its local terrain to simulate its own vehicles/entities’ target detection/acquisition/tracking/engagement and to perform line of sight calculations. The EOIR/LNK effort focused on database correlation issues, including line of sight calculation and ground clamping. LNK developed a terrain database conversion program that transforms the gridded Paint the Night elevation data into ModSAF compliant CTDB files. Initial development supported ModSAF 2.1/CTDB format 5, with later upgrade to CTDB format 7. Using C++ language software developed under this effort, the PTN terrain databases were converted from the Paint the Night environment into the ModSAF format. Using this capability, the Paint the Night system was able to interpret positional information (in the form of DIS entity state PDUs) directly, transforming the geocentric coordinate information (in accordance with the DIS coordinate representation standard) into the local coordinate system used by Paint the Night. Thus, ModSAF vehicles could be projected and moved around in the Paint the Night system without resorting to ground clamping. NVESD is conducting tests to confirm that ModSAF can perform its tasks efficiently when using a gridded terrain structure derived from high-resolution PTN databases. Functional descriptionBecause PTN builds T-Mesh terrain directly from source elevation data with no loss of information, the ModSAF terrain build process must likewise preserve resolution and accuracy with no conversion artifacts, and optimized data structures. Current and projected tools convert elevation models and object files representing 3D terrain features and associated abstract data into ModSAF runtime format. This development has many benefits for PTN. It allows PTN to be closely integrated with live simulation as part of a "Virtual Proving Ground", and permits ground targets generated by ModSAF to depict realistic and repeatable behaviors in the mission simulation. These ModSAF databases correlate exactly with high resolution PTN visual simulation, at 1 to 10 meter resolution. NVESD is using an AP Hill 5 meter data set as a test bed to validate simulation performance, with an inter-visibility test to compare live and virtual simulation.2.2 Database content and organizationFigure 1 depicts the PTN terrain database production flow as source data is processed, transformed and reformatted into PTN runtime format(s). As a minimum, PTN requires an elevation matrix (or height field) and a digital orthophoto to support feature processing. Gridded elevation data is converted into T-Meshed polygons, and then formatted into Wavefront/Alias OBJ terrain file format for debug, or into Silicon Graphics, Inc. Performer Fast Binary (PFB) format for real time rendering. This structure supports multiple levels of detail in the terrain, which are seamlessly invoked at specified transition distances. Feature data is normally extracted from the orthophoto as raster data using a pixel classification algorithm. These features are vectorized into 2D point, linear, and areal objects that represent trees/rocks, roads, surface features (i.e. airfields, lakes), and buildings. This data is then transformed into 3D objects that are rendered in PFB.PTN to ModSAF Conversion ToolThis section gives a brief technical overview of the current and future capabilities of the PTN to ModSAF conversion tool.3.1 Data InputThe conversion tool consists of two main components: data input and output.  The data input portion of the conversion tool is handled, for the most part, by the libraries and classes developed at NVESD.  These classes provide an easy interface to read and write elevation grid data into memory.  The data sets rely on control files (*.ctl) which describe size of the array of elevation posts, the X- and Y-post spacing, the file format (binary/ASCII, float/integer, number bit-length) and the file name.The following shows a sample control file:dfile=sample.hf fmt=1nsf w=769 n=897 x=5.000000 y=5.000000 file2mm=1000.000000 shorts=0 orientation=llParameter NameSample ValueDescriptiondfilesample.hfName of associated Height Field raw data filefmt1nsfFormat description including big/little endian, signed/unsigned, data type and length.w769Width of data (posts)n897Number of rows (posts)x5.000Spacing between posts in the X-axis (column/ East-West)y5.000Spacing between posts in the Y-axis (row/ North-South)File2mm1000.00A constant used to convert the raw data to Millimeters.  This example’s value signifies that the raw data is in meters.shorts0Flag stating whether the internal representation should be short or floatsorientationllThe origin’s corner designation (ll = lower left, for example)Table 1: Description of Key Values Used by the Control File3.2 Data outputThis section outlines the current capabilities of the CTDB conversion tool. The conversion tool is responsible for two main tasks.  First, the user must provide the converter with information specific to the database.  This includes the following:Database NameDatumUTM Zone NumberUTM Zone LetterUTM NorthingUTM EastingLatitude/Longitude extents in Decimal DegreesSecond, the user must provide the converter a height field’s control  file.  This file provides the converter with information size, type, and spacing of an accompanying height field file.  The converter will use all of this information and the elevation grid data to create the CTDB database.3.3 CTDB format concepts ModSAF uses CTDB format files to represent the characteristics of a given terrain.  Because the terrain data is vital for much of the Semi-Automated Forces (SAF) behavior, it is vital to accurately represent this data.  For example, CTDB stores terrain elevation information (as a grid or TIN) for line-of-sight and mobility algorithms, cultural feature information (roads, rivers, vegetation), soil information for mobility algorithms. The CTDB format does not store commonly used visual database information such as color and texture properties.The CTDB format contains sufficient data to support pre-established CGF behaviors, which normally take the form of “script-like” behaviors (i.e. combat instruction sets or task frames. Designed for previous generation machines, the format uses every bit of its data structures to the fullest; hence the name “Compact” is given. Elevation posts are grouped into “pages,” which are sections of terrain, 32 by 32 posts.  These pages break the database into rows and columns, are written to disk from the lower-left (SW) corner, column-major. The CTDB format has the suffix convention of  “.cXE”,  where “X” is the CTDB version (1,2,3,4,5, etc.) and “E” is the endian designation (b= big endian, l = little endian).  A CTDB format will be designated as big endian, or little endian, depending on the operating system. A brief overview of the CTDB format follows:A libctdb database file consists of the following sections:CTDB Header— This section describes the entire file, describing the loader the size (in bytes) of the various sections of data in the file.  This section also describes the size and UTM origin of the database.CTDB Auxiliary Header—this section contains additional information about the location of the database on the earth that was added in format 5. This small section describes extra information that the designers did not want in the main header.  The parameters include the (X, Y) origin of the database and the latitude/longitude extents of the database, in decimal degrees.Geoid Correction Data (optional)—this section contains the information necessary to convert between heights above the ellipsoid and heights above the geoid.Patch Group Headers—this section contains bookkeeping information about the patch group data.Topology –this section defines topological relationships of linear features.Abstract Features—this section contains information about terrain abstractions such as feature footprints, political boundaries, and town names.Linear Models—this section contains a library of linear feature models referenced by tree lines and other line features stored in the database.Volume Models—this section contains a library of volumetric models referenced by buildings and other volumetric features in the database.Aggregate Models—this section contains definitions of aggregate features, which are collections of features.Soil Tables— The soil tables section contains two sections.  The first section, in order to support arbitrary soil table sizes, is an index value for each of the soil tables.  The number of soil tables is stored in the header record of the CTDB file.  According to Mike Longtin of Lockheed-Martin, the use of soils can be described as follows:“There are three levels of indirection [when using soils].  The soil index (stored in the feature or grid post data) indexes into a soil table (which exists on a per-patch basis, although multiple patches can reference the same soil table).  The soil table entry is itself an index into the global PAT (Polygon Attribute Table).  Columns of the PAT store various values for one particular attribute, while the rows of the PAT store a particular set of attribute values.  One of the columns of the PAT contains the SIMNET soil types.”Water Characteristics—this section contains unique combinations of water characteristics that occur within the database.Tidal Zones—this section contains data for each unique tidal region of the database.Elevation Grid (Present only if some or all patches are gridded)— This section is the most important for the conversion tool.  First, the elevation posts are grouped into “pages,” sections of terrain, 32 by 32 posts.  These pages, which break the database into rows and columns, are written to disk from the lower-left (SW) corner, column- major. The CTDB format stores these 32 by 32 posts beginning with the lower-left (SW) post, column-major.  The individual elevation posts consists of a 32-bit data structure, which contains soil, cultural, and elevation data in its structure. See Figure 5.Patch Group Data Headers—this section describes how the data for each patch of a group is stored.Patch Features—this section contains information regarding microterrain, buildings, trees, roads, and rivers grouped by patchPatch Terrain Elements—this section contains the collection of all TIN data, by patch.Virtual Grids—this section contains the virtual grid for each patch.3.4 Supported features(1) Terrain Skin Converter This module, which has been completed consists of software routines which convert terrain grid files (hf = height field data) and header information (i.e. database ID, UTM origin and extents, and horizontal datum) into ModSAF CTDB formats 5 and 7. Current functionality supports databases in world coordinates or UTM.(2) Road Data Converter This module, which is under development, consists of software to convert 2D road vectors and 3D road polygons into ModSAF CTDB format. (3) Tree and Rock Model Converter This module, which is under development, includes development of software to convert 3D trees and other model instances/locations into ModSAF CTDB format. 3.5 Using the Conversion ToolThe conversion utility was initially written to convert raw elevation grid data at a 5-meter resolution. By resetting post spacing parameter, it is possible to convert PTN terrain databases of varying resolutions (within the PTN standard of 1 to 10 meter post-to-post spacing). Metadata associated with each database, including origin and extents, can easily be placed on the command line removing the need to recompile based on different height field and control file values.Lessons learnedWhile the CTDB format attempts to be compact, it has a number of data structures which duplicate information.  As opposed to organizing the format primarily by a logical spatial organization, the format seems to be organized by the algorithms (line-of-site, mobility, etc) that use the data.  A significant question arises from these examples: what happens when these duplications of data are not consistent?Here are a few examples of data duplication:Trees:  Trees are stored as point locations inside patches, with certain attribute information.  Among other attribute information, the tree’s elevation at the top of the tree is stored for line-of-site algorithms.  Based on the type of tree (linear model) and the elevation at the tree’s location, this value could be derived (at least when the CTDB file is loaded into memory).  Instead, it is the responsibility of the CTDB writer to find this value.Cultural feature masks can also be found in both the patch header structure and in elevation post structure, on a per-post basis.  Again, both in the patch header and elevation grid structures, these values could easily be derived from the actual tree-data.Roads/Rivers: An obvious and necessary duplication in the CTDB format is the representation of roads and rivers.  These laid-linear features must be represented as 2-D networks for mobility algorithms and as TINned geometry for correlation to the visual database.  A problem arises when using a visual database with geometry only and attempting to convert toCTDB because of the absence of road/river network data.  Because PTN builds both the visual and CTDB database from source data, PTN does not have this problem.Elevation data: Elevation data is stored in the elevation grid section of CTDB.  Also, a maximum elevation value is stored on a per-patch basis.  This maximum elevation is probably used for a low-pass line-of-site algorithm.  Again, this could be easily calculated at run-time when the CTDB file is being loaded.The conversion tool relied heavily on two sets of previously developed code: the input relied on the NVESD height field reader; the output relied on the source code in the ModSAF distribution. While the height field reader integration was almost immediate, the creation of a CTDB write capability proved to be considerably more time-consuming. This experience suggests that the modular, object-oriented software design is indispensable to the development of efficient and easily maintainable database conversion tools. This also suggests that these considerations should be paramount as ModSAF is transitioned to OneSAF.The PTN to CTDB conversion tool development would not have been possible with the ModSAF/CTDB documentation alone.  The ModSAF mailing list provided a number of critical answers to details of the format that the documentation did not explain. ModSAF utility programs also aided in debugging the conversion tool, before the data could successfully be loaded into ModSAF.  As debugging proceeded, it was found that many parameters were not explicitly set, so the converter sent undefined values to these parameters.  These erroneous values either showed incorrect data or crashed the ModSAF tool. Many terrain database file formats rely heavily on a hierarchical organization, using “push” and “pop” nodes to delimit parent-child relationships within the file.  The CTDB format uses a rigid format to organize its various data-types.  It relies heavily on integer values inside the various data structures to provide offset information to child structures (measured in bytes or 32-bit words, depending on the particular parameter’s convention).  This awkward use of offsets is complicated by the conversion of these integer values into actual memory-pointers when the database is loaded into memory.Preliminary ResultsA major effort at CECOM/NVESD is to build a virtual representation of Fort A.P. Hill, VA to augment field efforts in support of system development, testing, and evaluation.  The Fort A.P. Hill drop zone has been instrumented with a T1 line, GPS feed from targets, and sensor gimbal and button read controls.  A real-time image feed from Fort A.P. Hill to Fort Belvoir, VA was established over the T1 line using the VIC multicast backbone (M-Bone) vtc tool.  Sensor gimbal and button data was also transmitted over the T1 line using UDP sockets to allow the PTN simulation to slave to the sensor in the field.  Finally, GPS target locations were transmitted using an rf link to a base station, converted to DIS PDUs and transmitted over the T1 line to the simulation at Fort Belvoir.Preliminary runs demonstrated the virtual representation of Fort A.P. Hill closely resembled the live feed.  Target motions and line of sights were highly correlated.  The geometry given is one of the most difficult problems to solve.  Sensor downlook angles were on the order of –0.5 degrees over a terrain with little local relief.PlansWhile Paint the Night databases have been relatively small, “training area” databases up until the present, plans are to create a terrain database of 2( x 2( at a 10 meter resolution. In order to support this, PTN will move to database paging, and is exploring GCS coordinate representation to accommodate these larger data sets.A second planned enhancement involves the correlated conversion of surface material attributes. PTN will support the EO/IR Data Dictionary, which has been nominated as a SISO standard, for this purpose. The requisite enhancement of ModSAF/OneSAF would extend baseline ModSAF surface material attribute codes, to incorporate the EO/IR dictionary definitions used in sensor modeling, and converts these into characteristic ModSAF attributes.Parallel efforts are currently ongoing to convert PTN databases into SEDRIS, and SEDRIS databases to ModSAF. Once these capabilities are in place, the next step will be to test the end-to-end process converting PTN databases into ModSAF through SEDRIS.GlossaryCTDB A Terrain file format used with the ModSAF tool.  The acronym stands for Compact Terrain Database.Fair fightA situation in which a force’s probability of defeating an opposition force does not vary by the simulator that is used.Micro-terrainAny terrain geometry that consists of irregular triangle (or polygonal) meshes, in contrast to terrain based on a regular grid of elevation values.ModSAFA tool developed by mainly by Lockheed-Martin (formerly Loral, BBN) and TASC, used for generating entities that have intelligence about military doctrine.  The acronym stands for Modular Semi-Automated Forces.PageA section of elevation posts.  The standard size of a page is 32 by 32 elevation posts.PatchA section of terrain used for holding cultural features and micro-terrain.  A patch size is typically 4 by 4 posts.  In typical ModSAF databases with a post-spacing of 125 meters, this makes a patch of terrain an even 500 by 500 meters.Patch GroupA structure to group adjacent patches.  A group typically contains 4 contiguous patches, from west to east, wrapping from south to north at the east boundary of the database.References:[1] Riggs, William C. “Database Conversion to Support Correlation of NVESD Paint the Night Visual and ModSAF Terrain” LNK White Paper, Undated[2] Riggs, William C., and Fadoul, Matthew B., Final Report, EOIR Purchase Order LT2446, CONTRACT DAAB07-96-D-H754, D.O.  #0007, July 10, 1997Author BiographiesMAXIMO LORENZO is Chief of the Systems Simulations and Virtual Prototyping Branch, CECOM/NVESD at Fort Belvoir VA.  He has 15 years experience in simulating thermal sensors.MATHEW FADOUL is experienced in Geographic Information Systems and 3D simulation. His expertise includes 3D-terrain generation, CAD, simulation integration, and distributed simulation. Currently, he heads a consulting firm specializing in development of visual and constructive simulations, supporting a variety of Department of Defense customers.BILL RIGGS is Project Manager for Simulation and Training for LNK Corporation, Inc. He has over nine years experience in advanced distributed simulation and terrain database production technology programs. From 1992-96, he led LNK's terrain database production support group, which developed modeling and simulation terrain databases for the US Army Topographic Engineering Center.  Since 1996, he has been involved in a variety of research and infrastructure projects funded by NVESD, USATEC, and NASA to improve the efficiency, quality, and flexibility of terrain building for simulation applications.AUSTIN STOUDENMIRE is a simulation engineer at SAIC supporting the development of simulations at NVESD, Fort Belvoir VA.MIKE BALDWIN is a senior software engineer with SAIC supporting simulation projects at NVESD, Fort Belvoir VA.DAVE FLOREK is a Senior Computer Graphics Engineer with SAIC, supporting the Virtual Prototyping and Simulation Division of the Army CECOM NVESD.  He is currently helping to direct the redesign of a real-time thermal simulation package, and is developing custom database and memory-management software to support the project.  He is pursuing a doctoral degree in computer graphics from The George Washington University.PAGE  PAGE  2PAGE   PAGE 2 EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure 1: NVESD Paint the Night Terrain Database Production Process EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure 2: Line of Sight at 125m ResolutionFigure 3: Line of Sight at 130m ResolutionFigure 4: Line of Sight at 5m Resolution EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Figure 5: ModSAF Elevation Grid Representation