Breaching the M&S METOC Operational Barrier:The Worldwide Low-Resolution METOC DatabaseDr. Paul A. BirkelThe MITRE Corporation1820 Dolley Madison Blvd.McLean, VA  22102(703) 883-6399 HYPERLINK mailto:pbirkel@mitre.org pbirkel@mitre.orgBob ReynoldsDana ShererLitton TASC55 Walkers Brook DriveReading, MA  01867 HYPERLINK mailto:rareynolds@TASC.Com rareynolds@tasc.com,  HYPERLINK mailto:DZSherer@tasc.com dzsherer@tasc.com Jeff CovelliSAIC12479 Research PkwyOrlando, FL  32826 HYPERLINK mailto:javier.m.covelli@lmco.com javier.m.covelli@lmco.com Keywords:SE, SNE, Meteorology, Oceanography, METOC, Environment, Data BaseABSTRACT: Getting Modeling and Simulation (M&S) applications to include meteorologic and oceanographic data as part of their environmental representation has always been hard.  Part of the problem has been the limited availability of internally consistent Meteorologic and Oceanographic (METOC) environmental scenarios.  The DARPA STOW program, in cooperation with the JSIMS and JWARS programs, has developed a set of four worldwide low-resolution 14-day METOC data sets for simulation system testing and potential use in training exercises or analysis events.  These data sets are based on METOC model output data collected during CY98 with a resolution of 6 hours temporally, 1 degree spatially, and multiple levels vertically.  In addition to integrating multiple operational data sets, a collection of well-defined transformations have been developed to populate a significant number of derived variables of importance to M&S applications.  These populated scenarios support the STOW FOM, the JSIMS Element Data Model, and are available in TAOS database format for use with either the TAOS Distributor (DIS or RTI data transport) or the TAOS Database Read API.To place this activity in its proper perspective, we present an operational view of the METOC “consumption” problem from the point of view of the federation scenario developer and manager, and review where various current capabilities fit (and don’t fit) in this view.  We subsequently characterize the missing elements, and discuss how the Worldwide Low-Resolution METOC database provides a short-term solution to this vexing operational problem while motivating better long-term solutions.1. IntroductionWhile incorporating authoritative representations of the terrain environment into Modeling and Simulation (M&S) applications has been difficult, incorporating authoritative representations of the Meteorologic and Oceanographic (METOC) environment has been doubly so.  METOC source data, like terrain source data, is delivered to the M&S customer via multiple data stovepipes.  The temporal nature of the data, coupled with the multiplicity of complex dependencies among different data sources, makes effective integration, deconfliction, and subsequent use unacceptably expensive given current technology and operational requirements.  As a result, METOC environmental modeling is usually the last bastion assaulted in the march towards full environmental integration in M&S applications.In this paper, we:1.	Present a simplified model of the operational concept from the perspective of an M&S scenario developer and manager,2.	Review how current technology and developing capabilities fit, or leaves shortfalls regarding, this operational concept, 3.	Describe the Worldwide Low-Resolution METOC database and how it fits into the operational concept,Review the utility of the Worldwide Low-Resolution METOC database as a stopgap measure for supporting current and developmental M&S applications, andSuggest where the community should consider focusing their efforts in support of the DMSO-associated Natural Environment Executive Agents.2. An Operational ConceptViewing the operational problem from the perspective of an M&S scenario developer and manager, we can identify six major phases proceeding from METOC “data source to data sink”:Collection,Integration,Extension,Transmission,Tailoring, andSharing.Collection is about the discovery of, and access to, METOC source data.  This data is typically historical or model output (e.g., archived NORAPS Numerical Weather Predictions – NWP), but may also include climatology (e.g., Ocean and Atmospheric Master Library – OAML datasets).  The Master Environmental Library (MEL; see  HYPERLINK http://mel.dmso.mil http://mel.dmso.mil ) is focused on just such a task [1].  The fruits of a successful MEL session are a set of, e.g., historical NWP data sets transparently retrieved from multiple distributed resource repositories.Integration is about taking those disparate data sets and merging them into a physics-consistent, logically integrated, and physically single data set.By “physics-consistent” we refer to ensuring both intra- and cross-domain coupling which is consistent with known physics, e.g., nested atmospheric grids should share consistent boundary conditions, sea state should be consistent with surface winds, and underwater background acoustic noise should be consistent with sea state.By “logically integrated” we refer to a single data model that is independent of the resolution, accuracy, or source of the data used to populate it.  For example, wind U-V components should have a single logical representation, regardless of whether they occur at 10 or 90 kPa pressure height, or were “produced” using NOGAPS or COAMPS NWP models.By “physically single” we refer to a single data repository that while potentially internally heterogeneous for performance engineering reasons, appears physically uniform through the medium of a single, integrated access mechanism (e.g., an application programming interface).  The data customer requires simple, uniform access with unnecessary complexities hidden from view.Extension is about handling the gap between the basic physical measurements or variables provided by available NWP models, and therefore provided/populated during Collection, and the variables required by a federation, as expressed in a Federation Object Model (FOM).  In many cases, federates require METOC-related data rather than the “raw” METOC data itself that perhaps a weather forecaster might desire.  Consider, for example, atmospheric transmission loss characteristics as influenced by liquid water concentration (LWC) – a sensor model would more likely require extinction coefficients and cloud deck heights than a 3D grid of LWC, and would declare so in the FOM.  As a result, various transformations often must be applied to the integrated METOC data before the target FOM can be “populated”.  These transformations can range from simple formula through complex NWP models in their own right (e.g., local high-resolution wind fields to support a chemical transport/dispersion model).  The result of this phase is a data set which meets the content requirements of a specific FOM.Transmission is about taking the collected, integrated, extended data set and furnishing it to the simulation/federation scenario developer in a readily accessible form.  The Synthetic Environment Data Representation and Interchange Specification (SEDRIS) project (see  HYPERLINK http://www.sedris.org http://www.sedris.org) is focused on just such a task [2].  It is important to note that the Transmission phase could be placed earlier in the sequence.  We chose to place it at Phase 4 based on our desire as environmental data customers to receive fully integrated and transformed METOC data sets which are already “FOM compliant” from an authoritative, probably centralized, facility.  We would rather not have to take responsibility for executing those earlier phases local to our simulation application.Tailoring is about adjusting the received METOC data set to meet exercise- or scenario-specific training/analysis requirements.  In particular, a single METOC data set may be used in multiple tailored variants to support either training under alternative (but related) scenarios, or for sensitivity analysis to varying environmental conditions.  In any case, while authoritative tailoring tools are highly desired, they will probably need to be executed local to the simulation.  This is especially the case where tailoring may need to happen “just in time” during the course of the simulation execution to induce environmental conditions which were not anticipated prior to initializing the simulation.Sharing is about communicating the final ready-to-go METOC scenario to all federation participants.  This may occur via pre-distribution of the full 4D scenario to each participant for local time-slice retrieval at run-time, or run-time distribution using a variety of inter- and intra-simulation/simulator data transport mechanisms including DIS, the RTI, shared-memory, or a variety of other data distribution mechanisms.3. Current Technology and Capabilities3.1 TAOSUsing the DARPA Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) Total Atmosphere and Ocean Server (TAOS) project as an illustrative example we can see how each of these operational phases was addressed [6][7].  TAOS consists of three related software components known as the Integrator, the Editor, and the Distributor, all sharing an underlying Database.The TAOS Integrator supports the first three phases outlined above: Collection, Integration, and Extension.The collection capability depends on the MEL for data discovery in DoD environmental data repositories and subsequent access to that data.The integration capability focuses on the logical and physical levels and does not explicitly address the physics-consistent portion of the integration problem.  TAOS depends, as do all other current integration capabilities, on accessing temporally coincident data from multiple sources which are presumed to be physics-consistent either because they were collected from the real-world, or were intentionally co-modeled (e.g., nested grids).  As neither can currently be guaranteed, physics-consistency in the TAOS Integrator is necessarily weak, and depends on intelligent data collection and operator expertise.  Additionally, TAOS has no mechanisms for checking and flagging such inconsistencies if/when they occur.The extension capability is termed “transformations” within TAOS, and a robust infrastructure for executing transformations and a significant set of transformations are provided.TAOS uses the shared Database to accomplish the fourth phase – Transmission.The TAOS Editor supports METOC data Tailoring in the run-time mode.  Although the Editor maintains logical and physical data set consistency, it is not knowledgeable enough about METOC phenomena to ensure physics-consistency.Finally, the TAOS Distributor supports run-time data Sharing using both DIS and RTI-based data distribution mechanisms.  Additionally the TAOS Database can be pre-distributed to all federates and then accessed via a local application programming interface at run-time.3.2 MELThe Master Environmental Library (MEL) continues to ease the Collection phase problems of data discovery and access to individual historical and climatologic METOC data sets, most recently by developing a services interface which allows application developers to directly access MEL without the overhead of an imposed GUI.  MEL is also adding support for generating SEDRIS transmittals in addition to its current Transmission capability based on the GRIB and BUFR formats (respectively: FM 92-VIII Ext. GRIB (GRIdded Binary), and Binary Universal Form for the Representation of meteorological data) for METOC data.3.3 ESGThe Environmental Scenario Generator (ESG; previously known as Weather Scenario Generator – WSG) project is currently addressing several phases of the operational concept [2] [3].In conjunction with the MEL, ESG provides the ability to access low-resolution historical METOC archives based on consumer-oriented terminology (e.g., “rapid change in temperature or wind speed”), data mine the MEL inventory for time-periods during which the target weather conditions occur, and then additionally execute “just in time” Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) models to provide greater data resolution from the retrieved boundary conditions. These capabilities help improve the availability of data during the Collection phase.In FY00 ESG will be providing the capability to “chain” together multiple NWP and related METOC models to generate a sequence of data sets “just in time” which share boundary conditions, and therefore meet physics-integration requirements (thus helping improve the Integration phase).  ESG is also working to address logical and physical integration using the current MEL GRIB/BUFR format; additional “packaging” concepts are being developed to organize multiple GRIB/BUFR format data sets into a single data transmittal.During FY99, ESG will be developing a suite of data transformations similar to those in TAOS to address Extension issues.  These will be targeted to the needs of specific customers (see [10] for the types of transformations likely to be addressed).  These data transformations will be treated similarly to NWP models and “chained” together as part of the scenario data development process.  Development of a FOM-like specification front-end remains an open task area, however ESG is developing a Scenario Generation Template (SGT) which will specify how each parameter in the integrated and extended data set was populated.3.4 Tailoring TechnologiesThere are currently two important ongoing developments addressing technologies to support authoritative, physics-consistent METOC data tailoring:The DARPA Advanced Simulation System Thrust (ASTT) JSIMS Environmental Tailoring System (JETS) project [4][5], andThe UK Meteorology Office Field Modification System (FMS) application [8][9].Both show potential to support the Tailoring phase.3.5 Sharing TechnologiesIn addition to the current TAOS Distributor support for DIS and the RTI, both JWARS and JSIMS are developing run-time architectures with integrated environmental data access mechanisms which are specific to their program requirements.SEDRIS offers, via its Read API, standard mechanisms for accessing time-slice METOC data that may prove useful for run-time application although such potentially stringent performance requirements are not a priority for SEDRIS development.The JointSAF application also includes a general-purpose METOC “receiving” capability for DIS and RTI data distribution infrastructures, and the TAOS program has developed a similar capability to “receive” distributed METOC via DIS and the RTI and reassemble it at the behest of a simulation federate.4. The Worldwide METOC Database4.1 RationaleObjectively, it is expected that the A&S and Ocean Natural Environment Executive Agents will continue to develop ESG, in conjunction with the MEL, to support the full spectrum of Collection, Integration, and Extension requirements, including “just in time” Transmission of data to simulation scenario developers and managers.  It is hoped that this full-service capability might become operational early in the next decade.In the meantime, however, there are very few existing integrated, extended and transmission-ready METOC scenario data sets readily available via the MEL.  This makes it difficult for simulation developers to “test the METOC water” to determine the impact of incorporating METOC data into their federations, and subsequently set well-defined requirements for future integrated METOC scenario availability.This was a particular problem for the developing JSIMS and JWARS programs, who decided to team with the DARPA STOW program to develop a suite of four worldwide data sets which could be used during FY99-01 for development, testing, and potential exercise/analysis purposes.  The decision to adopt a worldwide perspective was driven by the desire to avoid potential “playbox” limitations during this time-period. Given the desire to capture several potentially different METOC phenomenological events from which at least one in any given geographic region would probably prove “normal” and one “variant”, four spaced 14-day time-sequences were collected.  For sizing and data availability reasons, low-resolution scenarios were the only affordable option.  This database is subsequently referred to herein simply as “Global-98” [11].Global-98 puts in place a basic capability for many simulations to begin experimenting with the integration of METOC data without concern that their "playbox of interest" will be empty or that additional costs will arise for METOC data collection and integration.  The scenario data is already “in the can”.  In addition, the negotiated METOC “FOM” provides a potential starting point for future community METOC object model development as well, as a requirement base for evolution of the ESG Extension capability.4.2 ContentThe Global-98 database contains a fully correlated set of 4D atmospheric and oceanographic state variables derived from authoritative, operational, model-based forecast products.  The model runs were made over four two-week intervals, equally spaced over calendar year 1998, and centered on the solstices and equinoxes. The Geodetic coordinate system used is based on the WGS-84 reference ellipsoid.The database is currently big-endian, and is approximately 15 Gbytes in size.  Global-98 is divided into three separate regimes: Ocean Volume, Ocean Surface, and Atmospheric.  Temporal resolution is 6 hours and horizontal spatial resolution is 1x1 arc-degree.  Vertical resolution is regime-specific.  Table 1 describes the contents of each regime.4.3 Collection and IntegrationAll three Global-98 regimes were populated using data collected via the MEL for the OTIS, TOPS, WAM, and NOGAPS NWP models.  Tide level was populated using the Xtide model, executed locally.  Integration was accomplished using the standard TAOS receiver/integration mechanisms to create a logically integrated and physically single database.  Physics-consistency was obtained by collecting data products as they were generated for use by the operational services; consistency is therefore exactly that required by the warfighter given the resolution of the data sources.4.4 ExtensionDetailed analysis of the STOW-97 FOM and the JSIMS IOC element data model requirements resulted in a single set of state variable specifications as enumerated in Tables 2, 3, and 4.  For each variable the following information is specified:Well-known name and definition,Units of measure (e.g., degrees Centigrade),Data type (e.g., real, enum),Valid range (e.g. –2.0 to 30.0),Data source used to populate (and whether any derivation is required),Relative storage size,Exceptions (if any) to the regime-specific temporal or spatial dimensionality, andWhich application will use this variable.Population of the Ocean Volume regime FOM required 3 transformations, the Ocean Surface regime FOM required 2 transformations, and the Atmospheric regime FOM required a total of 18 transformations.Of a total of 56 required state variables, 23 were derived or fully 50%.  This finding emphasizes the relative disparity between the content of the METOC data sources currently accessible via the MEL and ESG, and the METOC-associated requirements of M&S applications.  Given that the STOW federation is a mixed platform-level virtual/constructive simulation and JSIMS is primarily an aggregate-level constructive simulation, we believe that this finding will generalize to other M&S federations and applications.Table 1:  Global-98 RegimesA second finding is that several state variables were necessarily populated heuristically, due to the disparity between the resolution of the source METOC data sets and the resolution at which the environmental phenomena occurs, in order to fulfill the requirements of the FOM.  Fog Cover and Fog Thickness are two such cases; fog is not a phenomenon which can be adequately characterized on a 1x1 arc-degree basis (nominally 100x100 km.).  Therefore while it can be reasonably claimed that the Global-98 state variables populated directly from NWP models are physics-consistent due to the nature of the data sources integrated, all transforms are necessarily suspect and must be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.  The specific transforms used for Global-98 are defined in detail elsewhere [11].A corollary of this finding is that there may be no physics-consistent solution to providing FOM-compliant METOC data where there are significant disparities between the spatial scales of the FOM and the METOC phenomena of interest.  This suggests that M&S scenario developers and simulation proponents need to become better informed regarding METOC phenomena so as to reduce unrealistic expectations/requirements.  Conversely, developers of FOM-compliant METOC scenarios need to be prepared to introduce heuristic transforms which necessarily reduce physics-consistency in order to meet M&S operational requirements.4.5 TransmissionGlobal-98 exists only in TAOS Database format; due to lack of funding there are no current plans to provide access to this data set either by dividing it into its component parts for GRIB/BUFR transmission (e.g., via MEL) or as a logically and physically integrated data set via SEDRIS.StateVariableDefinitionUnitsData TypeValid RangeDerivationSizeExceptionsUsageWater  TemperatureOcean water temperaturedeg CReal-2.030.0TOV117.6noneSTOW JSIMSJWARSSalinityRatio of mass of dissolved salts to mass of water; total mass of dissolved salt per kg of sea waterpptReal32.037.0TOV24.4Temporal Resolution is 24 hoursSTOW JSIMSJWARSSound VelocitySpeed of propagation of acoustic energym/secReal13001700TOV317.6noneJSIMSCurrent U ComponentOcean current in the west-east direction where east is positivecm/secReal-100100TOPS1.0Spatial Dimensionality is 2D – surface current onlySTOW JSIMSJWARSCurrent V ComponentOcean current in the south-north direction where north is positivecm/secReal-100100TOPS1.0Spatial Dimensionality is 2D – surface current onlySTOW JSIMSJWARSMixing Layer DepthThe depth of the bottom of the mixed layer; mixed layer: the layer of water which is mixed through wave action or thermohaline convectionmetersReal0500TOPS1.0Spatial Dimensionality is 2D –  function of lat/lonJSIMSTable 2: Field Level Attribution for the Ocean Volume RegimeStateVariableDefinitionUnitsData TypeValid RangeDerivationSizeExceptionsUsageMaximum Wave HeightThe mean height of the highest tenth of waves measured from trough to crestmReal025WAM1.0noneJSIMSPrimary Wave DirectionDirection associated with the largest peak in the discrete wave spectrum, measured clockwise from true north to the direction from which waves are travellingdeg Real0360WAM1.0noneSTOW JSIMSPrimary Wave Mean PeriodInverse frequency associated with the largest peak in the discrete wave spectrum; time required for two consecutive peaks to pass a fixed pointsecReal1120WAM1.0noneSTOW JSIMSSecondary Wave DirectionDirection associated with the second largest peak in the discrete wave spectrum, measured clockwise from true north to the direction from which waves are travellingdegReal0360WAM1.0noneJSIMSSecondary Wave Mean PeriodInverse frequency associated with the second largest peak in the discrete wave spectrum; time required for two consecutive peaks to pass a fixed pointsecReal1120WAM1.0noneJSIMSSignificant Height of Combined Wind Waves and SwellAverage trough-to-peak height of the 1/3 highest waves in the discrete wave spectrum of combined wind and swell wavesmReal025WAM1.0noneSTOW JSIMSJWARSSwell Wave DirectionDirection associated with the largest peak in the discrete swell wave spectrum, measured clockwise from true north to the direction from which waves are travellingdegReal0360WAM1.0noneJSIMSSwell Wave Significant HeightAverage trough-to-peak height of the 1/3 highest waves in the discrete swell wave spectrummReal010WAM1.0noneJSIMSSwell Wave Mean PeriodInverse frequency associated with the peak of the discrete swell wave spectrum; time required for two consecutive peaks to pass a fixed pointsecReal1120WAM1.0noneJSIMSWind Wave Significant HeightAverage trough-to-peak height of the 1/3 highest waves in the discrete wind wave spectrummReal010WAM1.0noneJSIMSWind Wave DirectionDirection associated with the largest peak in the discrete wind wave spectrum, measured clockwise from true north to the direction from which waves are travellingdegReal0360WAM1.0noneJSIMSWind Wave Mean PeriodInverse frequency associated with the peak of the discrete wind wave spectrum; time required for two consecutive peaks to pass a fixed pointsecReal1120WAM1.0noneJSIMSDynamic Sea Surface HeightDynamic ocean surface height w.r.t. mean sea level (MSL)mSpectrum-5050TOS121.4Field Type -- WaveHeight STOWTide LevelComponent of dynamic ocean surface height due to tides; expressed as a signed offset from MSLmReal-5050XTide1.4Field Type -- ObservedFieldSTOW JSIMSJWARSSea StateAn index indicating the roughness of the sea, determined by binning significant wave heightnoneEnum1calm8roughTOS21.0noneSTOW JSIMSJWARSLand/Sea MaskA flag set to zero for gridpoints on water and to one for gridpoints on landnoneEnum0sea1landMEL1.0none--Table 3: Field-Level Attribution for the Ocean Surface RegimeStateVariableDefinitionUnitsData TypeValid RangeDerivationSizeExceptionsUsageDewpoint DepressionThe positive difference in degrees between the air temperature and the dew point; dew point: the temperature to which a parcel of air must be cooled at constant pressure and water-vapor content in order for saturation to occur (Glossary of Meteorology)deg CReal-5050TA1TA27.8noneJSIMSFreezing HeightLowest height above MSL at which air temperature drops below freezingmReal11e5NOGAPS1.0Spatial Dimensionality -- 2D (function  of lat/lon only)Geopotential HeightHeight of a given point in the atmosphere in units proportional to the potential energy of a unit mass at this height, relative to mean sea level.mReal01e5TA37.8noneJSIMSIce CoverA flag set to one for gridpoints located over ice and zero otherwisenoneReal01NOGAPS1.0Temporal Resolution -- 12 hours Spatial Dimensionality -- 2D (surface variable)JWARSPressure (at MSL)Air pressure at the surface, extrapolated to mean sea level over landmbarReal8001200NOGAPS1.0Spatial Dimensionality -- 2DSTOW JSIMSJWARSAir TemperatureAmbient temperature of air at a pointdeg C Real-8550TA1TA47.8noneSTOW JSIMSJWARSTerrain HeightHeight of terrain above MSL (as used by model)mReal01e4NOGAPS1.0Temporal Resolution -- undefined (terrain height is time invariant)Cloud CoverThe areal fraction of the grid cell associated with a point that is covered by clouds, as seen from abovepctReal0100TA51.0Spatial Dimensionality -- 2D (function of lat/lon only)STOW JSIMSJWARSCloud BaseHeight of cloud base above MSLmReal06e4TA61.0Spatial Dimensionality -- 2D (function of lat/lon only)STOW JSIMSJWARSCloud TopHeight of cloud top above MSLmReal06e4TA61.0Spatial Dimensionality -- 2D (function of lat/lon only)JSIMSJWARSCloud ThicknessDistance between cloud base and topmReal24000TA71.0Spatial Dimensionality -- 2D (function of lat/lon only)JSIMSCloud TypePredominant cloud type over the grid cell associated with a pointnoneEnumTable 2-13TA81.0Spatial Dimensionality -- 2D (function of lat/lon only)STOW JSIMSCloud PhaseLiquid/solid disposition of the cloud water contentnoneEnumTable 2-13TA81.0Spatial Dimensionality -- 2D (function of lat/lon only)JSIMSCloud Liquid Water ContentLiquid water content of a unit volumegm/cm3Real01TA81.0Spatial Dimensionality -- 2D (function of lat/lon only)JSIMSCloud Average Drop SizeAverage diameter of cloud water dropscmRealTBDTBDTA81.0Spatial Dimensionality -- 2D (function of lat/lon only)JSIMSAccumulated PrecipitationPrecipitation rate integrated over the last model timestep and initialized uniformly to 0.0 at the start of a Scenariokg/m2 (mm)Real050TA91.0Spatial Dimensionality -- 2D (function of lat/lon only)STOW JSIMSJWARSPrecipitation RateRate of accumulation of precipitationmm/hrReal050TA101.0Spatial Dimensionality -- 2D (function of lat/lon only)STOW JSIMSJWARSPrecipitation TypePredominant type of precipitationnoneEnumTable 2-13TA111.0Spatial Dimensionality -- 2D (function of lat/lon only)STOW JSIMSJWARSPrecipitation PhaseLiquid/solide disposition of the precipitable waternoneEnumTable 2-13TA111.0Spatial Dimensionality -- 2D (function of lat/lon only)JSIMSVapor PressurePartial pressure of water vapor at a pointmbarReal01000TA1TA127.8noneJSIMSRelative HumidityPercent of maximum absolute humidity at a pointpctReal0100TA137.8noneSTOW JSIMSJWARSWind U ComponentComponent of wind vector resolved along local East, positive eastm/secReal-100100TA1TA147.8noneSTOW JSIMSJWARSWind V ComponentComponent of wind vector resolved along local North, positive northm/secReal-100100TA1TA147.8noneSTOW JSIMSJWARSWind W ComponentComponent of wind vector resolved along local vertical , positive upm/secReal-100100TA1TA157.8noneSTOWVisibilityaka Meteorological Range -- a measure of visibility based on Beer’s Law and related to the visible-band Extinction Coefficient by Koschmeider’s RelationkmReal0.0160.0TA167.8noneSTOWJWARSVisible-Band Extinction CoefficientCoefficient of spatial attenuation of visible light as defined by Beer’s Law, and valid at a pointkm-1Real5e-53.0TA167.8noneSTOWJWARSHaze TypeSpecifies an atmospheric condition for which optical properties have been measured; as recognized by LOWTRANnoneEnumTable 2-13TA167.8Spatial Dimensionality -- 2D (function of lat/lon only)STOWFog CoverThe areal fraction of the grid cell associated with a point that is covered by ground fog, as seen from abovepctReal0100TA171.0Spatial Dimensionality – 2D(function of lat/lon only)STOW JSIMSFog ThicknessHeight of top of fog bank relative to ground; fog base is assumed to be at ground levelmReal0500TA171.0Spatial Dimensionality – 2D(function of lat/lon only)STOW JSIMSSurface Duct HeightHeight above the geoid of the effective ceiling of a radar duct formed by  moisture trapped by  a low altitude temperature inversion mReal30450N/A1.0Spatial Dimensionality – 2D(function of lat/lon only)STOW JSIMSSurface Duct IntensityA dimensionless, enumerated value indicating the strength of a surface radar duct.noneRealTable 2-13N/A1.0Spatial Dimensionality – 2D(function of lat/lon only)STOW JSIMSEvaporative Duct HeightHeight above the geoid of the effective ceiling of a radar duct formed by a rapid decrease in humidity just above the sea surface.mReal038N/A1.0Spatial Dimensionality – 2D(function of lat/lon only)STOWJSIMSEvaporative Duct IntensityA dimensionless, enumerated value indicating the strength of an evaporative radar duct.noneRealTable 2-13N/A1.0Spatial Dimensionality – 2D(function of lat/lon only)STOWJSIMSLifted IndexAtmospheric stability index used as a predictor of thunderstormsnoneReal-10+10TA181.0Spatial Dimensionality – 2D(function of lat/lon only)JSIMSTable 4: Field-Level Attribution for the Atmospheric Regime4.6 TailoringGlobal-98, in TAOS Database format, supports the TAOS Editor capability.  JSIMS will develop a limited system-specific pre-exercise and run-time tailoring capability for IOC, however JSIMS will probably use the TAOS Editor directly for pre-pre-exercise data tailoring.  As JWARS only requires tailoring prior to the analysis event, the TAOS Editor can be used to meet their current requirements.4.7 SharingGlobal-98, in TAOS Database format, is directly accessed by the TAOS Distributor and can be immediately shared in the STOW federation, or similar federations using DIS or the RTI 1.3.For those simulations with differing run-time data distribution requirements, the TAOS Database application programming interface in C++ may be used to directly access state variables and time-slices from the data set.  Unfortunately, the current API does not easily support paging of Global-98 subsets, which can become a problem for direct integration within applications with limited physical/virtual memory.  As a result, JSIMS is developing a pagable format for Global-98 METOC data which meets their specific system architecture and performance requirements.  Global-98 will then be recompiled into their specific run-time format for application use.5. ConclusionsThe Worldwide Low-Resolution METOC database represents, we hope, a transient stage in M&S community evolution towards a routinely-used fully-functional capability to support operational M&S customer requirements for METOC scenario data sets.  As a stopgap measure it has several obvious deficiencies related to resolution, heuristic transforms, and transmission format.Weighed against those deficiencies are its robust spectrum of data content, availability, and multiple access strategies (including DIS and the RTI).  These lower the entry barrier for M&S applications such as JSIMS and JWARS to begin assimilating METOC data early in their development lifecycle.  This increases the likelihood that models of military systems developed for those simulations will have “METOC environmental awareness” designed-in instead of bolted-on at a later development (or maintenance) phase.JSIMS has especially benefited from this joint database activity, as the complexity of the overall system development effort weighed against available resources would have otherwise led to an impoverished METOC representation at IOC (4/01).  Given the availability of the STOW-developed Worldwide Low-Resolution METOC database, that shortfall has been adequately addressed in terms of developmental activities leading up to IOC. Mechanisms for providing flexible, robust METOC populated data sets meeting operational requirements at JSIMS IOC and beyond remain contingent on successful investments at the A&S Natural Environment and Ocean Executive Agents. The importance of METOC data Extension in the scenario development process, and FOMs that match the resolution of required METOC data to the resolution of the phenomena of interest can not be underestimated.In the meantime, it is important that the M&S community clarify their operational requirements for:Integrated, extended METOC data sets tied to wide-use FOMs,Standard tailoring tools for use by scenario developers and simulation controllers.As a result, it is hoped that subsequent developments in MEL, ESG, JETS, and FMS capabilities will be ready in time to meet broad-use M&S application requirements early in the next decade.6. References[1]	Allard, R.A., et al., “The Master Environmental Library: A Source for Environmental Data”, In Proceedings of the Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 1998, 98F-SIW-061, pp. 330-340.[2]	Horan, B. and Cox, R., “SEDRIS Past, Present, and Future – Technically Speaking”, In Proceedings of the Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 1999, 99S-SIW-057.[3]	Lowe, S.J., et al., “Weather Scenario Generator: System Design and Project Status”, In Proceedings of the Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 1998, 98S-SIW-090, pp. 533-540.[4]	Dailey, P.S., et al., “Algorithms for Consistent Tailoring of the Synthetic Natural Environment”, In Proceedings of the Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 1998, 98F-SIW-224, pp. 1284-1289.[5]	Dailey, P.S., et al., “Using MM5 to Create Synthetic Environments for Military Training and Analysis”, In NCAR MM5 Users Group Meeting, June 1998.[6]	Whitney, D.A., et al., “Impacts of the Environment on Warfighter Training: STOW ’97 Experience with TAOS”, In Proceedings of the Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 1998, 98S-SIW-224, pp. 1254-1263.[7]	Whitney, D.A.., et al., “Virtual Natural Environments for the 21st Century”, In Interservice/Industry Training Systems and Education Conference, December 1998.[8]	Carroll, E.B., “A Technique for Consistent Alteration of NWP Output Fields”, In Meteorologic Applications, Volume 4, 1997, pp. 171-178.[9]	Carroll, E.B., “Guide to the On-Screen Field Modification Application”, Forecasting Systems, UK Meteorological Office, 1998.[10]	Havener, K.F. and Reigelman, G.A., “Air and Space Natural Environment Modeling and Simulation Technical Requirements Analysis”, Contract Number:  F19628-93-D-0001, Task Order 1040, CDRL A008, 18 November, 1997.[11]	Reynolds, B. et al., “Global METOC Database Attribution – Final Revision”, 1 October, 1998.[12]	CACI, Inc., “Joint Warfare System Preliminary Environment High Level Design”, 25 August, 1998.Author BiographyPAUL A. BIRKEL is a senior principal scientist for The MITRE Corporation.  He currently provides technical support and guidance to the DARPA Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) program in the area of environmental modeling, the DMSO Synthetic Environment Data Representation and Interchange Specification (SEDRIS) project, and the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) SNE Working IPT. In addition he provides guidance and support as needed to other DoD M&S and C4ISR programs via the US Army Topographic Engineering Center (USATEC).ROBERT A REYNOLDS is a Principal Member of the Technical Staff for TASC.  He has been and continues to be the lead developer of the TAOS system and is currently the principal investigator for the enhancements being made to TAOS to support space-weather modeling (see "TAOS in Space" in these proceedings), under the sponsorship of the SPACECOM and the Space Warfare Center.DANA Z. SHERER is the technical director for TASC's Environmental Modeling & Simulation programs.  These include the TAOS (Total Atmosphere Ocean Space) Environmental Services System and related global METOC database development, DARPA-sponsored JETS (JSIMS Environmental Tailoring System), SPACECOM spon-sored support of PSM (Portable Space Model), and Air Force-sponsored integration of TAOS with AES (Atmospheric Effects Server) for wargaming exercises.  Ms. Sherer is directing TASC-internal R&D of a "user friendly" desktop numerical weather modeling system, based on MM5, that will provide tailored weather environments for distributed interoperating simulators.  She has been with TASC for 10 years, working in the areas of systems engineering, distributed simulation, data analysis and scientific data visualization.  She received her BS and MS degrees in Systems and Control Engineering from Case Western Reserve University.JAVIER M. COVELLI is a senior software engineer for Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC). He is the Ocean SNE Lead for the Warfighter Simulation (WARSIM) program and the Environment CSCI Build2 coordinator.  In addition, he is responsible for coordination and integration of JSIMS Maritime/USMC DA products and requirements into the Environment CSCI. See also [7] for a similar view on a potential future operational concept for METOC data in M&S. Of course, delineating well-defined requirements for explicit environmental conditions and data elements remains the over-arching task that informs this concept, see for example [10]. As will be discussed later, typically half of the content of a METOC data set “usable” by M&S applications consists of data derived during the extension phase, rather than immediately available following integration. Unfortunately, while TAOS conceptually supports pre-simulation data tailoring, it does so by literally distributing the edited data “onto the net” and then reads it back into an “as distributed” database. Although this falls short of allowing the use of abstract terminology such as “cold front”, it is a significant step in that direction. For example, during FY99 ESG will be integrating support for the COAMPS NWP model. This, however, is viewed as a temporary expedient on the path to full use of SEDRIS for Transmission. See [11] for an in-depth discussion of the state variable specifications and derivation methods. See [12] for additional information on JWARS usage of these state variables. While Global-98 will be used at IOC, alternate sources will be required at JSIMS FOC.  These requirements include the need for live feeds. See reference [10] for an analysis of the technical content  requirements for such FOMs. EMBED Word.Document.8 \s  EMBED Word.Document.8 \s  EMBED Word.Document.8 \s 