1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability WorkshopNATO Long Term Scientific Study (LTSS/51)On Human Behaviour Representation(SAS-017)Uwe K.J. DompkeIABGEinsteinstr. 2085521 OttobrunnGermanyTel.: x49-89-6088-3061FAX: x49-89-6088-4029E-mail: udompke@iabg.deKeywords:NATO, Computer Generated Forces, CGF, Long Term Scientific Study, LTSS, Human Behaviour Representation, Staff Level Decision MakingABSTRACT: Long Term Scientific Studies (LTSS) are conducted under the NATO Research & Technology Board. The objective of these studies is to give a forecast on the technological development in a specific technological area in a timeframe of 10 to 15 years and to analyse the military implications. The paper will give an overview on the process of NATO Long Term Scientific Studies based on the example of the LTSS on Human Behaviour Representation.. Possible inputs by the nations will be highlighted and the relevance for the ongoing process of co-ordinating R&D Efforts will be explained.A first step in this LTSS will be to give an overview on the state of the art in modelling human behaviour and human factors in this context. This will be done in a workshop in December 1998. The results of this workshop will presented in this paper.IntroductionLong Term Scientific Studies (LTSS) are conducted by the NATO Research and Technology Board (R&T Board). The purpose of these studies is to provide a report on technological implications to military operations in the next 10 to 15 years and to give research planners recommendations. Human Behaviour Representation is a topic that is referenced in a number of applications like Decision Support Tools (DST) in operational planning, the representation of specific cells in a Computer Assisted Exercise (CAX), closed simulation systems for analysis and acquisition purpose that can be used without the engagement of operational people. The adequate implementation and operational usefulness of such a representation will help to develop more cost-effective simulation systems and better decision support systems in the future.So the use of such tools is not limited to one specific application area. They could be used in the operational CCIS, as analysis tools, or in the support of Computer Assisted Exercises or in supporting the acquisition process of military systems. Therefore the LTSS will have a wide impact on any such military planning. The research and development of the technologies needed for HBR is done at universities as well as by industry. But the main part of developing strategies to get the needed operational know-how and the means to implement this knowledge is left to research and development to be conducted by the military community itself being therefore a highly interdisciplinary task.In Chapter 2 the purpose and study procedure of an LTSS is explained. Chapter 3 highlights the content and exclusions of  LTSS/51. A first definition of Human Behaviour Representation in this context will be given in Chapter 4. The first Plenary Session of the LTSS was held in December 1999. One topic was an overview on programs in the participating nations. Chapter 5 summarises this. The other main topic of the Plenary Session was the identification of relevant technologies and scientific research to be addressed in the context of the LTSS. Chapter 6 gives an overview on these topics and how they relate to each other. Chapter 7 deals with the schedule of the LTSS/51.Long Term Scientific Study - Purpose And Study ProcedureNATO has reconstructed the Research and Technology organisation. The Research and Technology Board (R&T Board) under the Conference of National Armaments Directors (CNAD) deals with military research, development and procurement combining the tasks of former Defence Research Group (DRG) and AGARD. The Technology Group "Studies Analysis and Simulation" (SAS) under the R&T Board conducts Long Term Scientific Studies (LTSS) toprovide a report for the use by NATO and national authorities on technological implications to military operations in the next ten to fifteen years and to	provide research planners with recommendations.This means that technologies needed for a specific military task (e.g. for maritime operations or Computer generated Forces) are identified and their development in the future is evaluated. On the other hand, military requirements for the future are identified and the application of technological possibilities to meet these requirements is evaluated. A comparison of these two views will identify areas for research and development (R&D) programs as a recommendation for research planners. Because of financial restrictions, such R&D programs should end up in co-operative efforts between NATO nations.The schedule of LTSS/51 shows the typical layout of an LTSS:Executive Nation (for LTSS/51 Germany) drafts Terms of Reference (TOR).SAS-Panel and R&T Board approves TOR.Study Director is nominated (Dr. Uwe K.J. Dompke and Dr. Alexander von Baeyer as Deputy both from IABG, Germany).Executive Nation drafts Prospectus (lines out the Working Paper and gives a time schedule).Points of Contact (PoC) are nominated by participating nations.Executive Nation drafts Working Paper and discusses it with the PoC (the basis of the discussions at the Multinational Exercise (MNE)). The final version is distributed to the PoC and the R&T Board.The Preparatory Meeting is intended to prepare the MNE.Scientific and operational experts from the different nations participating in the MNE and discuss in plenary sessions and Working Groups the spectrum of technologies related to CGF. Individuals do not represent their nations or agencies, but provide knowledge and views only as experts in their area of technologies or in the military operational environment, respectively. The Final Report is drafted during the first week of the MNE and edited by the chairmen of the Working Groups, members of the R&T Agency, the Study Director and the Deputy Study Director during the second week of the MNE.SAS and R&T Board review the Final Report and forward it to the nations. National comments will be included in a Consolidated Final Report after one year. The LTSS report, will represent a consensus of expert opinions, rather than a position commonly agreed by nations.The following NATO organisations and nations are participating in the LTSS/51 on HBR and have nominated their Points of Contact:NC3ASHAPESACLANTBelgiumDenmarkFranceGermanyItalyThe NetherlandsNorwayTurkeyUnited KingdomUnited States		Content and Exclusions of the StudySuggested areas of investigation include:Future military use of Human Behaviour RepresentationThe possible applications of Human Behaviour Representation in the areas of CAX, operational Decision Support Tools, Operational Analysis, and acquisition and engineering will be identified through analysis of NATO documents, and interviews with senior commanders, officers, and staff members.Principal technological areas to be utilised in implementing HBRThe principal technological areas to be utilised in implementing Human Behaviour Representation will be identified by looking at the future military applications and the functions needed to implement and use such systems.Development of the principal technological areasTechnology forecasts and national research and development programs will be reviewed in order to identify the trends, future possibilities, and developments. The time frames in which they might be available will be estimated.Necessary military Research & Development (R&D) and potential collaboration of nationsAreas of necessary military Research & Development (R&D) and potential collaboration will be identified which have to reduce an overlap of national research efforts and therefore increase the effectiveness.The study will be concerned with all possible applications of NATO forces, including conventional warfare (land, air, maritime, as well as joint) and peace support operations. Chemical, biological, and nuclear warfare will not be considered.The principal objective of this LTSS is to identify the relevant technology areas that could support Human Behaviour Representation in different fields of military usage (operational use, planning and analysis, exercising and training, acquisition), to give a forecast of their development in the next 10 - 15 years and to give recommendations regarding NATO research and development programs in this area. This process will be triggered by military requirements that will arise in this timeframe. Human Behaviour Representation (HBR) - Definition The Prospectus states that the term "Human Behaviour Representation" is used as a generic term to refer to computer representations of human behaviour in simulations and that the term will be defined in more detail during this LTSS. The discussion at the first Plenary Session shows that following topics must be covered in the definition: executable model, individual and group behaviour, means of command and control information systems, analytical and process models, different aggregation levels. LTSS/51 will deal with higher levels of command (brigade and above) taking the available knowledge about automated or semi-automated forces on lower levels into account. Overview on National ProgramsDuring the first Plenary Session of the LTSS/51 the Point of Contact of the participating nations gave a short overview on national programs on the issue of Human Behaviour Representation. An overall finding is that each nation is very interested in Human Behaviour Representation and sees many applications in the future. On the other hand we have seen that we are at a starting point in building applicable systems for Human Behaviour Representation and have even not a basic knowledge about best ways to do this. But even if it is hard to do, if we don’t start with small steps we will never have any success.The following list shows only the highlights of ongoing programs in the nations represented in the first Plenary Session:Belgium spends some effort in negotiation behaviour modelling in the military context. This is a 5 years ongoing study also dealing with psycho-liguistic aspects.Denmark is doing some work in the area of human factors related to the use of Command and Control Information Systems (CCIS).Germany has already implemented some models of human factors in their CAX systems. Other closed simulation systems use some decision models based on more traditional approaches like decision tables. At the University of Federal Armed Forces Munich was some work using neural networks to build learning systems done. There is an ongoing study on human factors in staff level decision making (s. paper 99S-SIW-069).Norway compares in the Synthetic Behaviour Project a mathematical approach using Game Theory with other approaches using evolutionary programming and neural nets.Turkey is starting its work with the integration of simulation in their labs. Academic research is done in the areas of Artificial Intelligence and Neural Networks.United Kingdom has started work in following areas:Command Agents (CA) as knowledge based systemsIntegrated Performance Modelling Environment Project (IPME) with the overall target to develop a methodology for quantifying the human contribution to system effectivenessModelling Human Decision Making in Operational Analysis (OA) to provide guidelines for the representation of Human Decision Making in OA studies and modelsHBR in Synthetic Environments to explore the requirements for richer representation of SE behaviour and to identify the benefits expected from introducing such behaviourReducing the Cost of Acquiring Behaviours exploring both evolutionary (genetic algorithm and neural network) and knowledge based architecturesArchitectures & Models of Collective PerformanceWorkload Modelling and Stressor by InterferenceHybrid CAs -HF in Command & Control leading to a target agent architecture that brings together task, organisational, agent capability and reasoning behaviour perspectivesUnited States has spent effort in a study by the National Research Council on “Human and Behavior Modelling”. The study gives an good overview on the state of the art. It shows that a lot of models are already available, but are mostly not suited for today’s requirements because they are not designed for this purpose. Accreditation procedures for models of human behavior are needed.Also a lot of data on the issue of human behaviour is out there, but mechanisms are needed to store and retrieve the data.Some projects are on the way of some basic research to identify the main gaps and to develop new ways in modelling human behaviour like constrained based satisfaction, fuzzy expert systems, or evolutionary computation and to build these modules in an integrated architecture. Relevant Technologies and Scientific ResearchFollowing figure 2 shows the main technologies and scientific research areas which were identified as relevant for the development of HBR and their relationship. The forecast of the development of these technology and scientific research areas and their impact on HBR in the future is a main task of this LTSS.ScheduleThe LTSS work started with the first Plenary Session in December 98. A strawman on the definition of HBR will be produced by Germany and discussed with the study team. For the CGF & HB Conference in May are two sessions planned in which the in this NATO LTSS participating nations will give presentations on the state of the art of HBR and future possibilities. These sessions are open to the public. The national Points of Contact will have an own meeting directly after the conference to discuss the layout of the Working Paper and the contributions to that paper.The draft Working Paper will be produced by Germany up to September 99. This will discussed in the study team using the Web.The final version of the Working Paper will be produced at the Preparatory Meeting in November 1999. The Preparatory Meeting will also lay out the organisation of the Multinational Exercise at the end of the study to produce the final report. Chairmen and participants for the different working groups will be nominated by the national PoC.The Multinational Exercise as a symposium to bring the experts in the field together and to produce the draft final report will be held in March 2000. References   Defence Research Group, DRG Handbook - Handbook for the DRG and its subordinate bodies, AC/243-D/1111 1990 EditionU. Dompke, G. Scheckeler: Final Report on Long Term Scientific Study on Computer Generated Forces (CGF), NATO AC/243 (LTSS) TR/48  U. Dompke, A. v. Baeyer: Terms of  Reference Long Term Scientific Study on Human Behaviour Representation, NATO RTA/TSC(98)492, Brussels,  U. Dompke, A. v. Baeyer: Prospectus Long Term Scientific Study on Human Behaviour Representation, Ottobrunn, 1998 Richard W. Pew, Anne S. Mavor: Modeling Human and Organizational Behavior, National Acedemy Press, Washington D.C. 1998Author's BiographyUWE DOMPKE is a systems analyst and department manager at the IABG Command, Control, Communications & Intelligence Division in Ottobrunn, Germany. He is the Study Director for NATO LTSS/51 on HBR, LTTS/48 on CGF and NATO LTSS/40 on CAX. The identification and grouping of the different areas is based on an idea by Andy Belyavin, DERA UK.Figure 1: NATO R&T OrganisationSAS 	Studies, Analysis, Simulation 	IST Information Systems TechnologySCI 	Systems, Concepts and integration	AVT Applied Vehicles TechnologySET 	Sensors and Electronics Technology 	HFM Human Factors and MedicineHFMAVTISTSETSCISASR&T AgencyR&T BoardFigure 2: Relevant Technologies and Scientific Research AreasType of ConflictAggregation LevelType of ApplicationIntegrationValidationCCISSimulation SystemsSimulationReal WorldCCISAIKnowledge AcquisitionVerification...OptimisationToolsMimicToolsMilitaryTasksOptimizedBehaviourPerformance/BehaviourCrew/TeamTraitsCrew/TeamStatusEnvironmentContext