Conquering the Tower of Babel:An Approach to Taxonomy IntegrationBruce A. HarrisRonald SmitsDynamics Research Corporation60 Frontage RoadAndover, MA 01810978-475-9090 ext.1498bharris@drc.com, rsmits@drc.comDavid McKannanPeggy D. GravitzCOLSA Corporation6726 Odyssey DriveHuntsville, AL 35806256-922-1512pgravitz@colsa.com, dmckanna@colsa.comABSTRACT: In the multitude of doctrinal and other sources produced by and for military Service components, linguistic ambiguity is rampant among Services, between the military language and the English language, and between military language and M&S language. Each domain, be it military, civilian, M&S, or logistics, etc., seems to promulgate a private language, loosely derived from English, that intends to capture concepts, processes, and procedures that are supposedly unique to that domain. As a next step, taxonomies are developed within each domain, frequently representing different points of view of similar information, perpetuating the linguistic divisions.This paper examines an approach, based on a study of the Common Semantics and Syntax (CSS) project sponsored by the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) in support of the Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS, to use web-based tools for a seamless transition among user taxonomies. Two such tools, COLSA Corporation’s Eurisko and Dynamics Research Corporation’s Knowledge Acquisition Tool, are part of the DMSO sponsored M&S toolset. By creating an inventory of existing taxonomies, while mapping and matching these structures behind the scenes, a web-based tool can enable the tailored view of a common understanding of domain concepts and terms, without the loss of domain specific content. The requirement to maintain domain specificity is especially important when developing conceptual models that require Verification and Validation by Service component, while presenting the M&S community with a simulation independent abstract of the military mission space.The paper will show that both the military operational community and the M&S community would greatly benefit from a cohesive approach to taxonomy mapping and matching.1. IntroductionThe Tower of Babel was the construction that was erected by the descendants of Noah, in an attempt to unite all peoples by building a city and tower that would reach to heaven. God thwarted their efforts by turning their language into “babblings,” resulting in the abandonment of the Tower and the ideal. In this story, the lack or loss of a common language resulted in failure, which illustrates the challenges facing the M&S community in creating authoritative and realistic representations of the military mission space in the face of linguistic and conceptual ambiguity.Imagine hearing the following instructions: “At the bandit’s turn circle, when you begin to recognize definition of his aircraft and aspect angle, begin a low-to-high lead turn, overbanking to use radial g, while maintaining over-the-top airspeed.” Or: “counterfire gains freedom of action for all friendly maneuver forces and is inseparably tied to close and deep operations and is part of the overall combined arms fight to achieve fire superiority.” Or how about: “a federate with zero lookahead requiring repeatable executions and federate control of the ordering of simultaneous events might use these primitives.” These are examples of the jargon used by the different “players” in the DoD’s Modeling and Simulation (M&S) universe and their attempt to describe actions performed in the execution of their tasks. Although these descriptions are English, the jargon is distinctly different for each player in the M&S community.If one examines the doctrinal and other sources produced by and for military Service components, these differences in jargon continue. Linguistic ambiguity is rampant among Services, between the military language and the English language, and between military language and M&S language. Each domain, be it military, civilian, M&S, or logistics, etc., seems to promulgate a private language, loosely derived from English, that intends to capture concepts, processes, and procedures that are supposedly unique to that domain.Consistency among or within (military) domains is not always evident. Meyer pointed out that within the M&S world there is no agreement on fundamental terms, especially corresponding to new Object Oriented (OO) precepts [1]. By migrating from the real world, defined as the physical environment in a current time and space of military operations, to a synthetic representation of that world, abstractions and “translations” as well as the use of OO and other modeling techniques are unavoidable. It is, however, vitally important that the transition results in a realistic representation of the entities, processes, environments, relationships, and interactions involved. To that effect, the linguistic barriers need to be bridged.1.1 BackgroundThe US DoD M&S Master Plan [2] identifies three components of the M&S Common Technical Framework: the High Level Architecture (HLA), Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS), and data standards for common representation of data across models, simulations, and Command, Control, Communications, Computers and Intelligence systems. CMMS is intended to be the common, real world derived baseline for consistent M&S representations. See [3] and [4] for an overview of CMMS. Figure 1.  DMSO Data Engineering StrategyThe Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) has developed a Data Engineering Strategy (Figure 1) capturing the process of M&S development from knowledge collection to knowledge capture. The strategy envisions the use of Common Semantics and Syntax (CSS) and Data Interchange Formats (DIF) to produce models and simulations.DMSO also developed a CMMS Toolset Architecture (Figure 2) to ensure a consistent effort across different M&S programs (CMMS, HLA, etc.). DMSO envisions mission space models (MSM) being developed and submitted for inclusion in a model library. When a Mission Space Model is forwarded to the library, it will be stored in its native format (e.g., CASE tool product, MS Word document) and in a common format (produced by application of a Data Interchange Format). The CSS resources used in developing the model will also be stored. EMBED Word.Picture.8  	Figure 2.  CMMS Toolset Architecture2. TaxonomiesRecalling the challenges faced in the construction of the Tower of Babel, where linguistic barriers impeded achieving the ultimate goal, a similar predicament can be observed in the transition from the real world of military operations to the synthetic world of M&S. With each layer communicating and describing concepts and phenomena in “unique” terms, a solid foundation can quickly turn treacherous (Figure 3). Figure 3.  Conquering the Tower of BabelIn transitioning from a real world environment of military operations, systems, equipment, and the associated environmental factors to a synthetic representation, simulation developers must have a clear understanding of the military domain that they intend to simulate [5]. The knowledge acquisition process can use many tools and existing bodies of gathered knowledge/data. Some of these are the Universal Joint Task List, HLA Object Model Data Dictionary, CMMS CSS, Authoritative Data Sources (ADS) project, Order of Battle Data Interchange Format (OB-DIF), and domain specific data products, possibly with their own, unique, lexicons. Data products can be defined as “the accumulation of instance data in one of any recognized formats (e.g., database, document, etc.)[6].” The M&S and Service community’s need to identify and distinguish useful products of gathered knowledge, data and tools leads to the need for greater accuracy in description and classification of these products and tools. Some producers of data products consider taxonomies vital since they assist in the orderly population of the data products.Taxonomies have evolved to provide organization and classification in a scheme demonstrating their interrelationships and have been used in specific domains. Across domains, however, classification of products in a useful manner for all users has been difficult because of the difference in the language used in the different communities. It would be extremely useful to define a common use of terms for product classification. Taxonomies provide structure and can be used as abstractions or for classification of the captured knowledge base. Examples of such taxonomies can be found in the ADS, HLA OMDD, and the CSS. For users, the taxonomy is considered vital in the examination of the relevance of the system for distinct user groups, as well as by presenting a methodology for data retrieval.While accessing the utility of taxonomies for M&S, one needs to keep in mind the transition from the real-world warfighter jargon presented in doctrinal and operations data products to the synthetic representation of that action or task. As the transition is made from these operational data products through the internal processes of other user communities, preservation of original intent is a concern. Not only linguistic challenges but conceptual challenges as well need to be confronted and overcome for a realistic representation of the actions, entities, and interactions in the synthetic environment.A “common” resource serves the purpose of providing access to domain data products for users not normally associated with that domain, or cross-domain purposes, by informing the cross-domain user of the producer’s intent. Any successful resource can be defined as meeting the needs of its users, and can be measured by the re-use of the resource. By necessity, a common resource needs to accommodate the needs of users of different domains. The assumption is that common resources are intended to be a “single source” for “best practices” for the target domains or users. By classifying the data (or data-products) into a common resource, the producer of the common resource attempts to abstract the existing products into an ontology or taxonomy. This taxonomy, while assisting in the population of the common resources, also guides intended users of the common resources in their search for information or data. Arguably, the search mechanism should reflect the intended use of the information or data of the user’s domain, rather than the producer’s domain. That requires an analysis of the information content required by a cross-domain user, as well as the preferred search structure of the user.3. User GroupsIt has been argued that a common resource’s taxonomy should reflect the needs of the intended user of the resource. Whether one accepts such an argument or not, identification of the potential users of a common resource should be a goal for any data engineer, so the resource can be tailored to meet those users’ requirements. One such analysis was accomplished for the National Air and Space [Warfare] System (NASM) and Warfighter Simulation 2000 (WARSIM) under a DMSO sponsored contract [7]. Consistent with the DMSO produced CMMS Technical Framework five meta-categories of users were identified, including Sponsors, Producers, Administrators, Examiners, and Consumers. Within the categories of Sponsors and Consumers many “non-traditional” (e.g., not normally associated with M&S programs) users were found. Such users included MAJCOMs and their Program Managers, or Service Component Doctrine Writers or Unit Designers. While not all examined common resources might be applicable to all identified users in a group, each user group had representatives that benefited from each of the examined systems resources. The study also highlighted the difficulty the producers of a common resource face when developing a common syntax or taxonomy. The producers not always identified the requirements of the intended users of the resource up front, but rather adopted a taxonomy structure that accommodated the populating of the resource. Sometimes, the structure evolved during the data mining, as a result of the heuristic effects of gathering data. While such heuristics may be very valuable for the producer of the resource, they may not be applicable to its intended users. Since the taxonomy tends to guide the population of the resource, a Verification and Validation (V&V) issue is raised not only of the lexicon fill, but of the taxonomy as well. The importance of V&V, and where appropriate Accreditation (A), will be addressed later in this paper in more detail. For now, it suffices to state that the needs of the intended users are frequently not met by the taxonomy employed by the producer of a common resource.The question remains whether it is realistic to pose that a particular “global” taxonomy can be developed, or already exists, that could meet the need of such a diverse group of users. The broadly applicable toolset developed under the direction of DMSO includes many excellent resources for the M&S community and offers larger applicability than ever envisioned before. The re-use of these tools and resources could be further enhanced by a better understanding of the inherent strengths each of these resources has. Recalling the Tower of Babel, the skills to build the tower were present, but a profound inability to communicate existed. Taxonomies are intended to structure those communications between user groups by providing a conduit that conforms to some basic “building codes.”4. Tools, Partnerships, and IntegrationTo advance the goal of interoperable and reusable M&S components, a common understanding of terms is necessary for describing and characterizing components. Tools are necessary to capture knowledge and search for reusable components. Partnerships and integration are necessary for interoperability among M&S components and interoperability among tools.Interoperability and reuse are themes stated within DoD Directive 5000.59 DoD Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Management [8] and the DoD Modeling and Simulation Master Plan [2]. Interoperability implies common definitions of components, partnerships among component developers and integration of components that operate and interact together. Reuse implies M&S components can be found to meet a requirement of another model or simulation development. The question arises, “How are reusable components located?”Once interoperable and potentially reusable components are developed, the ability to advertise existence of these components to the M&S world is a challenge. Several projects have been undertaken to build repositories for M&S components or metadata describing reusable components. Many of these repositories exist today (e.g. HLA Object Model Library, CMMS Repository, the various MSRRs). A major problem is being able to search all of these repositories to find a component or set of components that meet particular requirements. The terms used as keywords, and in taxonomies and descriptions to classify the components in these repositories are not uniformly defined. Also, these terms are not related in such a way that a search using a given term will produce results of all components classified by other terms with the same or similar meaning. Building a common vocabulary applicable across all user communities is impossible because they have developed their own lexicons that apply to their domains. Figure 4 illustrates the problem. Many users employ different taxonomies and terms to view and describe M&S components.The solution lies in partnerships to define terms, map terms and taxonomies, and partnerships to build integrated tools for searching across repositories. By developing partnerships among user communities a common understanding of the use of terms can be achieved. The CSS of the CMMS project has developed a database of terms and their common definitions. Partnerships among the modeling and simulation user communities are necessary to expand this common lexicon to validate and verify these definitions and use of the terms. Partnerships are also necessary to develop integrated tools for knowledge acquisition, repository searching, and taxonomy mapping.An example of a partnership in tool development within the CMMS framework is the Formalized Data Product (FDP) Knowledge Acquisition Tool (KAT) developed for DMSO by Dynamics Research Corporation. This tool assists in the orderly production of knowledge products that form the basis for Conceptual Models. Versions ofthe tool are used by or being customized for use by NASM, WARSIM, and JSIMS. The tool is developed in a cooperative, partnering relationship between the development agency (DMSO) and the user community (JSIMS and its partner programs). Although the tool has many potential users, it is not designed to bridge the linguistic challenges nor can it navigate among taxonomies. It does offer the potential to collect such resources and display their content to the user, but the KAT does not yet offer the utility of an integrated taxonomy browser.Another example of a partnership arrangement is taking place within the CMMS Program. The CMMS Program has an objective to register conceptual models being developed by the major DMSO Partner Simulation Programs including the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) and Joint Warfare System (JWARS). The CMMS-Registration Template (CMMS-RT) is an approach to define an interchange format that supports the exchange of registration information among cooperating autonomous and heterogeneous partner repositories. Each partner will develop the capability to interface with the Figure 4.  Independent User/Taxonomy Viewspecified common format and structure. The CMMS-RT provides the format for interchange of registration metadata describing M&S components constructed by distinct organizations. Each organization, having their own catalog of components, may implement their own storage solution, data format and catalog content. M&S components and resources cataloged may not be text or HTML format, and may not be directly available on the Web. The CMMS-RT eliminates the need for simulation developers to understand each program's unique format for registration metadata. The CMMS-RT specification provides the mechanism for seamless interchange of metadata among partners. Each catalog owner publishes, in the CMMS-RT format, the metadata for only those M&S components and resources they wish the user community to access.The CMMS-RT has been implemented in a Web search tool application known as Eurisko (a Greek word for Search) being developed for DMSO by the COLSA Corporation. This tool provides the user the ability to search multiple CMMS-related repositories. The owner of each repository in the partnership decides which M&S components from their repository to advertise. Metadata about M&S components is published in the CMMS-RTdata interchange format and stored in a database for Eurisko to search. Eurisko provides two search features. One feature provides the ability to search the text of the supplied metadata for words or phrases supplied by the user. The other feature is the ability to execute a taxonomy search. The taxonomy search starts with a graphical view of the taxonomy, a hierarchical tree structure of related terms used to classify M&S components. If the chosen taxonomy term is a branch of the tree, Eurisko will produce a result list of all entries related to the chosen term and any subordinate terms in the tree. If the chosen taxonomy term is a node of the tree, Eurisko will produce a result list of all entries related to the chosen term. Eurisko provides the ability to search more than one taxonomy, if available. Result lists can be browsed using the Eurisko tool. If hyperlinks are available, these may be followed to the specified Web site.As illustrated in Figure 5, the synergy among tools (e.g. FDP KAT, CSS and Eurisko) is highly dependent on the common understanding of syntax and semantics. This kind of partnership and integration is essential in building tools and M&S components that will achieve the reuse and interoperability goal.Figure 5.  Integrated User/Taxonomy ViewFigure 6.  Eurisko Development ProcessEurisko has undergone a robust development process, as depicted in figure 6. As a result of that process, Eurisko has demonstrated its multi-taxonomy browser technology, using a centralized search engine to access disparate catalogues and resources. Eurisko treats taxonomies as “trees”, which is a special kind of directed graph. Graphs are nodes or vertices connected by arcs or edges, each edge depicting a one-way relationship between the nodes it connects. In a taxonomy, each vertex is a category, and each edge is a “belongs to” relationship. In a reversal of botanical correctness, the top of a tree is called a root. Eurisko uses nested sets to represent the tree in SQL.The next logical step in Eurisko development is to implement the capability to search across taxonomies. This search capability will be highly useful to users because they can initiate searches based on a taxonomy with which they are comfortable. The search will return more “hits”’ because any M&S resources classified by related terms in other taxonomies will be included in the result set. The key issue here is to map and match terms among taxonomies. This can be a formidable task but can be supplemented by tools to assist in term matching using the common syntax and semantics. Through partnerships among M&S participants, the taxonomy mapping and matching can be a reality and tools can be added to theCMMS toolset to provide capabilities to define these mappings to other tools such as FDP KAT and Eurisko.5. The Relevance of V & VConsider our biblical Tower of Babel: how likely is such a scenario in M&S?  One can easily argue that it is not very likely at all, in fact, that with all the VV&A ongoing in M&S, it is highly unlikely that the synthetic world could be so disjointed from the real world. It is indeed true that V&V, and where appropriate Accreditation, is an embedded practice. For example, JSIMS employs a two-step V&V process [6], ensuring the Conceptual Models are validated against the real world and then verifying that the development of the JSIMS is consistent with the descriptions contained in the Conceptual Models. Such a rigorous V&V process is not always present in the development of taxonomies or in the population of common resources.The taxonomy should be applicable to the intended user’s domain, since that it intends to facilitate interoperability and knowledge acquisition across domains. Eurisko can provide a mapping and matching capability to registered taxonomies in the multi-taxonomy browser, facilitating the re-use of common resources, if the mapped taxonomies follow a logic model that can be traced and mapped to both origination and destination domain. Absent of a clear understanding of the logic model for a taxonomy development and an appropriate V&V of both the model and the result, mapping multiple taxonomies will become increasingly difficult.As pointed out earlier, instances of a heuristic effect in the development of common resources are documented. Such “on-the-job” learning experiences might be useful for a tool developed with a specific purpose in mind and with a rather narrow, single user focus. It can be argued, however, that an “authoritative” common resource needs to conform strictly to a set of business rules that provide accountability to the development effort. Absent such guidance, V&V of the resulting resource’s data population or its taxonomy is extremely difficult. No matter how conscientious the developer was during the data mining process, there needs to be clear traceability of data to its original source.The absence of written business rules prior to the start of data mining creates an environment in which the data gatherer has a unique understanding of the scope and purpose of the resource’s content. The absence of guidance for selection criteria or precise definitions of metadata and associated taxonomies places a premium on the data-miner’s judgement and intuition. That intangible quality is extremely difficult to reproduce afterwards during a V&V of the resource. By committing business rules to paper post facto, one runs the inherent risk of inconsistency within the mined data vis-à-vis the business rules.By drafting the rules up-front, preferably based on an analysis of user requirements, a heuristic effect can still be maintained. Now, however, the effect is a result of the data-miner’s inability to conform to the business rules. These rules can then be adjusted or modified to accommodate the encountered difficulty and internal consistency of the data is maintained. Volumes are written about VV&A and it is not the intent of this paper to change any of these practices. It appears, however, that the development of lexicon toolsets not always receives the same scrutiny as found elsewhere within the M&S community. In light of the presented taxonomy integration argument and the potential time saving offered by the common resources in the DMSO toolset, these resources may become a de facto source of “authoritative” information or data. To some extent this is already occurring. A “circular reference” can be observed by close examination of some of these resources, while the pedigree of the original data products mined for the common resource might not warrant this assumed stature [9]. This presents a risk for all potential users of such resources, since the V&V practices of such resources are often poorly defined or documented.None of this necessarily detracts from the inherent value of the broadly applicable toolset, or of the developed resources themselves. It does raise the issue of what up-front development constraints were placed on the resource and the V&V, at the appropriate level, of such resources. By advocating the use of these tools and resources to the user community, the producers’ processes need to be able to withstand the same level of scrutiny levied on the larger M&S community.6. SummaryIn the course of building simulations that accurately represent aspects of the military mission space many obstacles need to be overcome. One of those obstacles is the basic understanding of the semantics used to describe the tasks, missions, concepts and processes involved. Getting users to agree on definitions is virtually impossible. Taxonomies offer the potential to structure the gathered data. If that structure reflects the conceptualization of the captured domain, as attested by an appropriate V&V, their integration can provide great benefit to all involved. By mapping and matching registered taxonomies “behind-the-scenes,” a comprehensive library of resources becomes available to any interested user. This in turn promotes the use and reuse of such resources, advancing stated M&S goals of reduced costs. A potential side effect might be a reduction in linguistic ambiguity as a result of the increased use of common resources by all involved users. Partnerships between users and producers, such as demonstrated by KAT and Eurisko, offer tangible advantages over independent development efforts. By integrating the technical capabilities of the M&S community with the mission requirements of warfighters and simulation developers alike, a strong foundation of existing knowledge can be transformed into unambiguous representations of the military mission space.7. References[1]	Robert J. Meyer: “You Say Resolution, I Say Fidelity, You Say Accuracy, I Say Detail,…Let’s NOT Call the Whole Thing Off!” Spring 1998 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 1998.[2]	Department of Defense Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Master Plan, DoDD 5000.59-9P, October 1995.[3]	Jack Sheehan et al.: “Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS): Basic Concepts, Advanced Techniques, and Pragmatic Examples,” Spring 1998 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 1998.[4]	Thomas H. Johnson: “Mission Space Model Development, Reuse and the Conceptual Models of the Mission Space Toolset,” Spring 1998 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 1998.[5]	Steve Risner et al: “Conceptual Modeling in the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS),” Fall 1998 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 1998.[6]	ADS website: Definitions and Responsibilities page at URL: http://165.113.139.101/definitions.html.[7]	Bruce A. Harris et al: “Doctrine and Systems Relevant to the National Air and Space [Warfare] Model and Warfighter Simulation 2000,” 23 June 1998, Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, Alexandria, VA.[8]	DoD Directive 5000.59, "DoD Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Management," January 4, 1994. url: http://web7.whs.osd.mil/pdf3/d500059(1-4-94)/d500059.pdf[9]	Bruce A. Harris et al: “Final Report: Conceptual Models of the Mission Space Data Dictionary,” 31 December 1998, Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, Alexandria, VA.Author BiographiesBRUCE HARRIS is the program manager for the CMMS Data Dictionary project for Dynamics Research Corporation. In addition to his 30 years experience in military force planning and analysis as an Army officer, he has an extensive background in conceptual modeling and requirements analysis. One of his earlier projects involved the Universal Joint Task List and the definition of performance measures for joint tasks and operations.RON SMITS is a systems analyst for Dynamics Research Corporation. He is the DMSO liaison to the NASM program and brings 16 years experience flying operational fighter aircraft to the simulation world. He has been involved with the CMMS Data Dictionary and NASM conceptual models since joining DRC in 1998.DAVID MCKANNAN is a systems consultant with COLSA Corporation. He is the lead for data engineering on the CMMS-RT and EURISKO efforts, and has provided data engineering support for many DMSO-sponsored projects. He has also provided data engineering and data design support for Ground Based Radar simulations.PEGGY GRAVITZ is a systems consultant with COLSA Corporation. She is the lead for several DMSO-sponsored projects. She has an MS in Systems Management and Business Administration. She has 15 years experience as a data engineer and analyst in information management systems. DATE \@ "MM/dd/yy" 01/29/99  TIME \@ "h:mm AM/PM" 12:02 PMExaminerConsumerConceptual ModelProducerJoint DoctrineConceptual ModelsService DoctrineSimulationsObject ModelsFederates/HLA EMBED Word.Picture.8  