Standards and the Master Environmental Library (MEL)Bruce J. DonaldsonApplied Technology Solutions1451 Dolley Madison BlvdMcLean, VA 22101703-575-2884bdonalds@msis.dmso.mil Keywords:Standards, Metadata, Master Environmental Library, Specifications ABSTRACT: The Master Environmental Library (MEL) has been developed as the Department of Defense (DoD) Modeling and Simulation (M&S) environmental resource repository.  As such it is critical that it be open and useable by all of DoD as well as the government and commercial vendors supporting the building of environmental databases for these simulations.   In addition, the MEL’s larger goal is to provide access to environmental data held by government, international and commercial organizations for not only DoD M&S organizations, but anyone interested in environmental data.   One of the primary goals in the development of the MEL was to provide access to already developed environmental data and thus encourage reuse of this data.   In order to accomplish this mission the developers of the MEL have worked with DoD, National, and International standards for data dictionaries, data formats, communications, software, and metadata.  Meeting a DoD standard would allow the MEL to work within the military community, but much of the environmental data and users work at the national or international level so it requires the MEL to also meet these standards to successfully carry out its’ mission. Standards permeate every aspect of the MEL from the data dictionary through data delivery.   The difficult part has been in deciding which standards need to be complied with, which can be modified for the MEL, and which can be completely ignored.  This has resulted in a series of internal studies, numerous meetings with standards organizations, and finally a trade off analysis on where the MEL needed to go.  As a result, MEL is using standards from as diverse a group as the Federal Geographic Data Committee (FGDC), International Standards Organization (ISO), National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA), Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA), Open Geographic Information Systems Consortium (OGIS), and others as discussed in the paper.1. IntroductionThe Master Environmental Library (MEL) is an environmental data discovery, ordering, and retrieval system based on the latest Internet technology [1].   It provides access to widely distributed organizations producing, archiving, and maintaining environmental data on the oceans, atmosphere, terrain, and near-space.    The MEL supports Modeling and Simulation (M&S) for training, analysis, and acquisition through a single easy to use interface.  It promotes interoperability by facilitating reuse of environmental data and products.  To achieve this interoperability the MEL must conform to standards.  Standards can be established locally, by the Department of Defense (DoD), by the U.S. Federal Government, Nationally, or even Internationally. Standards can be government or commercial.  With the government and DoD adoption of open systems architecture, DoD is adopting many of the commercial standards which is bringing these closer together.  The order of acceptance of standards is mandated to be International down to local, but many systems have adopted a bottom up approach thus creating what have become known as “stove piped” systems.  The MEL has worked closely with the various standards and standards organizations to ensure the system is not “stove piped” in any respect.  This constant coordination has resulted in a system that is in great demand within DoD and the M&S CommunityThe standards discussed in this paper include those required for data format and transfer, metadata, data dictionary and taxonomy, and system standards.  2. Data StandardsData standards in this paper refer to the specifications and formats in which the data is produced and archived.  This is normally also the format in which the data is transferred between systems.  These standards consist of DoD, Federal, National and even Internationally recommended or mandated standards, as well as formats or specifications which are also sometimes called standards.2.1 Environmental Source Data StandardsThe success of the MEL depends on its ability to deliver environmental source data in formats that are useable to the DoD Modeling and Simulation Community.  In many cases this data is transformed into a simulator specific environmental data format which is proprietary or system specific once it is in the hands of the environmental database builder.  However, by ensuring that the source data meets DoD Standards, the MEL is able to provide a standard from which all can plan and work.  In doing this, the MEL conforms to the Joint Technical Architecture (JTA) Version 2.0 for Data Interchange Services. The three data interchange sections of the JTA which apply to the MEL data at this time are the Geospatial Data Interchange, Atmospheric Data Interchange, and Oceanographic Data Interchange [2].    These specify the military, national and/or international standards for the exchange of these data types. Terrain Data provided by the MEL falls under the Geospatial Data Interchange section of the JTA.  These are all currently National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) products.  They include Digital Terrain Elevation Data (DTED) level 0, 1 and 2, Digital Topographic Data (DTOP), Vector Smart Map (VMap) level 0, 1, and 2, Controlled Image Base (CIB), and Compressed ARC Digitized Raster Graphics (CADRG) on the unclassified server.  The classified MEL also provides Interim Terrain Data (ITD).   Each product conforms to a Military Specification as well as belonging to a group of products that conform to a Military Standard for that category of product.  The CIB and CADRG each have their own Military Performance Specification, MIL-PRF-89041 and MIL-PRF-89038 respectively and also conform to the Raster Product Format (RPF) which is a Military Standard.  Raster products are those made up of individual pixels such as imagery or a paper map that has been scanned.  The DTOP Performance Specification, MIL-PRF-0089037, is still in draft format.  The three levels of VMap products each have a Performance Specification; MIL-PRF-89039 for Level 0, MIL-PRF-89033 for Level 1, and MIL-PRF-0089032 for Level 2.  The DTOP and VMap products all conform to the Vector Product Format, another Military Standard.  Vector products are made up of data elements that are classified as points, lines and areas with associated information or attributes.  DTED is the only terrain product that does not yet conform to a Military Standard, but the three levels all do conform to Military Performance Specification MIL-PRF-89020A [3].  Finally, ITD conforms to Military Performance Specification MIL-PRF-89014A.  It is being converted into Vector Interim Terrain Data (VITD) to comply with the VPF Military Standard.  MEL will carry the VITD as it becomes available.  By providing standard terrain data products that meet standards and specifications, the MEL ensures the simulation terrain data base producers of products they know and can standardize on.MEL provides the capability to encode atmospheric and oceanographic data stored in the MEL into the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) Gridded Binary (GRIB) form or Binary Universal Form for Representation (BUFR) of meteorological data.  The GRIB format was developed to transfer gridded data fields and satellite imagery.  The BUFR format is used for data transfer as well as on-line storage and data archiving.   Both these formats are mandated by the JTA [4].2.2 Simulator Data Base StandardsIn addition to the source data formats, the MEL provides access to environmental simulation databases in the Standard Simulator Database Interchange Format (SIF).  This is the current mandatory standard found in the Modeling and Simulation Domain Annex of the JTA [5].  The SIF is a DoD data exchange standard (MIL-STD-1821) which was adopted several years ago for sharing externally created visual terrain simulator databases for the training and mission rehearsal community.   These databases are held at the Simulator Data Base Facility (SDBF), a MEL Resource Site, at Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico.  The Synthetic Environment Data Representation and Interchange Specification (SEDRIS) being developed by DMSO will replace the SIF in the future [6].  It will also provide the capability to ingest source data in different formats from the various repositories to provide a single format for the exchange of the data.  SEDRIS has been designed as a uniform and effective interchange specification for the pre-runtime distribution of source data and integrated databases.  The FY99 program for the MEL includes adding the capability to order some data in either its native format (GRIB, BUFR, VPF, etc.) or SEDRIS Transmittal Format (STF).  This capability will be expanded as more SEDRIS translators are developed and users require the data.3.  Metadata StandardsHoldings in the Master Environmental Library are described using metadata.  Metadata is best defined as data or information about data.  In the case of the MEL, the metadata helps the user determine the following information that is critical in their selection of the data set [7].Availability:  Data sets that exist for a geographic location.Fitness for use:  Data Sets meeting specific needs.Access:  Information needed to acquire an identified data set.Transfer:  Information needed to process and use a data set.  The best analogy for metadata in the MEL is that of a card catalog for a library.  Users access this card catalog to determine which books (data sets) meet their needs.  This metadata documents the information resource holdings and is used for searching and categorizing the holdings of Resource Sites.National StandardsThe data in the Master Environmental Library is described using the Federal Geographic Data Committee (FGDC) Content Standard for Digital Geospatial Metadata (CSDGM) version 2.  The CSDGM was established in 1994 under Executive Order 12906, “Coordinating Geographic Data Acquisition and Access: The National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI)”.   Version 2 was approved in 1998.  MEL developers at Naval Research Laboratory (NRL), Monterey have worked closely with the FGDC to help develop this standard.  By adopting this standard the MEL provides the ability to search metadata held by organizations within the NSDI, which includes such repositories as the US Geological Survey (USGS), Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).The standard defines the names of data elements, compound elements and information about the values that are to be provided for the data elements.  It does not specify the organization of the data within the computer or data transfer or the means by which it is displayed to the user [8].  The metadata can thus be stored in flat files as it is in the MEL or in a relational database or a combination of the two.   The standard contains seven major sections and three subordinate sections that are often repeated throughout the seven major sections.  Some of the seven sections are mandatory, some are optional and some are highly recommended.  The more sections that are required, the more information is available for the user as well as for searching the data sets, but this also requires more work on the part of the data producer.   There are also mandatory and/or optional elements internal to the sections as well.  The MEL requires more information than is required by the CSDGM to better support data searches.  This does not preclude the MEL from searching metadata records from other NSDI sites.  Returns from those sites would just not address some of the key words and fields used with MEL registered metadata.  The major sections include:Identification Information (Required by MEL).  Provides basic information about the data set, to include title, geographic area, currentness and method for acquiring the data set.Data Quality Information (Recommended).  Provides an assessment of the data set to include positional accuracy, completeness, consistency, sources of information and data production methods.Spatial Data Organization Information (Recommended).  The method used to represent the spatial information in the data set.Spatial Reference Information (Recommended).  Description of the coordinate reference frame for describing the geographic location of the geospatial data.Entity and Attribute Information (Required).  Provides information about the content of the data set to include names and definitions of features, attributes and attribute values.Distribution Information (Required for MEL Custom Order).  Provides information on how to obtain the data to include available formats, point of contact, and any fees.Metadata Reference Information (Required).  Provides information on the currentness of the metadata.The three subordinate sections do not stand alone.  They are found internal to the seven major sections where appropriate.  They include:Citation Information.  This includes originator, title, edition and other data set identifying information.Time Period Information. This includes information on when the data was produced or collected.Contact Information.  This includes the person or organization responsible for the data and various means of contact.  The MEL emphasizes the organization over the person due to the transient nature of people.A MEL Resource Site has the responsibility for building the metadata record, checking it and submitting it for acceptance to the MEL Metadata Manager prior to putting it on line and thus advertising the data it describes.  Once the metadata record is approved, it is submitted to the Access Site for indexing and thus becomes available for search.  MEL provides on-line tools to the Resource Sites for developing the metadata record and checking it to ensure compliance with the FGDC CSDGM.The Government Information Locator Service (GILS), also called Global Information Locator Service outside the US, is a national and international program for the identification and search of information on the Internet.  GILS data is not solely geospatial, but includes reports, documents, algorithms, and other information found on the Internet.  The metadata used to search the GILS is a subset of the FGDC CSDGM.  The MEL program is currently registered as a GILS site and as it adds this format of environmental information, it will comply with the GILS metadata for non-geospatial products.3.2  International StandardsThe MEL is working with other US organizations towards the international metadata standard that is being promulgated by the International Standards Organization (ISO) Technical Committee (TC) 211, Geographic Information/Geomatics.  The draft International Standard ISO 15046-15, Geographic Information – Part 15: Metadata, was released during the summer of 1998 and the MEL program submitted comments in conjunction with the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) to support geospatial metadata for Modeling and Simulation (M&S). The metadata standard will have two levels of conformance: Level 1-Cataloging Schema and Level 2-Full Schema.  All metadata will have to meet at least the minimum level, Level 1. The standard will allow the creation of profiles for those groups having requirements between the two levels.  This standard will be finalized by mid 1999 and the MEL program will coordinate a profile under the new standard for M&S geospatial data.  The ISO standard is being closely coordinated with the FGDC standard so the two are complementary when adopted. MEL representatives have also participated with the Open Geographic Information System Consortium (OGIS) to review not only this standard, but other specifications the consortium is developing for geospatial data.  The OGIS is a consortium of government and industry organizations committed to the development of a comprehensive suite of open interface specifications that enable developers to write inter-operating components that provide the capability to access heterogeneous geospatial data and geo-processing resources in a networked environment.4.0 Dictionary & Taxonomy StandardsTaxonomy is defined by Webster’s Dictionary [9], as:  “The science, laws, or principles of classification.”  The same dictionary defines the term dictionary as:  “A reference book having an explanatory alphabetical list of words, with information given for each word, including meaning, pronunciation, etymology, and often usage guidance”.   Thus, the words used to describe environmental features and attributes are defined by a dictionary, but their hierarchy, or structure beyond an alphabetical listing, is described by a taxonomy. The M&S Community is as diverse a population as a one would find in the DoD.   It includes trainers, analysts, researchers, developers, operators, and the industry supporting them.  This diverse group requires an environmental dictionary and taxonomy that they all understand and can work with.  The mission of the MEL is to support this diverse community with the capability to query, search, and retrieve this environmental data.  4.1 DoD Data Dictionary StandardsTo do this, the MEL has adopted the DoD Data Dictionary System (DDDS).  The DDDS is the primary tool supporting the DoD Data Administration in developing and managing standard data per DoD Directive 8320.1 [10]. The DDDS is run by the Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA) as the central repository for data standards and related information.   As such, it can also be considered a taxonomy due to the hierarchical structure it has created.  Directive 8320.1 applies to all component Automated Information Systems (AISs).  With the goal of the MEL to become a fully operational system supporting DoD, this use was less a choice and more of a requirement. The process of defining data elements, nominating them and having them accepted and inserted into the DDDS is a long, time consuming process which results in the DDDS being about a year behind what the individual Functional Data Administrators (FDAd) are working on.  This time lag and resultant lack of data elements within the DDDS has required the MEL to expand the approved elements with the proposed elements of the appropriate FDAds responsible for the environmental data elements represented within the MEL.MEL is using the United States Imagery and Geospatial Information System (USIGS) Conceptual Data Model (CDM) for standard Mapping, Charting, and Geodesy (MC&G) data elements.  The FDAd for the USIGS CDM is NIMA.  The majority of these elements came from the Feature and Attribute Coding Catalog (FACC) which is Part 4 of the Digital Geospatial Information Exchange Standard (DIGEST). This is an international exchange standard that is the result of almost 20 nations collaborating to define a coding standard for MC&G features and attributes [11]. DIGEST is called for under JTA 2.0 for geospatial data interchange. NIMA also has the responsibility for defining imagery data with respect to cataloging, query, archiving, and retrieval functions.  As NIMA formulates this imagery dictionary, MEL will include it for the imagery holdings it accesses.MEL is using the Joint Meteorology Oceanography (METOC) Conceptual Data Model (JMCDM) for oceanographic and atmospheric data elements.  The FDAd for the JMCDM is the Chief, Naval Meteorological Oceanography Command (CNMOC).  The MEL has been working closely with CNMOC for the past two years to ensure environmental data elements required for M&S are included in the JMCDM which are then nominated to the DDDS.The DDDS names will be found in the Entity and Attribute Information section of the metadata record.  They are one of the primary means of searching the metadata records.4.2 Other Dictionary StandardsIn addition to working with the DDDS, the MEL is developing a taxonomy tool in conjunction with the Office of the Ocean Executive Agent for DoD M&S.  This taxonomy tool will allow users to select terms from a dictionary known to them and have the tool translate the local term into a DDDS approved word for search within the MEL.   The first two dictionaries being supported by this tool are the DoD Universal Joint Task List (UJTL) and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Global Change Master Directory (GCMD).  The UJTL is a list of all tasks required by the Unified Commands to accomplish their missions.  This task listing also creates a list of conditions and standards. Conditions are variables of the environment that affect the performance of the task.  The physical environment is one of the three broad categories:  physical, military, and civilian, within the UJTL.  By providing a mapping between these terms and the DDDS, the MEL provides the trainers an easy tool for searching for environmental data sets they need for training.  MEL is also mapping the dictionary used in the GCMD to the DDDS to allow researchers the use of their own terminology to search for environmental data within the MEL.  The GCMD is part of a larger Federal program called the Global Change Data and Information System (GCDIS).  This can be described as “individual agency data and information systems that support global change research supplemented by a minimal amount of crosscutting new infrastructure, and made interoperable by the use of standards, common approaches, technology sharing, and data policy coordination” [12]. The GCDIS user community extends from global change researchers to other researchers, policy makers, educators, private industry, and private citizens. Through the GCDIS, these users are able to learn about the existence and location of relevant data and information resources, have key holding available in useful forms, and be assured of their quality and continued availability.  This concept fits well with the MEL and the taxonomy tool will allow easier search and access to these data sets.Internet StandardsThe success of the MEL not only depends on its ability to deliver the data required, but to do it using common everyday industry standards for networking and communications.  In this regard, the MEL continues to conform to the JTA 2.0 standard requirements for its Internet implementation.  Some of the more common standards implemented within the MEL follow.Document InterchangeThe MEL uses Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) 4.0 for hyper-text formatted and navigational linked documents.  In addition, it provides MEL documentation down loadable from the World Wide Web (WWW) in Adobe PDF 3.0, Microsoft Powerpoint 4.0, and Microsoft Word 6.0 formats.  Although these are not standards per se, they are common document interchange formats readily useable by DoD.Host StandardsA host is a computer that generally executes application programs on behalf of the users, and shares information with other hosts.  The MEL Access and Resource Site computers fall under this definition and adhere to the following WWW standards which are called out in JTA 2.0:Domain Name System (DNS) for host management.File Transfer using the File Transfer Protocol (FTP) for dissemination of much of the MEL data. Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) for search and retrieval within the WWW.Uniform Resource Locator (URL) for specification of resource location and access method.Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) for host to host communications.Distributed Object ComputingIn 1998 MEL adopted the standards for distributed object computing defined by the Object Management Group (OMG) Object Management Architecture (OMA). These included the use of the Unified Modeling Language (UML) to model MEL Version 2.0 and then build to this model.  The UML is being submitted to the OMG for adoption as an industry standard.  In addition, MEL converted to the Common Object Request Broker Architecture (CORBA) for transactions using Interface Definition Language (IDL) and the Inter-ORB Protocol (IIOP) for defining the interfaces and services. ConclusionsAs the MEL moves from a developmental system to an operational system, it becomes critical it met the standards spelled out in the JTA 2.0.  As I have pointed out in this paper, it is no longer just DoD standards with which we must deal, but increasingly it is commercial, National and international standards which drive information technology and environmental information.  The MEL continues to work to ensure the information technology we use as well as the  environmental data we provide access to, meets our customer requirements and the best way to do this is to use commonly accepted standards.7. AcknowledgementsMEL is sponsored by the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) and managed by the DoD Office of the Ocean Executive Agent for Modeling and Simulation.  My thanks to these organizations and the hard work of the MEL Development Group lead by Dr. Richard Siquig of NRL, Monterey.8. References[1]  R. Allard, R. Siquig, B. Donaldson & E. Kihn:  “The Master Environmental Library:  A Source for Environmental Data”, Paper 61, Proceedings of the Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Orlando,  p.  1, 1998.[2]  Department of Defense Joint Technical Architecture, Version 2.0, DISA, pp. 2.2-5-2.2-11, 26 May 1998.[3]  Digitizing the Future, Ed 4, Defense Mapping Agency, pp. 37-40, 1996.[4]  Department  of Defense Joint Technical Architecture, Version 2.0, DISA, pp. 2.2-10-2.2-11, 26 May 1998.[5]   Department  of Defense Joint Technical Architecture, Version 2.0, DISA, p. M&S-5, 26 May 1998.[6] Department  of Defense Joint Technical Architecture, Version 2.0, DISA, p. M&S-5, 26 May 1998.[7]   MEL Metadata Guide (draft), DMSO, p. 5, November 1998.[8]   Federal Geographic Data Committee. FGDC-STD-001-1998. Content Standard for Digital Geospatial Metadata (revised June 1998). Federal Geographic Data Committee. Washington, D.C[9]   Webster’s New Riverside University Dictionary, The Riverside Publishing Company, 1994[10]   DoD Directive 8320.1, DoD Data Administration,   26 September 1991.[11] The Digital Geographic Information Exchange Standard (DIGEST), Part 4 Feature and Attribute Coding Catalogue (FACC), Ed 2.0, Digital Geographic Information Working Group, June 1997.[12] The U.S. Global Change Research Information Office Homepage, URL:  http://www.gcrio.org/gcdis.htmlAuthor BiographyBRUCE J. DONALDSON is a Senior Program Manager with Applied Technology Solutions (ATS) in McLean, VA.  He is the MEL Program Manager for the Ocean Executive Agent and has been with the program for two years.  He has had more than twenty-five years experience working geospatial projects for the DoD and commercial firms.  Mr. Donaldson holds a M.S. in Systems Management from the University of Southern California and a M.S. in Cartographic and Geographic Sciences from George Mason University.  