New Approach for Remote Station Training Support for the 32nd Army Air and Missile Defense Command (AAMDC) Warfighter Carlos GarciaRon GiddensJulie ThomasonCOLSA Corporation6726 Odyssey DriveHuntsville, AL 35806{cgarcia, rgiddens, jthomason} @colsa.comKeywords:Training, AAMDC, Communication ABSTRACT: The need to train the soldier with simulation data is ever present in today’s environments. Increasing cost and decreasing budgets makes it necessary to provide efficient ways to train in distributed remote locations.  Ft. Bliss Warfighting Center (FBWC) has the new responsibility of training the 32nd Army Air and Missile Defense Command (AAMDC) and will incorporate 21st century technology methods of providing world wide simulation data to the soldiers to train as they will fight.   The approach taken is to leave personnel and computing resources in the simulation center and only remote the simulation, visualization, audio, video and tactical data feeds. A flexible communication infrastructure will be used that allows for the use of multiple methods of communication to include standard telephone system, ISDN, cellular phone, radio, satellite and wide area networks (Internet, NIPERNET, SIPRNET.)  This paper discusses the approach and lessons learned from their experience.IntroductionDuring the 1998 AUSA symposium, Ft. Bliss Warfighter Center (FBWC) provided a demonstration of its capabilities for remote training.  The FBWC demonstrated the transmission of tactical and simulation traffic to the 32nd AAMDC TOC in the El Paso Civic Center over commercial analog telephone lines.FBWC recognizes that effective training or field exercise requires adequate communications and access to simulations.  Unfortunately, these capabilities are often a limited resource and costly to remote locations.  The Warfighter requires large amounts of data to stimulate the equipment and personnel during training. To overcome this obstacle, FBWC utilizes the Advanced Research Center Telecommunications Interface Console (ARCTIC) developed by Space and Missile Defense Battle Lab (SMDBL) to fulfill its own training requirements.  SMDBL developed the ARCTIC to provide a flexible low cost method of delivering simulation and tactical data to remote systems.  The ARCTIC provides the Warfighter with a non-intrusive connectivity to train, as he will fight.  The Warfighter is able to exercise/stimulate tactical systems with either tactical or simulation data.  The ARCTIC is both a peacetime and GO-TO-WAR communications gateway capable of using a variety of communications links, e.g., cellular telephone, analog telephone, ISDN, radio, satellite, etc., to establish connectivity.  BackgroundIn February 1998, the 32nd Army Air and Missile Defense Command deployed to Kuwait as part of the deploying forces for Operation Desert Thunder.  This was in anticipation of a potential conflict that was eminent due to the impasse over United Nation (UN) inspectors accessing key sites.  Once the 32nd AAMDC was in theater and operational, the commander requested training support from SMDBL. During Operation Desert Thunder, connectivity between the AAMDC and the SMDBL was established over the SIPRNET but its use was limited to passing a limited number of tactical messages in e-mail format.  Once the ARCTIC was on the ground, support to the AAMDC rapidly expanded.  Support now included passing simulation data, providing an audio/video teleconferencing capability, “flying” an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) surrogate and operating the Portable Space Model (PSM).  During this exercise, the ARCTIC demonstrated the capability of transmitting TIBBS/TRAP tactical messages directly from serial feeds. These enhancements allowed for expanded training support through a “crawl, walk, run” phased approach to the training needs of the Warfighter.  The “Crawl” phase can be described as individual operator training on the separate tactical workstations (often referred to as Box Training).  The 32nd AAMDC operators had only recently received the suite of equipment that made up the Force Projection Tactical Operations Center (FPTOC) from U.S. Army Space Command and desperately needed initial system training.  The “Box Training” was conducted with simulations running in the Advanced Research Center’s (ARC) Synthetic Battlefield Center (SBC) in Huntsville, AL.  The simulations were sent from the SBC in Huntsville, AL to Camp Doha, Kuwait over the SIPRNET.  During this phase of the training exercise, individual systems were stimulated to train the operator on their equipment.  Once proficient on their equipment, operators were ready to begin the second phase of training, the “Walk” phase.The “Walk and Run” phases of the training were conducted using ARCTIC gateways in conjunction with the SIPRNET. The ARCTIC gateways provided intelligent routing and automatic compression of simulation data.  Six DSN lines were setup as a backup to the SIPRNET.  The DSN lines were never required due to the success of the SIPRNET.  During training MODSAF, EADSIM and EADTB were used to create a comprehensive scenario to train the TOC personnel in air and TMD operations.  The Portable Space Model (PSM) was brought into theater during the “Walk” phase of training. PSM provided all Tactical Event Systems (TES) warnings.   Prior to the arrival of the PSM only one of the TES elements was being portrayed in the scenario.  The ARCTIC provided data routing between the SBC at Huntsville and all of the system in the TOC (see Figure 1.)  In addition, the ARCTIC logged all of the scenario data and provided a local and remote Stealth viewer.  The Stealth viewer provided an Unmanned Arial Vehicle (UAV) view of the battlefield to be used in locating TMD threats before and after launches. The “Walk” phase was designed to teach the operators how to fuse the information on their individual workstations with the other workstations in the Tactical Operations Center.  The “Walk” phase occurred as part of a theater wide Command Post Exercise (CPX).  During the CPX, the AAMDC crews were taught how to use the information from their workstations to provide the TOC commander with situational awareness of both air and Theater Ballistic Missile (TBM) threats.  The final and most comprehensive phase, “Run”, became known as “Capstone Remote Station Training”.  This phase consisted of executing four days of scenarios and was intended to stimulate all systems simultaneously.  Several simulations/models were used and synchronized to provide a coherent and integrated ground, air, and missile threat.  The scenario was intended to develop and test crew proficiency.  Preparing for the 21st CenturyThe 32nd AAMDC applied the lessons learned from remote station training during Operation Desert Thunder and incorporated the remote station training capability into its normal training routine.    Several iterations of Remote Station Training were conducted during the latter part of 1998.  Each iteration built upon the previous success similar to the crawl, walk, run phased training that was executed during Operation Desert Thunder.   The end result of the advances made during the remote station exercises was demonstrated in El Paso during the 1998 AUSA Air and Missile Defense Symposium.During the 1998 AUSA symposium FBWC initial goal was to provide a demonstration of remote station training similar to what was accomplished during Operation Desert Thunder.  In this configuration, the FBWC provided tactical and DIS network traffic to the 32nd AAMDC TOC in the El Paso Civic Center over commercial analog telephone lines through the use of ARCTIC gateways. FBWC secondary goal was to provide a new approach that allowed additional flexibility and cost effectiveness during training exercises. This new configuration simultaneously transmitted network and tactical serial data to the tactical workstations in the TOC located in the Civic Center.  This approach allows for re-configurability of the training without deployment of additional hardware or personnel, thus reducing the cost and support equipment at the remote site to the necessary communication equipment.Three tactical serial feeds were transmitted remotely from the FBWC. The ARCTIC serial patch panel received data from the TDDS and TIBBS feeds generated by the PSM early warning system and TADIL-J data generated by the DTI system.  The ARCTIC automatically relays the serial data to the remote ARCTIC at the Civic Center.  Since there is no indication where a packet begins and ends in serial data, TCP/IP reliable protocol was required.  The serial data is encapsulated within TCP/IP and is then transmitted to the remote site, where it is converted back to serial format. This encapsulation is required for serial feeds which are considered “streams” of data rather than “packets” of data such as DIS.  The serial data flowed in one direction between sites. The advantage of utilizing unidirectional feeds is that the ARCTIC is able to re-transmit the feed to multiple sites simultaneously.  Bi-directional feeds typically have an acknowledgment cycle and can only be sent between two sites.As part of the demonstration, a simulated Unmanned Ariel Vehicle (UAV) was flown remotely from the FBWC and visualized in the Civic Center through the use of a Stealth.  For backup proposes the ITEST simulation was located at the Civic Center to provide simulation ground clutter.  The data was then sent back to the FBWC so that the UAV operator could maneuver the aircraft through the battlefield.  4. Data MultiplexingWhen the simulation data is determined to be destined to the remote site, it is first compressed using a Lempel-Ziv-Welch (LZW)  based compression.  LZW is a type of lossless  compression where compressed data is decompressed back to its original form without any data loss.  Following compression, the data is encrypted by the KIV-7 which is treated by the ARCTIC as a bulk encryptor.  The data is then multiplexed between the five existing phone lines as small encapsulated data packets.  The encapsulation provides error correction and sequencing of the data.  This capability allows for each phone line to operate at different baud rates while still keeping each line fully utilized.  During the symposium, data classification was selected to meet the security level of the viewing audience.  This was accomplished though the physical disconnection of the classified serial feeds from the ARCTIC gateway.5. ConclusionThe accomplishments achieved during AUSA will allow the 32nd AAMDC to train anywhere in the world.   The FBWC can now distribute simulation and tactical data from its center while keeping deployed hardware and personnel to a minimum.  This capability reduces the cost to support the 32nd AAMDC and reduces the support equipment at the remote site to the necessary communication equipment.The possibilities of future conflicts due to the impasse over United Nation inspectors accessing key Iraqis sites are examples of how the Warfighter will use the experiences gained from the 32nd AAMDC remote station training to ready soldiers for their wartime mission.  The ARCTIC gateway provided the communication to the Warfighter during peacetime operations and allows for remote station training while awaiting execution of the wartime mission should the situation escalate beyond peacetime operations. Author BiographiesCarlos Garcia is the Program Manager for the ARCTIC gateway at the Advanced Research Center, Huntsville, AL.  For the last 10 years, he’s been involved in development of applications for tactical systems and modeling and simulations at COLSA Corporation.Ron Giddens is the Exercise Project Manager for the ARCTIC gateway at the Advanced Research Center, Huntsville, AL.  Prior to joining COLSA Corporation he was part of the team involved in the conception of the Force Projection Tactical Operation Center.  For the last three years, he’s been involved in exercise and training support for Space Missile Defense Command.Julie Thomason is Software Developer for the Technology Products and Solutions Group.  She is involved in software development and is the testing lead for the ARCTIC software projects. Figure 1Figure 2 EMBED Visio.Drawing.4  