Results of the DARPA Course of Action Analysis (COAA) Proof of Principle Pilot TestW. H. (Dell) Lunceford, Jr.: Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), luncewh@hqda.army.milGreg Schow: U.S. Army Simulation, Training and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM), Greg_Schow@stricom.army.milRuss Richardson: Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC), rrichardson@std.saic.com Rob Alexander: Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC), ralexander@std.saic.comSummary.  Command and control systems of the future will provide commanders and staffs with full, integrated support for continuous planning and execution of military operations in the context of new force structures and doctrines.  However, RobA U.S. Army staffs today are still forced to apply manual techniques in their planning for combat operations, despite the ongoing revolution in information technology.  Of particular concern is providing support for analysis of alternative courses of action in order to assist the planners and commanders in understanding the full implications of their alternatives.  If analysis support is to be provided for future planners under Army-After-Next concepts, it is reasonable to begin investigating how advanced technology can assist current and near-future planners.  A number of candidate analytic techniques for an integrated analysis solution are being investigated by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) under its Course of Action Analysis (COAA) concept exploration effort.  COAA is studying how technology can be used to improve military planners’ understanding of alternative courses of action (COA), increase COA resilience, and decrease time necessary to develop COAs. The focus of the program is on analysis, not planning, and on decision-aiding, rather than automated decision-making. The program began in May 1997 with knowledge acquisition and requirements definition.  Then, a three-pronged concept exploration effort proceeded.  First, a Proof-of-Principle (PoP) System was built to illustrate a number of concepts and show how certain technical approaches could provide the needed analysis support.  Second, a Pilot Test was held at Ft. Leavenworth, KS in October, 1998 with participation by officers of the Army’s School of Advanced Military Studies (SAMS) to provide feedback on the concepts illustrated by the PoP System.  Third, several parallel investigations were conducted to explore alternate or complementary technical approaches.  In broad terms, the major conclusions of the investigation to date are first, that it is possible to build a decision-support system that speeds the process and enhances planner understanding of alternatives (feedback from Pilot Test participants) and helps them develop more resilient COAs faster (assessment of the technical team). Additionally, execution monitoring and real-time reaction to unfolding events are areas of great potential improvement in the current process for which advanced technology can be useful.  In short, advanced technology can provide for better, faster decision-making.Introduction. Command and Control (C2) systems of the future will need to have a wide range of embedded tools to aid the military planner.  Current systems in use, and in development, tend to focus on supporting control during execution of military operations, but their planning tools are limited, and “stove-pipe” in nature.  Integrated support for the deep analysis of alternative courses of action (COA) is not available, and few programs are actively researching this difficult problem.  Under the doctrine and force structure envisioned for far-future U.S. military operations there will be a great need for decision support with emphasis on COA analysis.  The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) has been investigating a number of candidate analytic techniques for an integrated analysis solution under it’s Course of Action Analysis (COAA) concept exploration effort.  COAA is studying how technology can be used to improve military planners’ understanding of alternative courses of action (COA), increase COA resilience, and decrease time necessary to develop COAs. The focus of the program is on analysis, not planning, and on decision-aiding, rather than automated decision-making. Initially, the COAA program explored analysis concepts in the context of current and near-future planning doctrine, in order to build a foundation on which to expand its research to support Army-After-Next planning.  It is also possible that the results may by of use in assisting developers of Army-After-Next planning doctrine in envisioning the potential of technology to assist in COA analysis.The program began with extensive knowledge acquisition and requirements definition.  Six months were devoted to observing active-duty Army planning staffs in action, studying the doctrinal literature, and exploring initially promising concepts, and culminated in the development of an operational concept and requirements for a Proof-of-Principle System.  Then, the program proceeded with three mutually supporting efforts.  First, a Proof-of-Principle (PoP) System was built to illustrate a number of concepts and show how certain technical approaches could provide the needed analysis support.  Second, a Pilot Test was held at Ft. Leavenworth, KS with participation by officers of the Army’s School of Advanced Military Studies (SAMS) to provide feedback on the concepts illustrated by the PoP System.  Third, several parallel investigations were conducted to explore alternate or complementary technical approaches.  This paper describes the concepts investigated by the COAA program and reports the central results of the investigation.The COA Analysis Problem.The primary focus of the COAA program is the identification and exploration of technologies that can be embedded within planning systems to aid the planner in the analysis of alternative courses of action.  As technology is developed and applied it is envisioned that the actual planning process will be improved.  As a secondary focus of the COAA program, technology insertion into the present doctrinal planning process may be helpful.The key issue is how to incorporate advanced technology to assist military planners in increasing the speed of COA development and analysis, and in increasing their understanding of alternate COAs.  The ultimate goal is to speed the process, and to allow commanders and their staffs to produce more resilient COAs.  In this context, resilience is defined as insensitivity to external events.  In other words, a resilient COA will be one that is likely to accomplish the intended mission without major modification even in the presence of unforeseen circumstances.The Army’s process for planning of military operations is called the Military Decision-Making Process (MDMP).  It is simply an instance of a problem-solving methodology summarized as understand the problem, propose alternatives, analyze the alternatives, and select one to implement.  REF _Ref439852521 \h Figure 1 summarizes the MDMP, and shows the scope and focus of the COAA program within the context of the MDMP.  In short, COAA is focusing on COA Analysis, while also supporting development of alternative COAs and their comparison.  To provide a fully integrated solution, COAA will need to expand its scope in both directions, i.e., including Mission Analysis at the beginning of the process, and extending to OPORD generation and execution monitoring toward the end of the process.   EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1 – Military Decision-Making ProcessCurrent command and control systems are designed to support control of current operations.  They are not well equipped to support the fluid “what-if” analysis required for planning future operations.  Tools that exist are likely to be quite static and not integrated with the whole MDMP. They usually require the planner to ask a specific question, for example, “What are the fields of fire from this battle position,” or “What is the best route from this location to that location.”   Military planners need support for deeper analysis.  They need to understand each alternative COA and its implications concerning how it might unfold during execution.  They need to know the possible range of outcomes of the COA in various circumstances.  They need to know first if it is feasible and acceptable in its nominal outcome, and then if it will be feasible and acceptable in a range of circumstances.  They need to know how well it satisfies the commander’s evaluation criteria, and what risks and opportunities are present.  These kinds of issues require more than the current set of standalone, limited tools.  They require an integrated analysis solution.Program History. The following summarizes the major phases of the COAA program. A number of additional investigations and activities overlapped and paralleled these phases.May - Aug 1997: Requirements AnalysisJun 97 - Jan 98: Knowledge Acquisition and Program DevelopmentDec 97 - Apr 98: System and Experiment DesignJan - Aug 98: Proof-of-Principle (PoP) System Implementation (Three Rapid-Prototyping cycles)5-9 Oct 1998: Pilot Test at Ft. LeavenworthA great deal of time was spent gaining a detailed understanding of the problem by observing several major Army headquarters planning staffs execute the MDMP, by assessing the doctrinal basis for the process, and by conducting knowledge acquisition of military planning and military operations.  Numerous technical concepts were proposed during the early period.  Some were analyzed and noted as having potential, then set aside for later investigation.  Somewere incorporated in the PoP System, and some were determined not to be directly applicable.  An initial “think-piece” prototype was built during the requirements analysis phase to assist in developing an operational concept of the PoP System.  Following the decision to proceed with the PoP System, it was implemented using the rapid-prototyping software development paradigm, with three prototyping cycles.  Work continues on a fourth prototype to incorporate some of the feedback from the Pilot Test. Although the primary purpose of implementing the PoP was to create a test-bed for subject-matter expert feedback on the concepts being explored, another major benefit was that the team actually had to face the hard problems of design and integration.  Thus, the completed system demonstrates by its existence the feasibility of building such a system using the technical approach adopted.The Pilot Test at Ft. Leavenworth provided a forum for gathering feedback from members of the Army’s preeminate school for tactical and operational planning, in a way that engaged the officers intellectually in developing and analyzing a COA.  It also provided the COAA team with an opportunity to gain insights by observing expert planners using the system.Program Scope and Parameters.The COAA Program Manager established program guidance to focus the team’s work in an effort to make real progress in a fairly narrowly scoped area.  As stated above, the program’s primary focus is on analysis of COAs, although COA development and COA comparison are also within the scope of the program.  As research proceeded, it became clear that these three steps of the MDMP (COA development, analysis, and comparison) are very closely intertwined even in the manual process, and as decision support tools become available, will be merged even more.  Much analysis occurs in determining the feasibility and acceptability of a COA during the COA development step, and comparison of COAs depends on the analysis of their relative strengths and weaknesses.Although the long-term goals of the COAA program are to investigate how advanced technology can assist future military planning processes, it was decided to focus immediate efforts on support of the Army’s current doctrinal process as stated in FM 101-5 NOTEREF _Ref440008022 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT 1, and to design an architecture in the context of the Army’s current command and control system, i.e., Maneuver Control System (MCS) at the operational and tactical echelons.  In order to lead to experience-based results rather than theoretical concepts, it was decided to design and build a Proof-of-Principle System which would incorporate concepts being considered.  Since the goals of the COAA program center on technology exploration, not system development, it was decided not to put resources into making the PoP System robust or complete, except as necessary to support testing with actual Army users.  Therefore, for example, the brigade tasks provided for user selection are doctrinally correct but do not comprise an exhaustive list of the missions a brigade could be called upon to accomplish.  It was decided to investigate ways of providing decision support, not automation of decision-making.  This fundamental decision was based on the realization that the critical output of the planning process is not the plan itself, but the understanding gained by the planners and the commander about the nuances and implications of the course of action adopted.  This is best summarized by GEN Dwight D. Eisenhower’s comment that “In preparing for battle I have always found that plans are useless, but planning is indispensable.”   The Proof-of-Principle System therefore makes use of the “mixed-initiative” paradigm where the human planner specifies many of the parameters of a course of action, and the computer system responds by analyzing the results, deriving some parameters, and in some cases, suggesting further human inputs.  This program decision also steered the team away from an investigation of automated generation of COAs or automated planning, not because that area might not be fruitful, but simply to scope the investigation.Proof-of-Principle System.Based on the knowledge acquisition and requirements generation accomplished during the first six months of the COAA program, a Proof-of-Principle (PoP) System was designed and built.  The technical approach used to support COA analysis in the PoP was constraint satisfaction.  Each type of military task is described as a set of constraints and variables.  As the planner/user develops a COA he is actually selecting a constraint set or specifying variables for a constraint set. As he does so, system checks constraints and provides immediate feedback.  A failed constraint signals that the intended COA is infeasible or unacceptable.  Even if the COA remains feasible and acceptable, measures of risk are computed and continuously updated.  These measures of risk are shown to the planner, who may decide to modify his COA if risk to mission accomplishment becomes too great in a particular area.The PoP System as used by the SAMS officers during the Ft. Leavenworth Pilot Test appeared as shown in  REF _Ref439853004 \h Figure 2 below.  Two officers, serving as the G3 Plans and the G2 Plans Officers, work collaboratively in developing friendly and enemy courses of action, respectively, and then step sequentially through the “Action-Reaction-Counteraction” cycle of the wargame.  Each COAA Client serves as host to the analysis user interface and to a mapping system that is shared across workstations and displayed on a big-screen display or simply projected via a computer projector. Battlefield Planning and Visualization (BPV) System is a legacy mapping system.  BPV is a developmental and research mapping system of the U.S. Army Communications and Electronics Command (CECOM).  The COAA Server hosts the analysis engine that supports analysis of the COA.  Additional systems such as Maneuver Control System (MCS) and Tactical Engineer Command and Control System (TECCS) can also be connected to the PoP System.  MCS would operate by providing input to BPV on the current friendly situation, logistical situation, and enemy situation.  MCS receives logistical data from Combat Service Support Control System, and receives enemy data from All-Source Analysis System (ASAS), all components of the Army’s Tactical Command and Control System (ATCCS).  TECCS provides terrain-related information such as a Modified Combined Obstacle Overlay (MCOO) which gives a visual representation of restricted and unrestricted terrain from which mobility corridors can be derived.  The system operates on a local area network using, in this view, three Windows NT Pentium Pro dual-processor computers.  The two computers hosting COAA Clients require special-purpose graphics cards to support a dual-monitor screen.   EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2 – Proof-of-Principle SystemEach COAA Client supports a dual-monitor display.  Typically, the left-hand monitor ( REF _Ref439854301 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 3) shows the map and the “Mission Package Browser”.  The right-hand monitor shows the analysis displays.  EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3 – Proof-of-Principle GUI – Left MonitorIn the upper left-hand corner of  REF _Ref439854301 \h Figure 3 a set of “Risk Alarms” are displayed.  In this example, the bar labelled “Margins” was selected to show its constituent parts, consisting of the PoP System’s view of risk to mission accomplishment due to fuel usage, ammo usage, maneuver room, and reserves available.  Other risk metrics comprise the other two major risk alarms, “Risk” and “Complexity”.  The worst of each alarm’s constituent metrics is shown in the risk alarm bar, and is intended to alert the planner to problems in his COA.  Although the metrics chosen were considered to be important ones in COA analysis, others not implemented in the PoP System would no doubt be included in any complete system.  In the lower left of  REF _Ref439854301 \h Figure 3, a “folder” is shown containing all electronically available information pertaining to the assigned mission and its possible COAs.  The map on the rest of the screen is displayed with BPV.   EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 4 - Proof-of-Principle GUI – Right MonitorThe right monitor of the PoP System’s COAA Client displays the timeline/synchronization matrix.  Division essential tasks (shown in the top row), and tasks assigned by the division to subordinate units are shown as bars and are synchronized in GANNT-Chart style.  Task bars that are gray are complete and feasible.  Yellow task bars indicate tasks which have not yet been fully specified (perhaps no axes or objectives have yet been associated with the tasks), and red task bars are those which the system has determined to be infeasible or unacceptable.  Technical Approach: Constraint Satisfaction.The underlying technical approach for the PoP System is constraint satisfaction.  Each task is represented as a set of variables and constraints on those variables. A COA development and evaluation problem is formulated as a constraint satisfaction problem (CSP).  Briefly, a CSP is defined as a set of variables and constraints between variables.  The CSP represents a graph where each variable is a node and constraints are arcs connecting these nodes.  The solution to a CSP is achieved by a hierarchical or multi-dimensional search through the domain of each variable in an attempt to find a consistent set of variable values.  A particular CSP problem may not be solvable, meaning that there is no set of variable values that will satisfy all the constraints.For example, consider the case of a planner who is tasking a mechanized infantry brigade to move from its current position along a certain axis to an objective, and specifies that the brigade is to begin its move at a certain time and complete it no later than another time.  He has specified values for variables of a CSP.  Constraints between variables would include, among others, that the time allowed for the unit to complete its move must exceed some computed time.  This computed time might consider how long a brigade of this type would require to move over the terrain covered by the axis, in the face of enemy opposition as portrayed by the enemy situation and COA.Classic constraint satisfaction involves sets of variables with discrete scalar domains.  The COAA CSP approach extends the paradigm to include continuous variables and discrete variables of arbitrary type.  Complex variables representing routes and subtasks are handled.  Each variable type has a generator function that produces candidate values for consideration during the search process, effectively discretizing each variable’s domain.CSP solution is NP-Complete, and exhaustive search grows exponentially with the number of variables.  It is therefore necessary to use heuristics that exploit domain specific information to minimize the search space.  The COAA CSP approach employs numerous mechanisms to achieve a valid set of variables in a reasonable time.  The implementation of these heuristics is through the variable generator functions.The COAA PoP’s CSP approach characterizes military capabilities as collections of variables and constraints, called constraint sets.  Each constraint set corresponds to a single, doctrinal task which a given Army unit can perform.  For example, the doctrine that a brigade needs to follow in conducting an Attack (or Defend, Screen, Withdraw, etc.) would be represented as a constraint set.  As the planner specifies graphical control measures and other parameters for the task he is assigning to his subordinate brigade, variables are set in the corresponding constraint set.  The system then checks the plan against constraints such as underlying terrain trafficability, enemy resistance expected enroute, and time, fuel, and ammunition resources available.  It also generates values for other variables in the constraint set which can automatically be generated.  If a constraint violation occurs, the user is immediately notified and can take action to resolve the infeasible or unacceptable situation.  Constraints checked include “rules of thumb” such as doctrinal preferences, and hard data such as terrain.  Successive or parallel subordinate tasks are then tied together with timing and other constraints developed as the planner  interacts with the system to specify the division COA.An important finding of the COAA program is that constraint satisfaction as extended in the COAA CSP is a feasible and natural technical approach for supporting COA analysis.  When combined with other applicable techniques, it would serve as a powerful basis for an integrated decision-aid for the MDMP.Parallel Investigations.Worst-Case Enemy Response Analysis.  Adversarial Planner (AP) is a hierarchical task-decomposition automated planner developed at MITRE. It was hypothesized that AP could be used as a post-processor to the COAA system by taking a Blue COA and doing counterplanning to derive a “most-dangerous” Red COA. The task-decomposition-style AP and the constraint-satisfaction-style PoP System are quite different in terms of their underlying knowledge representation schemes. An important conclusion of this effort is that the plan representation used to communicate between such disparate systems must have a common semantics in order to allow one system’s COA to be initialized by input from the other.  The COAA program began with DARPA’s Common Plan Representation (CPR), now called Continuous Execution Representation (CER), but this representation was only a starting point for sharing of COAs between the two systems.  Its extensibility was essential, but the amount of extension required made it a cumbersome process.Threat Analysis Overlays. A concept that was studied in some depth was the computation and display of threats to military units of various types based on the battlefield situation. The Threat Analysis Overlays (TAO) System is designed to calculate threat arising from direct and indirect fire, communication, detection, identification, and other battlefield metrics and then display them as a surface plot overlaying the map showing the degree of threat at each location.  These threat contributions are calculated relative to threatened units and capabilities.  For example the threat from a Mechanized Infantry Battalion is separately calculated relative to Infantry, Mechanized Infantry, and Armor, as well as other unit types. TAO facilitates the planner’s visualization of the mission-specific, battlefield threat/opportunity situation.  The TAO system enables user-controlled generation of battlefield threat maps based on user-selected threat and lethality aspects.  The overlays display the threat from user-selected sources against user-specified forces across the region, or over a specified route. For example, the user may display the threat from Red air defenses against Blue helicopter units across the whole map. Where the threat is greatest, the display will have the most intense coloring, or alternately, be shown highest on the vertical axis.The COAA Threat Analysis Overlay system is based upon an entirely numerical representation of the battlefield.  The system derives a threat "field" from each battlefield unit considering intervening battlefield features.  These fields are developed independently and can thus be combined into arbitrarily specified user threat views.  This field-oriented representation of the battlefield enables the application of many well-understood numerical optimization algorithms, and simplified visualization of situation awareness.The TAO system includes a route planning system based on a Simulated Annealing algorithm.  This system plans a 3-dimensional route in the user constructed threat space given a set of waypoints.  The implementation is designed to optimize two parameters simultaneously.  This Simulated Annealing system allows a planner to optimize the amount of threat exposure of a unit as it travels a path of specified width, while also minimizing the distance traveled.  Generation of a COA’s Range of Outcomes.  It is well known that any kind of full-featured simulation of combat is a dynamical system, subject to mathematical chaos.  The layman’s definition of chaos is a condition where a small change in an input condition may result in an inordinately large change in the output in an unpredicatable direction.  For example, adding one more tank round to the basic load of a brigade might cause simulation of a previously feasible COA to predict mission failure.  As such, it is dangerous to attempt to provide a point prediction of the outcome of combat with a single run, or even a set of stochastic runs, of a simulation.  In fact, some theoreticians claim that it is impossible to generate any reliable statistics from such a system.  Although the constraint satisfaction approach provides a more “declarative” perspective on a model of combat, it is theoretically equivalent to simulation, and suffers from the same problem.  One approach to dealing with the problem of chaotic COAs is to utilize the mathematics of chaos directly to characterize a COA, and perhaps provide the planner sufficient insight to avoid operating too near regions of chaotic behavior.  This approach will be investigated in future work under the COAA program.  Another, more pragmatic approach, is deliberately to generate a wide range of outcomes, not based on likelihood of occurrence, in order to attempt to span the outcome space.  This information is at least as useful to the planner as information about likelihood of outcomes, in that the commander will normally place a high value on avoiding risk of catastrophic failure.  The COAA program investigated a method of generating a COA’s range of outcomes called multi-trajectory simulation.Multi-Trajectory Simulation is a technique developed by investigators at Wilkes University to deal with the problem of chaotic behavior of combat simulations.  In concept, each time the associated stochastic simulation in question would normally draw a random number, the multi-trajectory version of the simulation will simulate both (or all) trajectories that could result from the random draw.  Of course the immediately apparent problem is combinatorical explosion of trajectories, and so much of the research deals with ways to manage that explosion according to desired measures of evaluation, and according to time and resource budgets.   Under the COAA Program, multi-trajectory simulation technology was applied to course-of-action analysis during an initial prototype development.  A small, simple, very fast simulation built to emulate the coarse characteristics of a larger, more valid model was used to generate thousands of trajectories of a single COA in several minutes.  Information about branching choices and states was retained to provide an explanation capability. Thus planners had the capability to investigate the cause of critical branches which differentiated success from failure.  In theory, this kind of investigation could provide the evidence a planner needed to guard effectively against the occurrence of failure branches, or to encourage the occurrence of high-opportunity branches.In the opinion of the COAA team, multi-trajectory simulation has significant promise as a methodology to support COA analysis when used in conjunction with other techniques.  Although the approach was not incorporated in the final Proof-of-Principle System, the team’s experience in implementing it for the initial prototype provided convincing evidence of its utility.Visualization of Ranges of Outcomes.  One of the serious difficulties in using multi-trajectory simulation (or other Range-of-Outcome generation techniques) is the visualization and interpretation of the results.  To be able to span the entire range of outcomes, so many trajectories must be generated that it becomes very difficult to understand the results.  A Range-of-Outcomes Display utility was implemented on SGI hardware during the COAA program to visualize the trajectories and their branch nodes, as shown in  REF _Ref439859510 \h Figure 5.    EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 5 – Visualization of a Range of Outcomes In this view, the vertical axis represents Blue casualties, the horizontal axis is time, and the third display axis is simply an indexing of trajectories, in order to allow identification of individual trajectories. Each node represents a branch point where one trajectory split into two diverging outcomes.  Nodes can be selected to show explanations about branching conditions.  Colors were intended to represent degree of feasibility or acceptability of each trajectory and node with respect to the dependent measure under consideration, in this case Blue Casualties.  However, the coloring was inadvertently reversed, so Red represents good conditions (“fully mission-capable”), Yellow represents mediocre conditions (“some degradations to mission capability”), and Green represents bad conditions (“in danger of being mission-incapable”).  Clearly, interpreting such a display visually would be difficult even for someone well versed in the approach, and not appropriate for use by Army planners in general.  Much research is needed to determine how to cluster groups of similarly behaved trajectories or otherwise simplify the display of information contained therein.Simulation Assessment Study.  Early in the COAA Program it was assumed that the technical approach most likely to be used for COA analysis would be traditional simulation.  The thought was that COA analysis consisted mainly of generating a scenario with which to initialize a simulation, running it, and analyzing the output.  Therefore, a simulation assessment was conducted to determine which simulations would be applicable.  In the conduct of this assessment, and along with the parallel knowledge acquisition process, it became the strong opinion of the COAA team that the use of traditional simulation alone would not suffice to support COA analysis fully.  The dynamical nature of combat simulations as discussed above meant that a single run, or even a set of stochastic runs, would be insufficient to adequately predict the outcome of battle.  It was also seen that the determination of feasibility and acceptability was an important part of COA analysis, which nonetheless happens during COA development.  That meant that analysis capability was important during scenario generation.  Also, the “Action-Reaction-Counteraction” cycle was found to be a central part of COA analysis.  In this cycle the G3 Plans Officer plays out a portion of the COA during the action step, the COA is rolled back, the G2 Plans Officer replays the COA with likely enemy reactions during the reaction step, the COA is rolled back again, and the G3 Plans Officer replays the COA with Blue responses to likely enemy reactions.  Although rollback capability is part of many simulations, it is not a natural part of a simulation, which by its nature models combat through time.  Additional problems with traditional monolithic simulations are the time to develop data and scenarios, and staffing requirements for support and careful use of currently existing simulations.  No sufficiently valid simulation was found which was simple enough in preparation and simple enough to learn that no additional staff would be required to run it.  Thus the requirement was apparent that if simulation were to be used in the COAA system, a special-purpose one would need to be designed and implemented.  Because of the above considerations, a more declarative model of combat was preferred, where the user-planner developed a COA as in the manual process, and immediate feedback was provided about the feasibility and acceptability of the portions so far developed, and the risks incurred. No doubt there is a role for traditional simulation in COA analysis, but more as a common-sense check of the nominal trajectory desired for the COA, than as a check of feasibility, acceptability, risk and opportunity.Other (Literature Reviews). Several promising techniques were reviewed.  Exploratory modelling,, a method developed at RAND, and genetic algorithms, were two with some promise.  Exploratory modelling is structured sensitivity analysis, where critical parameters are set at their practical extremes in various combinations in order to bound the outcome space.  An objective function is explored within this outcome space to gain insights about implications to the selected measure of effectiveness.  Genetic algorithms offer promise in the automatic generation of courses of action.  However, since the COAA program focused initially on mixed-initiative planning, this area of research was not pursued. Pilot Test Overview.In October 1998, the COAA team took the Proof-of-Principle System to Ft. Leavenworth, Kansas to be used by officers of the U.S. Army’s School of Advanced Military Studies (SAMS).  SAMS is the Army’s school to train future division and corps planners.  Its student body is composed of an elite group of highly professional, knowledgable officers, and the faculty is the Army’s premier group of experts on the Military Decision-Making Process and the military art at tactical and operational levels.  The Pilot Test consisted of five iterations, one day each, where a pair of officers played the role of division G3 and G2 Plans Officers planning for a combat operation and provided feedback on the potential of the concepts illustrated by the PoP System.  Thus ten officers provided participated in the Pilot Test and provided feedback.  An operations order (OPORD) prepared by an actual corps staff during a prior training exercise was used to provide the context for the planning.  It was felt that in order to gather meaningful feedback from the participants, it was necessary to engage them intellectually in the process, so a real-world mission was critical, as was their personal involvement as users, not just observers, of the system.Each pair of planners was given a one-hour demonstration of the system, and then trained for about two hours using the PoP System on several training problems.  A mission analysis was prepared by COAA team subject-matter experts based on the Corps OPORD, and briefed to each pair of participants in lieu of their own mission analysis (since the PoP System does not support the mission analysis step of the MDMP).  Then for four hours, the pair of participants developed and analyzed a COA using the PoP System.  Since the system was not robust, and since the participants did not have extensive training in its use, a technical expert assisted each planner in using the system.  Comments during training and during the exercise were recorded.  Following the exercise, the participants were debriefed using a structured feedback survey.  Participants were asked to consider, as they used the PoP System, not so much the utility of the actual system, but the potential of the concepts illustrated if fully validated and robustly implemented.  Summary of Major Lessons Learned.An enormous amount of experience and a number of insights were gained during this initial phase of the COAA program.  In broad terms, the clear conclusion is that advanced technology has the potential to provide support for better, faster decision-making.   Particularly, COA analysis tools can be built which help military planners develop more resilient plans faster and with greater understanding.  Further conclusions are that advanced technology can provide the ability to monitor execution of combat operations for early identification of opportunity and risk, and can provide the commander with the ability to react rapidly to unexpected situations.Lessons came from two primary sources. During the Pilot Test, SAMS officers using the Proof-of-Principle System provided structured feedback about the potential utility of the concepts illustrated by the system. Secondly, the COAA team itself gained insight into the process and technologies during knowledge acquisition, literature review, design and development of the system, and conduct of the Pilot Test.The Pilot Test was highly successful in gaining informed feedback.  The SAMS officers were quite capable of thinking abstractly about the potential of the system even where limitations in the actual implementation hindered the process to some degree.  There was a strong consensus that the approach illustrated by the PoP System was a good one, and that the concepts presented would be useful to Army planners.  A great deal of useful feedback was gathered about how the system should evolve in the future, and what areas were important to focus on. Responses of the SAMS officers can be summarized by the following two comments: “This has great potential… This will focus the planning staff ... and save time…” and “I wish we had it today, not ten years from today.”  Specific Lessons Learned.Simulation and other advanced technology can be used to do COA analysis.  Clearly, the two modeling and simulation technologies explored, multi-trajectory simulation and constraint satisfaction, proved to have great potential for use in the Army’s MDMP.  Based on this experience, it is likely that future planning processes will also be supportable by advanced modeling and simulation technology.COAA tools must be tightly integrated with the planning process.  Standalone tools, or tools which require the user to frame specific queries about the problem, are not sufficient to speed the planning process.  It is a common result of technology programs in this arena that a system is developed, tested, and fielded, only to find that the intended users do not find the system useful because the overhead of time and expertise required to use it exceeds the gains the system might provide.  The COA development, analysis, and comparison steps will gain speed and quality by providing immediate feedback on the feasibility, acceptability, quality, and resilience of the COA.  It will gain speed when the volumes of data needed to form correct estimates of a COA are accessible by a system in real time.  It will gain quality when a system can provide such a responsive “what-if” tool that planners gain deeper understanding of their COAs than ever before.  It will gain resilience when ranges of outcomes can be generated and analyzed so as to provide the planner an understanding of how robust each COA is in the presence of uncertain input data and enemy responses.A closely linked COA Development and COA Analysis cycle can significantly improve the Military Decision-Making Process (MDMP).  Much analysis happens during the COA Development step, and development in the form of COA refinement happens during the COA Analysis step of the MDMP.  A closely linked cycle is a natural tendency when planning is fully supported by information technology.Mathematically based analysis tools provide the data necessary to link other systems.  For example, a COA development and analysis system such as the COAA PoP System could take inputs from the Army’s logistic system CSSCS (or its successors), and in turn could provide predictions of logistical requirements to CSSCS for the COA selected to execute. A common plan representation is critical, including both syntactic and semantic support.  The COAA program experienced great challenges in attempting to link systems as disparate as a hierarchical task-decomposition automated planner (AP) and a mixed-initiative decision support tool based on constraint satisfaction (PoP System).  These experiences showed how important it is that a common plan representation have shared semantic content in order that natural interfaces can be developed without ad hoc attempts to insure equivalence of appropriate concepts in either system.Tools are of use to experienced and inexperienced planners alike, but for different reasons. They can bring inexperienced planners’ capability to the experienced level. They can also help hurried or tired, though experienced, planners be consistent and complete in their planning while under stress.  There was some difference of opinion among SAMS officers about the advisability of providing such a system to inexperienced planners.  The fear was expressed by a few that very inexperienced planners might depend too heavily on a decision support system, treating it with too much confidence and avoiding the necessary hard work of gaining personal understanding of each COA.  However, an opposing opinion voiced by many of the SAMS officers was that such a tool would be ideal for training inexperienced staff officers or providing the knowledge they needed in operational circumstances.Taken to its logical conclusion, the integration of highly efficient analysis tools can fundamentally change the planning process.  Although the initial phase of the COAA program focused on support of the current planning paradigm, it was apparent at many points in the program that future planning will be substantially different in terms of the process and also perhaps in the roles of planners and commanders.  For example, the ultimate distillation of such work could result in a planning system so easy to use and so powerful that the commander himself and perhaps his operations officer could plan an operation by themselves.  Even a less-powerful system could be used by the commander to pre-screen COAs in order to develop well-reasoned planning guidance or commander’s intent to give to his planning staff.These tools apply to mission execution as well as mission planning.  Army After Next concepts envision continuous planning and execution of operations at all command echelons simultaneously.  In such an environment, it is clear that information technology must play a large role in sharing a common operating picture.  Planning which is done in parallel across all echelons must be supported by a common planning picture as well.  Tools such as those developed for the COAA PoP System which share information across echelons will provide the environment for this common planning picture.  Additionally, once a system such as the PoP System has a fully developed and analyzed COA, a next step is to find ways to monitor the ongoing operation and detect the degree to which it conforms to the nominal COA.  If an operation which begins to diverge substantially from the desired COA, or if preconditions to a decision point are met, an alarm would inform the current operations staff.  It is not an easy matter to measure an ongoing operation and compare it with an existing COA, but the technologies explored in the COAA program provide the starting point for this extension.Advanced technology will allow reduction of people who must participate in the planning process both horizontally and vertically.  It should be noted that many of the “peripheral” members of the planning staffs participate in planning as an additional duty from their assigned staff jobs.  For example, a military intelligence warrant officer might be an intelligence analyst in the Corps MI battalion, but goes to the plans cell location to assist in providing expert data about enemy capabiities.  If these data could be shared (at a collateral level of course) with the MI battalion and stored on-line in the COA analysis system, the warrant officer might not need to take time out of his primary duties to move to the plans cell in order to be available to provide his occasional input to the process.   Much of the input of staff officers in the planning process involves data lookup in reference books (or from memory).  This input could easily be provided by the system itself.  In the vertical dimension as well, Army After Next concepts envision reducing the number of command echelons.  This in itself implies a reduction vertically in the number of planners.  Of course, decision support needs to be powerful to replace this reduction, in that the existence of fewer echelons implies larger span of control, and more complicated COAs.In short, decision support tools have the potential to free up decision-makers from the mechanics of the process to focus on decision-making.  Faster, better decision-making will be the result of powerful decision support tools for COA analysis.  Open Research Issues.There are substantial issues remaining to be investigated.  Research might continue in several directions.  Simply extending and improving the existing Proof-of-Principle System could make important contributions to the Army’s planning process.  Simple addition of a full set of doctrinally correct military tasks for use by planners would add to the robustness of the system.  The Human Computer Interface requires refinement and revision in order to take present an interface that is easily learned and easily used.   Verification and validation of the existing and future software would be necessary before such a system would be eligible for use by real-world planners in real-world situations.  SAMS officers and COAA team members provided a plethora of suggestions for useful additional tools and extensions to the PoP System.  Most important to overall utility of the PoP System would be its integration into the whole MDMP so that it can take inputs from the Mission Analysis step and provide outputs to the OPORD generation step. Alternately, extending the concepts investigated in support of Army division planning to other echelons such as brigade or corps and JTF, or to other Services would be valuable.  The U.S. Marine Corps shares many planning doctrines with the Army, but there are differences.  Air Force planning often varies in kind, as matching target lists with delivery means is a different type of problem than analyzing ground courses of action.  And Navy planning as practiced today is more akin to the Army’s efforts to prepare for a deployment of forces by training, equipment repair, and equipment transportation.  Joint doctrine adds even more complexity, although planning tools for joint operations are as critical for future doctrine as Army planning tools.  A great deal of research would be needed to extend the current COAA concepts in these directions.There are also serious unanswered questions concerning core technologies.  Work could continue to investigate data visualization techniques, plan monitoring approaches, plan generation methods, componentization of key modules to provide better extensibility and portability, or other technologies.  Constraint satisfaction, simulation, and multi-trajectory modeling are all promising technologies which have not been fully explored.Conclusion.In summary, DARPA’s Course of Action Analysis Program has built an important base from which to investigate how advanced technology can best support COA analysis for military decision-making. The goal of COA analysis support should be to improve the planners’ and commander’s understanding of the COAs under consideration. The COAA program has found that decision support tools have the potential to free up decision-makers from the mechanics of the process to focus on decision-making.A deliberate knowledge acquisition and requirements definition phase produced a core understanding of the issues and potential approaches for decision support of the Military Decision-Making Process.  A Proof-of-Principle System was designed and implemented that provided a means of investigating a number of analysis concepts and technical approaches.  This system was used by Army SAMS officers during a weeklong Pilot Test to determine whether the concepts illustrated by the system had potential in the view of experienced planners.  During these other efforts, several parallel investigations researched the potential of other promising technologies.  There are substantial issues remaining to be investigated, but it is clear that powerful decision support tools for COA analysis will result in faster, better decision-making. US Army Field Manual. “FM 101-5, Staff Organization and Operations,” Concepts and Doctrine Directorate, US Army Command and General Staff College, Ft. Leavenworth, KS, 31 May 1997. Schow, G., Alexander, R., Calder, R., Turner, G., Whitakker, G., “DARPA Course-of-Action Analysis Program Final Report”, to be published January 1999. Chamberlain, F. L., Calder, R. B. "STOW Army Ground Command Forces: Technical Approach," Proceedings of the Spring 1998 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, March 9-13, 1998. Elsaessar, Chris, Adversarial Planner Briefing” to the Army Model & Simulation Office (AMSO) Standards Category Coordinator for Battlefield Algorithms - Command Decision Modeling, Mar 1997, found at URL:  HYPERLINK http://www-leav.army.mil/nsc/warsim/reason/adplan/index.htm http://www-leav.army.mil/nsc/warsim/reason/adplan/index.htm Palmore, Julian I., “Dynamical Instability in Combat Models: Computer Arithmetic and Mathematical Models of Attrition and Reinforcement”, Military Operations Research Journal, V2, N1, Spring 1996. Joseph L. McCauley, “Complexity, Simulations, and Emergent Law”, Phalanx, Military Operations Research Society, December 1996. Gilmer, John B., Jr., Sullivan, Frederick J., and Al-Hassan, Sadeq, "Testing of Multitrajectory Techniques for Military Simulation", presented in Working Group 33, Modeling, Simulation, and Wargaming, of the 64th Military Operations Research Society Symposium, June 1996. “Simulation Tradeoff Analysis”, N61339-97-6-0046 CDRL No: A004, prepared by Science Applications International Corporation for the U.S. Department of Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, 25 June 1997. Banks, Steve, “Exploratory Modeling For Policy Analysis”, RAND, Santa Monica CA, reprinted in Operations Research, Vol. 41, No. 3, May-June 1993, pp. 435-449. Lembert, Robert, “Exploratory Modeling: Making Good Choices Without Good Predictions”, Draft Annotated Briefing AB-112-S&T, RAND, September 1996.