Simulation Based Acquisition,Key ConceptsRobin FrostUSD (A&T) DTSE&E/SEPentagon, Rm. 3D1075Washington, DC 20301-3000frostrl@acq.osd.milDave ThomenScience Applications International Corporation8301 Greensboro Drive, Suite 209McLean, VA 22102thomend@mail.etas.comKEYWORDSSimulation Based Acquisition; SBA, Collaborative Environments, Distributed Product Description, DPDABSTRACT:  Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) is a joint Industry and Department of Defense initiative to define an acquisition process that employs a robust, collaborative use of simulation technology to integrate the process across acquisition phases and programs.  The intent of the initiative is to reduce the time, resources and risk associated with acquisition, enable integrated product and process development and improve the quality of the product. Two key concepts of SBA are Collaborative Environments and Distributed Product Descriptions.  This paper, although providing a brief background of the SBA Initiative, concentrates on the two key concepts, and the proposed steps that would lead to their implementation in the way defense weapon systems are acquired in the future.  Associated with the implementation of SBA will be the need for standards associated with the concepts discussed.1.	IntroductionThis past year a joint task force to the Acquisition Council of the Department of Defense (DoD) Executive Council for Modeling and Simulation (EXCIMS) was established to begin the process of developing a road map on how to implement Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA) within the DoD.  Members of the Joint SBA Task Force were drawn from the Services and other DoD agencies.  Over a six-month period, they prepared a document - A Road Map for Simulation Based Acquisition [Ref. 1] – that begins to describe how DoD can go from the current vision for SBA and into making it a reality.  The Road Map examines the current way DoD acquires defense systems, and presents the future architecture envisioned under SBA.  In developing this future architecture, several concepts fundamental to SBA emerged.  Two of these, the concept of collaborative environments and the concept of distributed product descriptions, are believed by the task force to be key to SBA implementation.  2.	What Is SBA?2.1	BackgroundTo understand the requirement for SBA, we need only to look at how we conduct acquisition today.  On an average, weapon systems take 8 to 10 years to design and 15 to 20 years to field.  The current environment is characterized by the fact that the full potential of integrated product and process development (IPPD) and the integrated product teams (IPTs) are not realized, solution decisions are made too early, the majority of system costs are locked in by milestone II of a program’s life, and our operation and support costs continue to dominate the total life cycle costs.  In many cases, M&S continues to be characterized by highly specialized, one-time use models with unique data requirements, and limited reusability [Figure 1].2.2	VisionThe SBA vision is “an acquisition process in which DoD and Industry are enabled by robust, collaborative use of simulation technology that is integrated across acquisition phases and programs.”   The goals of SBA are to substantially reduce the time, resources, and risk associated with the entire acquisition process, to increase the quality, military worth and supportability of fielded systems while reducing total ownership costs throughout the total life cycle, and to enable IPPD across the entire acquisition life cycle [Figure 2].Figure 12.3	Evidence for Confidence in SBAThe confidence the DoD leadership has placed in SBA is based on strong and compelling evidence found in recent acquisition programs.  In the Study on the Effectiveness of Modeling and Simulation in the Weapon System Acquisition Process, instances are cited that illustrate the potential benefits of SBA [Ref. 2].  Examples include how M&S tools have permitted the Navy to reduce the standard parts list from 95,000 for the Seawolf class submarine to about 16,000 for the NSSN.  The Army Tank and Automotive Research Development and Engineering Center was able to design a new, low silhouette tank prototype using 14 engineers for 16 months, whereas it previously took 55 engineers 36 months.  Using CAD on the Air Force B-2 permitted them to achieve first-time correct tube bending of expensive titanium electronic cable conduits.The evidence from programs such as these, combined with examples from industry (e.g., the automotive and aircraft manufacturers) and the research initiatives of DARPA and other agencies (e.g., Simulation Based Design) illustrates the potential contribution of a comprehensive, integrated simulation-based approach to defense acquisition.  SBA entails deliberate and coordinated use of M&S across the many acquisition domains, over all phases of a program’s life cycle.  It further promotes the reuse of M&S between programs.Figure 23.	Approach3.1	Top-Down and Bottoms-UpThe task force approached their assignment from multiple directions, taking both a top-down and a bottom-up approach.  Employing Quality Functional Deployment (QFD) methodology, they sought to identify a strategy to task, top-down understanding of SBA.  The product of this effort led to 24 implementation recommendations that are traceable directly back to the underlying strategy and concepts associated with SBA.At the same time, the team attempted a bottom-up effort in an attempt to define the SBA architectural components [Figure 3]. Envisioned is an Operational Architecture, defining such elements as the organizations, activities, and processes involved; a System Architecture including platforms, components and data flow; and finally, the standards, rules and conventions are defined in a Technical Architecture. Figure 33.2  Emerging ConceptsIn the process of developing the Road Map, two key concepts associated with SBA emerged. Collaborative EnvironmentDistributed Product DescriptionsThese and the relationship between them are depicted below in Figure 4: Figure 44.    Collaborative Environments4.1   Reuse and InteroperabilitySBA seeks to capitalize on the economies inherent under the principles of reuse and interoperability.  If tools or data or environments can be reused at different stages of the acquisition process, the program reaps the benefits of not having to develop new tools, new data, or new environments for that specific instance.  Similarly, if the information obtained in one step is readily available to other steps in the process, the program can avoid the costs of recreating or converting the information.  The idea of collaborative environments is to create groupings of tools, people, and processes to foster reuse and interoperability.  The intent is to be able to work across functional areas, across acquisition phases, and across programs.   It provides the acquisition community a “reusable framework of tools, resources, and (potentially) IPTs within the bounds of a given application domain.” [Ref 1]There are many different types of collaborative environments that could be built. Collaborative environments could be created within industry at the sub-system level, focusing on commonality between sub-systems of a system.  Collaborative environments could be built at the traditional product level, seeking reuse and interoperability within the context of a common product.  Others propose building collaborative environments at the mission level, (e.g., strike warfare,  integrated air defense) leveraging the commonality that exists between programs of the same mission area.  The Joint SBA Task Force believes the greatest benefits in the near term exist with collaborative environments at the product and mission levels.  4.2  The ChallengeJust as there are many different levels at which to create collaborative environments, there are also many different ways one could to go about building these environments.  The acquisition community is faced with a diverse selection of M&S tools.  They range from costing models, to computer aided design/computer aided engineering (CAD/CAE) models, virtual factories, enterprise management decision support tools, theater conflict simulations, stimulators and training simulators.   The challenge is how to integrate these into a system of models and simulations that support the DoD acquisition process. There are many issues associated with how to construct these collaborative environments that must yet be resolved.  They go beyond the protocols and schema to be employed.  There are issues of identifying and defining the relationships between the components of the architecture and capturing the processes within which they must interact.  Operational, system and technical architecture must be established for the individual collaborative environments.  Through the experience gained from a series of SBA experiments, to be conducted over the next few years, the answers to many of these issues will be obtained. The Joint SBA Task Force proposes that a collaborative environment reference system architecture for all DoD be developed from such research and experience.  The intent is to “highlight the required ‘piece-parts’ and opportunities for interface standards associated with a collaborative environment.” [Ref 1]  Without such an architecture, cross-environment sharing may be adversely affected. 4.3  Can We Learn from Others? The M&S community may not have to wait for the results of the SBA experiments to begin work on reference system architectures.  It may be possible to leverage the work and experience of the software community over the past decade, during which they were faced with a similar situation.  Over the years, a number of computer aided software engineering (CASE) tools had been developed to support the different parts of the software development process.  With advances in computer technology, and the increased size and complexity of the software products, a large and diverse set of CASE tools eventually emerged.  To support the complete software development life cycle, the software community sought to bring together collections of these tools into CASE environments. One lesson they discovered is the difference between an environment and an amalgamation.  To obtain a true environment of CASE tools, there must be  “glue”; “something that is provided in the environment that facilitates interactions of those tools.” [Ref.  3]The parallel for SBA may be that the elements brought together to create a collaborative environment must be more than a collection of many parts, but must itself become an integrated whole.  We may draw on an analogy from chemistry.  In a mixture, elements are brought together, but they do not lose their individual properties.  However, in a compound (e.g. salt), a new substance is created with properties that can be quite different from the original elements.  M&S collaborative environments may need to be like compounds.Figure 55.    Distributed Product DescriptionsFor the system and technical architectures, the task force proposed a hierarchy of layers providing greater definition of the elements necessary to SBA [Figure 5].  This includes the introduction of a component that is similar to, but goes beyond, the current Smart Product Model.  It combines data and other characteristics associated with a given product together with the inherent inter-relationships of the product with its environment. This component is being called a Distributed Product Description (DPD).As described in the Road Map, the DPD is “a distributed collection of product-centric information that is interconnected via web technology into what appears (to the user) to be a single, logically unified product representation.” [Ref 1]  As a product is developed during its initial stages, the DPD associated with the product matures in parallel.  The acquisition process is acquiring both the product and the associated  representations of  the product at the same time.  It is these product representations within the DPD that will enable IPPD and the IPTs.  When provided the appropriate automated support tools and schema, the IPT members will have access to and work with the same information resident in the DPD.  This will mean the M&S community will need to develop a set of appropriate Data Interchange Formats (DIFs) that will support the interchange and flow of product information.6.	Summary SBA is still only a concept.  It is a strategy for how DoD, as an enterprise, can conduct the future business of acquiring defense systems.  It is a strategy that exploits recent advances in M&S technologies to change traditional paradigms and traverse current barriers in defense acquisition.  SBA is using M&S to capture and share the state of product knowledge between functions, phases and programs.  Much research remains to be done.  One of the leading areas is in the development of appropriate reference architecture and standards that will permit the creation of collaborative environments and DPDs.  The acquisition community will need to work closely with the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization in this effort.7.	References[1]	Acquisition Council draft, A Road Map for Simulation Based Acquisition, 4 December 1998[2]	DTSE&E study: “Study on the Effectiveness of Modeling and Simulation in the Weapon System Acquisition Process”, October 1996[3]	Brown, Alan, et. al., Principals of CASE Tool Integration, Software Engineering Institute, Oxford University Press, 1994.Author BiographiesROBIN FROST is a Systems Engineer in the Systems Engineering Directorate of Office of the USD (A&T).  Ms Frost holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Systems Engineering from the University of Virginia.  She has worked as an engineer and an engineering supervisor for IBM and the US Navy, and has served in the Office of the Secretary of Defense since 1995.  She oversees OSD policies on M&S in Acquisition, Chairs the Acquisition Functional Working Group under the Acquisition Council and heads the Industry Government team researching SBA.DAVE THOMEN, a Senior Analyst with SAIC, provides technical support to USD (A&T) DTSE&E on M&S in Acquisition.  He holds a Master of Science degree in Operations Research from the Naval Postgraduate School.  He supported the development of the Simulation, Test and Evaluation Process (STEP) Guidelines and has participated on the Government Industry Team researching SBA. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  