HLA Object Model Data Dictionary Population and UseRandy Robertson, Margie Dey, and Roy ScrudderApplied Research LaboratoriesThe University of TexasP.O. Box 8029Austin, Texas 78713-8029512-835-3647, -3497and –3857randyr@arlut.utexas.edu, margied@arlut.utexas.edu, scrudder@arlut.utexas.eduKeywords: HLA, OMDD, FEDEP, Data Standards				ABSTRACT: A key activity in the development of a High Level Architecture (HLA) federation or simulation is the documentation of the respective Federation Object Model (FOM) or Simulation Object Model (SOM). A substantial reduction in time and resources can be obtained by using common names, definitions, and data representations in FOMs and SOMs. To bring these benefits to the HLA community, the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) provides an Object Model Data Dictionary (OMDD). The OMDD provides standards-based common semantics and syntax for object and interaction classes, attributes, parameters, complex data types, and enumerated data types. Several recent federation developments have demonstrated the applicability of existing OMDD contents and also fostered the development of new OMDD contents. This paper discusses the current structure of the OMDD, tools to support OMDD use, and how users can directly employ OMDD contents in FOM and SOM development. The HLA OMDD has undergone significant population growth since the initial contents were provided in March 1998. The process used for OMDD population, using existing FOMs and SOMs, is described, and means are identified by which the HLA community can contribute to this ongoing population effort. The development of the OMDD is an ongoing effort of DMSO and the Department of Defense (DoD) Architecture Management Group.1. BackgroundThe HLA provides a flexible infrastructure for incorporating federates (models, simulations, and live systems) into interoperating federations. A key component of the HLA is the use of object models to state data exchanges. The intrinsic data publications and subscription capabilities of a single federate are stated in a simulation object model (SOM). A Federation Object Model (FOM) states the data exchange agreement among the federates in a federation. The HLA provides the Object Model Template (OMT) [1] as a documentation standard for FOMs and SOMs. As an architecture, HLA does not mandate the contents of the FOMs and SOMs, just their form in the OMT. However, many long-term and short-term benefits can be derived from using common semantics and syntax in the construction of HLA object models. Early prototype federation experiences led to the development of the Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) [2]. The FEDEP identifies the activities necessary to develop and execute an HLA federation. The FEDEP identifies an Object Model Data Dictionary (OMDD) as a critical resource to support such development. For this reason, the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office sponsored the development and population of an OMDD.2. Benefits of OMDD UsageThe short-term benefits of OMDD use come from time savings in FOM and SOM creation. By using predefined components from the OMDD, the FOM or SOM developer does not have to spend time researching or typing critical FOM and SOM components. This is most pronounced when using OMDD enumerated data types. For example, the OMDD contains enumerated data types for aircraft and ship types that contain over 1,000 entries each. Researching and typing these enumerations as part of each FOM and SOM development would take days, if not weeks. The result is the ability to quickly develop object models by "plugging together" OMDD components. An early OMDD experiment reported the construction of an entire FOM from OMDD components with no typing of new information. [3]The longer term benefits of OMDD usage come from increased clarity, understandability, and reusability of FOMs and SOMs. By using OMDD components, which are based on authoritative data sources, SOM and FOM developers have access to a commonly understood set of terms and data types. It is much easier for users of a FOM or SOM to identify the concepts they are searching for in a federate or federation when the object model contents are based on commonly understood terms instead of a local lexicon or jargon. For DoD users, the benefits are amplified when integrating a federation that uses real-world systems such as command and control systems. One of the authoritative data sources used in OMDD development is the same set of data standards used for real-world systems development.One of the most dramatic benefits from the use of common terminology and data types from the OMDD comes during federation integration. When the federates have used common OMDD terminology and data types in their SOMs, the development of the FOM for the federation becomes a much simpler process. Because of the common terminology in the SOMs, it is easy to identify where federates are exchanging the same semantically and syntactically equivalent data. For this reason, it is most critical that OMDD contents be used early in the development of SOMs, as part of the original federate specification and design or as part of the design of the SOM for existing federates.      3. Structure of the OMDDThe HLA OMDD is a collection of metadata (data about data) for five types of components: object classes, interaction classes, attributes/parameters, complex data types, and enumerated data types. For each of the components, reference sources are identified. These include identification of authoritative data sources such as joint publications and international standards as well as mappings to the source object models and Defense Data Dictionary System (DDDS) elements. Each of the components in the OMDD is assigned a unique name within the component category. Object classes, interaction classes, and attributes/parameters also have definitions, notes and associated terms for each component. Each associated term may be a synonym, or term describing a more general or more specific concept. For example, the OMDD object class "vessel" has associated terms of "craft" (equivalent), and "submarine" (more specific).The concepts of attributes and parameters are not separated into distinct component types in the OMDD. Both attributes and parameters are the same type of component — a property of a class. The only distinction between an attribute and a parameter is whether it is a property of an object class or an interaction class. An attribute/parameter from the OMDD (e.g., "velocity") could be used as either an attribute or a parameter when it is used in FOMs and SOMs. For each attribute/parameter in the OMDD, one or more representations are provided. Each representation provides a unit of measure (if appropriate) and data type. The data types may be any of the base data types from the OMT, or one of the enumerated or complex data types contained in the OMDD. For complex data types, the OMDD specifies a list of fields and the corresponding attribute/parameter to describe the values for each field. OMDD enumerated data types provide a representation (integer value), enumerator (short text values), notes, and synonyms for each possible value of the data type.Each component of the OMDD is labeled with a status indicator. This lets a user of the OMDD component know the level of validation that a component has undergone. The following scheme is used for labeling OMDD components:Developmental — Early stage of development. No review outside the OMDD development team.Candidate — OMDD component has been validated by a representative from the source Object Model’s technical agent to be an accurate representation of the concept from the original Object Model.Approved — OMDD component meets the candidate criteria and has been matched or mapped to an approved DoD data standard.The OMDD does not specify an object model structure at the detailed level of a FOM or SOM, but rather specifies the components from which a FOM or SOM may be constructed. Object and interaction class hierarchies are not addressed in the OMDD. These decisions are left up to the FOM and SOM developers using OMDD components, allowing them the flexibility to construct class hierarchies that support the publication and subscription patterns of the federate or federation. Experience has shown that deep class hierarchies in SOMs provide flexibility in integrating a federate in many potential federations, while shallow class hierarchies are more appropriate for federations' FOMs. [2] For these same reasons, the assignment of attributes/parameters to the appropriate level in object and interaction class hierarchies are left up to the user of OMDD components when constructing FOMs and SOMs.4. Object Modeling Tools Under DMSO sponsorship, a robust set of tools has been developed to support the FEDEP, from federation design and development through integration and testing, federation execution, and the analysis of results. Commercial tools have also entered the market to support key phases of the FEDEP. The DMSO-sponsored developments are based on a tool architecture that uses the specification of Data Interchange Formats (DIFs) to integrate the tools [4]. Three types of tools from the overall architecture, which support the object modeling phase of the FEDEP, are shown in Figure 1. The Object Model Data Dictionary System (OMDDS) is the key component in the tool suite that provides development, management, and access to OMDD information. The OMDDS provides access to data dictionary elements via downloads of the entire OMDD contents or through user selection of OMDD components via search and browse mechanisms. Registered OMDDS users are provided persistent storage areas to manage their extracts from the OMDD, so that items of interest can be identified and collected over time and then exported for use on FOM and SOM editing. The OMDDS also allows viewing of the full set of metadata describing OMDD elements. This includes mappings to the DDDS elements and the source FOMs and SOMs used in the creation of the OMDD element.The other tools are the Object Model Library (OML), which provides a library of reusable FOMs and SOMs, and the Object Model Development Tool, which is used to construct and edit FOMs and SOMs. Both DMSO-sponsored and commercial OMDTs are available. The OMDDS and OML represent Web-accessible repositories, which DMSO will support on a long-term basis to foster object model reuse and ease of object model development and integration. The OML is also the repository of FOMs and SOMs that have been used in the creation of OMDD elements. The OMDD content development process will be described later. All of these tools are integrated through an OMT DIF, which supports the transfer of complete object models, and an OMDD DIF, which supports the use of data dictionary elements. Information about OMDTs can be obtained via the Tools Bulletin Board at the HLA Home Page ( HYPERLINK http://hla.dmso.mil http://hla.dmso.mil). The OML and OMDDS can be accessed via the Federation Development Process and Tools page at the same Web site.5. Identifying OMDD Components to ReuseAs mentioned above, users can export the entire contents of the OMDD. The result is an OMDD DIF file that the user then associates with the OMDT. Specifics on this process vary among the OMDT suppliers, but the result is the same. The OMDD components are then available as selectable items for incorporation in a FOM or SOM via the OMDT. However, exporting the entire OMDD contents may present the OMDT user with a daunting task of weeding through the list of available choices to build the FOM or SOM.The recommended approach is to select just those items of interest using the OMDDS interface, and then export the identified OMDD components in an OMDD DIF file. The process for using the components in the OMDT is the same, but the user only has those items of interest as choices. Of course, the user can also enter his or her own object model components in the FOM or SOM if suitable OMDD contents are not identified.To identify OMDD components of interest, users have two choices—either browsing or searching via the OMDDS. To browse, the user selects the type of component (e.g., object class) and then the point in the alphabet to start browsing. An even better approach is to use the OMDDS search capabilities. The user 1) selects the types of components to search (multiples are allowed), 2) selects whether to search just on names and associated terms, or to include definitions and notes, and 3) specifies a search string. For example, by using the string “aircraft” and selecting to search using the names, associated terms, definitions, and notes for all the OMDD component types, the user can view a variety of object model components that might be useful in building a portion of an object model. From this list of results, the user can select items to store in the export area. As mentioned previously, this export area is persistent, so new items are added to items already in that user's export area. Users also have the option of deleting items from their individual export areas. Once a suitable list of OMDD items is built up, the user can then export them in an OMDD DIF file for use in the OMDT. 6. Incorporating OMDD Contents into an Object Model Once a set of OMDD components is associated with an OMDT, the user can proceed to object model construction or modification. Using object and interaction classes exported from the OMDD, the user can construct class hierarchies appropriate to the SOM or FOM. Attributes/parameters from the OMDD can be associated with the classes, using the data types also extracted from the OMDD. Additional classes, attributes, parameters, and data types can be added as needed.The OMDD contents can be incorporated directly into an object model or used with modifications. Because they were created for maximum reusability, some OMDD components are designed to represent broader or more descriptive concepts then may appear in an object model. These components can be used “as is” or used as a part of an object model component name if a more specific meaning is desired. For example, an object modeler can use the OMDD attribute/parameter “Speed” to construct “Aircraft_Speed.”  The modeler can then modify the OMDD definition “Scalar representing the magnitude of the velocity of an object” to “Scalar representing the magnitude of the velocity of a device designed to be capable of atmospheric flight” (a combination with the definition of the OMDD object class "Aircraft").7. Population of the OMDDAll of the OMDD contents have a basis in a FOM or SOM currently in use in the HLA community. The process of creating an OMDD component begins with the analysis of an existing FOM or SOM. Research is then conducted to determine if authoritative names, definitions, and data representations already exist for the concept described in the FOM or SOM. The primary authoritative sources used for OMDD content creation have been the DDDS and the “Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms,” JCS Pub 1-02. The IEEE Standard Dictionary of Electrical and Electronics Terms, 6th Edition, and IEEE Standard 1278.1-1995 “Standard for Distributed Interactive Simulation — Application Protocols,” and Merriam Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, 10th Edition, were also used as references. The above sources and Roget’s Thesaurus were used to develop notes and associated terms. Figure 2 depicts this process of creating OMDD components from elements of FOMs and SOMs and using the authoritative sources.For the initial development of the OMDD, FOMs from three federations were chosen [5]: Real-time Platform Reference (RPR) FOM, Engineering Federation FOM, and Joint Training Confederation FOM, including the associated Aggregate Level Simulation Protocol (ALSP) Operational Specification (OPSPEC) and Interface Control Documents (ICDs). Further population has proceeded based on contents from the Joint Theater Level Simulation (JTLS) - Global Command and Control System (GCCS) - NATO Consultation, Command and Control Agency (NC3A) FOM,Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) 97 FOM, and Eagle SOM.Population of the OMDD will continue based on additional FOMs and SOMs. Contents of FOMs and SOMs residing on the OML will be evaluated for suitability as OMDD content. Emphasis is on SOMs that have passed HLA compliance testing. Data analysts examine object models to identify components that may be suitable for inclusion in the OMDD.  The first step is to analyze the components for mappings to existing OMDD contents. If a mapping to an existing OMDD component is not defined, the component becomes a candidate for development. The data analysts will determine where authoritative representations already exist and can be reused. 8. OMDD Usage to Date The OMDD has been available to the user community since March 1998. In its first nine months of usage (at the time the paper was written), users had made increasing and significant use of the OMDDS Web site. During this period, over 2,500 user visits to the Web site have occurred, filling over 35,000 information requests. Over 100 users have set up individual storage areas for exporting OMDD contents.Phase one of an ongoing effort to migrate the JTLS and its associated federates, GCCS, NATO command and control systems, and commercial viewers to the HLA has produced a significant use case for the OMDD. The FOM components for this federation mapped to three object classes, one interaction class, 51 attributes/parameters, and four enumerated data types which already existed in the OMDD. As a result of an analysis of the JTLS-GCCS-NC3A FOM, 32 new object classes, 14 new interaction classes, 22 new attributes/parameters, nine new complex data types, and two new enumerated data types were established in the OMDD. This pattern of finding some reusable OMDD components for any given FOM or SOM development, while identifying new ones needed on the OMDD, is expected to continue in the near future. But as the population of the OMDD increases over time, the proportion of object model components that are already represented in the OMDD will continue to grow.9. ConclusionsThe OMDD provides a valuable resource to the HLA user community, which offers significant near-term and long-term savings.  The result of effective OMDD use will be SOMs that are easier to integrate and FOMs that are more understandable and reusable.Users are the key to the success of the OMDD. They are encouraged to use the OMDD and ensure that the terms in the FOM or SOM under development or in use are represented in the OMDD. The best way to do this is to check the subject object model into the OML and notify the OMDD team through the OMDDS web site of the recommended additions to the OMDD.10. References[1]	Defense Modeling and Simulation Office: "HLA Object Model Template, Version 1.3," 5 February 1998.[2]	Defense Modeling and Simulation Office, "HLA Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) Model, Version 1.0," 21 August 1996.[3]	Bouwens, C., Miller, R., Harkrider, S., Lutz, R., and Scrudder, R.: "Object Model Development: Tools and Techniques," Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 9-13 March 1998.[4]	Scrudder, R., Lutz, R., and Dahmann J.: "Automation of the HLA Federation Development and Execution Process," Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 14-18  September 1998.[5]	Hammond, J., Dey, M., Scrudder, R., and Merkin, F.: "Populating the HLA Object Model Data Dictionary—A Bottom-Up Approach," Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 9-13 March 1998.Author BiographiesRANDY ROBERTSON is an OMDD analyst and project manager with ARL:UT. He has over 20 years of Army Aviation and Military Operations Research and Systems Analysis experience. He has worked with the Conceptual Modeling of the Mission Space and the Air Intelligence Agency Y2K working groups. Most recently he has worked directly with HLA programs in the use of OMDD contents and the development of new OMDD contents.MARGIE DEY is a Senior Systems Analyst with ARL:UT. She has broad experience with both legacy and client/server information management applications and databases. She is currently the lead for OMDD content development.ROY SCRUDDER is program manager for modeling and simulation information management activities at ARL:UT. He is a member of the HLA Core Technical Support Team. Mr. Scrudder is currently providing data engineering support to the HLA community, including management of the HLA OML and OMDD efforts. EMBED Word.Picture.8   EMBED Word.Document.8 \s 