160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment (Airborne) Synthetic Theater of War-Architecture (STOW-A):A Mission Planning Exercise SimulationAleysha PaschalThomas LaschU.S. Army STRICOM12350 Research ParkwayOrlando, FL  32826407-384-xxxx, 407-384-3679Aleysha_Paschal@stricom.army.mil, Thomas_Lasch@stricom.army.mil Keywords:. ABSTRACT: This paper provides a discussion on the design and execution of 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment (Airborne) (SOAR(A)) Synthetic Theater of War-Architecture (STOW-A) training exercise executed in October 1998.  The 160th SOAR(A) STOW-A training exercise provided the 160th SOAR(A) Aviators and the 75th Rangers mission planning and execution in a synthetic environment.  The STOW-A effort created an infrastructure that combined existing simulation and simulators to support this mission planning exercise.  The 160th SOAR(A) STOW-A training exercise combined the MH-60L and MH-47E Combat Mission Simulator (CMS) with Interactive Tactical Environment Management System (ITEMS), Janus/Protocol Data Unit (PDU) Adapter Software System (PASS) & SoundStorm, and Advanced Simulation Technology Incorporated (ASTi) for radio support on a Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) Network with long haul support from the AC-130U Aircrew/Maintenance Training Device (ATD) in Hurlbert, FL and live helicopter radios to provide exercise realism.  Exercise support was also provided by TOPscene for mission preview.  Simulation Analyzer (Simulyzer) was used for data logging with Effectiveness of Naval Electronic Warfare Systems (ENEWS) providing a plan view display.  The resulting synthetic environment replicated synthetically how the training exercise would be conducted in reality. 1.0 Introduction.  For a night fight mission, the 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment –Airborne (SOAR(A)) provides the Army with the ability to effectively conduct reconnaissance missions while in the protection of night cover.  The 160th SOAR(A) is a premier night fighting force and is the Army's only Special Operations aviation force.  The 160th SOAR(A) continuously improves its special night fight techniques to enhance its night mission capabilities, hence its motto: “Night Stalkers Don't Quit”.  To keep this fighting force ready, training is always at the forefront for the 160th SOAR(A).  To support their training needs, the 160th SOAR(A) relies on live engagements as well as simulation to provide realistic combat situations.  The 160th SOAR(A) simulation training is provided by the Simulation and Mission Rehearsal Facility that was opened in December 1993.  This facilities provides Special Operations aircrews a dedicated facility to develop their mission planning and execution skills through simulation.  It houses the 160th SOAR(A) simulation assets that originally consisted of two stand alone Combat Mission Simulators (CMS), a MH-60L and a MH-47E CMS.2.0 AC-130U Aircrew/Maintenance Training Device (ATD) Testbed (TB) Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) Integration.  From January - June 1998, as part of the AC-130U ATD TB HLA compliancy effort, a long haul capability to Fort Campbell, KY was established from Hulburt Field, FL and a DIS interface with radio communications for the MH-60L and MH-47E CMS was developed.  This provided the 160th SOAR(A) simulation facilities with a DIS Unit Interface (DUI), that allowed the CMS to interface with DIS Protocol Data Units (PDU), a shared Evans and Sutherland (E&S) 4000 for visual for the CMSs and other supporting simulation assets.  These simulation assets include: ModSAF for semi-automatic augmenting forces, Simulation Analyzer (Simulyzer) for exercise management, T1 to the AC-130U ATD TB at Hurlburt Field, FL for long haul capability, and DIS radio communications, Advanced Simulation Technology Incorporated (ASTi) for realistic radio communication.   With this DIS capability of the CMSs, the 160th SOAR(A) was now ready to enter into the interactive world of simulation.3.0  STOW-A EXERCISE SUPPORT.  With the DIS CMSs, the Synthetic Theater of War-Architecture (STOW-A) program then began planning and integrating the technical support of the simulation support of the 160th SOAR(A)upcoming training event.   The STOW-A program built on the 160th SOAR(A) existing simulation components and added Interactive Tactical Environment Management System (ITEMS) to provide the augmenting air computer generated forces, Janus 6.3 interfaced to DIS with Protocol Data Unit (PDU) Adapter Software System (PASS) and Sound Storm support for 75th Ranger deployment activity, and a simulated radio to live radio connection for C2 interaction.  A DIS compliant TOPscene was also developed for pre-exercise fly through.  With this combination of simulations, the 160th SOAR(A) and 75th Ranger Regiment deployment training exercises could be conducted through simulation. This now allowed the 160th SOAR(A) along with its 75th Ranger Regiment component to conduct a multi-echelon training exercise through a mix of simulation and live components.  3.1  Mission Execution.  This arrangement of simulation assets was used to conduct a 160th SOAR(A) and 75th Ranger training exercise in October 1998.  The training mission focused on the Shugart-Gordon Military Operations in Urban Terrain (MOUT) site at Fort Polk, LA and allowed the 160th SOAR(A) and 75th Ranger training audience to plan and conduct a mission that centered on retrieving an encryption device for this region.  While the planning phase of the exercise followed actual planning procedures, to execute this training mission, the 160th SOAR(A) and 75th Rangers took advantage of technological advances in simulation to provide the robust training environment to actually execute the mission.  This allowed the trainees to experience close to combat experiences, allow them to focus on the mission without the fear of injury or loss of life.  In simulation, the trainee can be subjected to near misses to death while actually surviving for another chance. To fly the training mission, the 160th SOAR (A) training audience used the MH-60L Combat Mission Simulator as the lead MH-60L helicopter for the rescue flight.  ITEMS, a computer generated force rounded out air support and even allowed for man-in-the-loop interactive role player through a Blue/Red Trainer (BRT) device.  An AC-130U ATD Simulator located at Hurlbert Fields provided early threat elimination for the mission and Janus, a constructive trainer provided the 75th Ranger ground play when the 75th Rangers were deployed from the helicopters.  A live Command & Control (C2) helicopter flew in the air over Fort Campbell, and kept in radio communication with the mission with a simulation to live radio link with the simulated ASTi voice traffic.3.2  SIMULATION COMPONENTS.  While the focus of mission was for training success, the underlying technical simulation was responsible for its successful execution.  The foundation of the simulations relied on using DIS PDU.  Each simulation communicated with the other on this common framework.  DIS allowed the linking of various types of simulations at multiple locations to create a common virtual “world” for the simulation of highly interactive activities.  3.2.1 Lead Helicopter.  MH-60L/47 CMS interfaced with the DIS world through the DIU, allowing these simulators to interact with other DIS simulations/simulators.  The CMS is a full-motion visual training devices.  They fully replicate their respective aircraft and allow for realistic training. 3.2.2  Additional Helicopters.  ITEMS was used to round out the air support for the training exercise and is a complete simulation package that provides interactive players and supports command and control authority structures. ITEMS is a powerful and sophisticated Computer Generated Forces (CGF) system that easily generates multi-sided conflicts and modern day warfare scenarios. The fundamental object within ITEMS is the entity. An entity is an intelligent air, ground or sea platform that is used as a building block to configure scenarios.  Expertise has been gained through participation in such things as air-to-air refueling, formation flying, fixed wing air-to-air combat, wingman, radar modeling as well as aeroballistic modeling of a range of bullet, rocket and missile studies to match real world data. In addition, participation in DIS has provided an opportunity to broaden its involvement in simulation and is an ongoing activity.3.2.3 Air Fire Support.  AC-130U ATD simulator was used to clear the area prior to the 75th Ranger deployment.  This simulator includes a fire control system allowing simulated weapons delivery, sensor/weapons alignment, and diagnostic maintenance operations.  The visual, radar, sensor, and electromagnetic combat environment databases are correlated to each other for real-time display.  The real-time display is a high-resolution perspective scene generator, including day/night, radar, All Light Level Television (ALLTV), and Infrared Detection Set (IDS) capabilities.  The visual image generation system will display multiple computer-generated moving models in each visual or sensor scene.  Databases for simulated strike operations against a wide variety of targets including fixed cultural features, and fixed or moving models in the applicable visual, electromagnetic, sensor, and radar presentation.  A computer-generated simulation of all AC-130U gunfire modes is provided to allow full interaction between supported crew positions.  These modes include automatic trainable, automatic fixed, semiautomatic fixed, and manual override.  Dual fire control computer capability will be simulated to the same level of fidelity and performance as the aircraft.  Malfunction capabilities needed for mission aircrew qualification training and maintenance integrated diagnostic training and certification are provided.3.2.4  Pre-Flight.  TOPscene was used to pre fly the mission for terrain familiarization.  TOPscene is an operational training system consisting of 3D imagery products and infrastructure.  TOPscene can produce imagery clear enough to see major and minor roads as well as buildings, vehicles, doors, and windows.  TOPscene is the only battlefield visualization system that lets aircrew and battle commanders rehearse their missions before going into combat with timely, realistic, real-world images of the contingency area. The TOPscene 4000 is the most realistic visual system available today.  A single, unit-level console with a footprint smaller than a desk, the Model 4000 generates photobased 3-D imagery at 30-Hz frame rates for real-time simulations over large terrain databases.  The databases are acquired from various sources (photographic, sensor, satellite, Defense Mapping Agency, etc.) and processed by the off-line TOPscene Data Base Generation Systems. They are stored on removable digital disks and transported to the user, where specific routes are flown to support mission needs.  System enchancements permit changes in visibility, time of day, sensor imagery, graphic overlays, instrument indications, even threat warnings.  TOPscene 4000 is tunable to replicate the precise visuals encountered in any environment.3.2.5  75th Ranger Representation.  Janus 6.3 provided the 75th Ranger Regiment interaction for the ground battle.  Janus is a Battle Simulation for Battle focused Training.  It is targeted to Company/Team Level.   The training audience interfaces directly with simulation via workstations.  The communication between members of training audience is via tactical communications.   Janus is also used by the Tactical Commander’s Development Course (TCDC) with role player I/F to simulation.  Janus is connected to the rest of the simulation through the PDU Adapter Software System (PASS).  PASS translates Janus information into DIS PDU that allows Janus to interact in a DIS environment.To make the Janus training more robust, Sound Storm was used to provide the sounds of battle to the Janus 75th Ranger Regiment soldiers.  SoundStorm interprets DIS PDUs into .WAV files and provides the corresponding sound for that entity.  It is also multi-directional and fades as the entity moves out of range.3.2.6  DIS Data Collector.  For data collection, Simulation Analyzer (Simulyzer) was used.  Simulyzer is a software tool used for data collection and analysis in the DIS environment.  It is a universal simulation data collection and analysis capability incorporating key design criteria that ensures system flexibility, usability, and extensibility.3.2.7 Communication Support.  Also supporting this training exercise was a communication structure that consisted of  live radios and simulated radios (ASTi).   These radios provide simulation to simulation communication as well as communication to the actual live C2 helicopter.  The ASTi Radio is a DIS compliant radio model that is used for tactical voice communications, aircraft intercom, and test control networks.   The basic model includes a WGS 84 based smooth, round earth propagation model. The ASTi radio is a PC-based server capable of accommodating up to six (6) separate radio stations.  The ASTi is primarily used to replicate SINCGARS radios, but is also used for other communication needs, such as replicating the Vehicle Inter/Intra Communications System (VIICS) intercom system in the C2V mockups.3.2.8  Overview Display. Effectiveness of Naval Electronic Warfare Systems (ENEWS) was used as the plan view display for the exercise.  ENEWS provides digital maps for an overview perspective of the mission.3.3 Integration Issues.3.3.1 Terrain Database Correlation.  With these multiple simulations came multiple Terrain Databases that brought about the normal correlation issues.  This exercise terrain was from Fort Campbell, KY to Jackson, MS, and then on to the Joint Readiness Training Center Shugart/Gordon MOUT complex at Fort Polk, LA.  The area of terrain used by each system had to be built.   Janus 6.3 terrain was developed by TRAC, Monterrey and the town area of operation was overlayed in Janus 6.3.  PASS, Janus 6.3 DIS interface built the DIS correlation with ModSAF .RDF files, but since ModSAF Fort Polk area did not exist, TRAC built the file from GEO databases.  For ITEMS terrain, ITEMS can convert an openflight database through a Link convertor but that database must also have feature files in the database.  Since there did not exist a Fort Polk open flight database with culture features available, CATI built the Fort Polk terrain database.  The CMS E&S database was built by Hulburt Field who also built the AC-130U ATD terrain.  To correlate the databases, different locations were selected and in the end all databases were moved to match the Janus terrain since that database could not be repositioned.  The AC-130U ATD had to adjust its DUI representation of its entities since it could not reposition the aircraft on its database.3.3.2  Communication integration.  Another integration challenge that the STOW-A team faced was interfacing live radio with simulated ASTi radios and vice versa.  This interface allowed actual C2 participants to monitor the simulation battle from a communication standpoint.  For the simulation components, DIS radio communications were provided by ASTi DACS integrated with the MH-60L and the MH-47E simulators with hand-held radio control terminals at simulation stations at Fort. Campbell.  Through the T-1 DIS connections, communications with the AC-130U ATD simulator at Hurlburt Field was also provided.  To provide this communication feed to the live radio in the C2 helicopter that flew over Fort Campbell during the exercise, a custom interface was specially designed and fabricated to provide a communications bridge with live radios.  This was done by boosting the sound of the live feed through an amplifier then feeding it through an ASTi hand held terminal.  The simulation to live feed provided more of a challenge in that a circuit board had to be constructed to activate the push to talk switch on a live radio so that the simulation communication traffic could be feed over the airways. 3.3.3  75th Ranger Sound Support.  To support the 75th Rangers ground battle, SoundStorm was used to provide the sounds of battle to the 75th Rangers at the Janus/PASS terminals. SoundStorm 3D is a DIS compliant three-dimensional battlefield sound generator.  Sounds are generated by translating the associated .WAV file to the Entity State, Fire, and Detonation DIS PDUs from the DIS simulations.  SoundStorm is attached to an “ear point” of a specific DIS entity (in this case, a soldier) at any location on the battlefield.  Sounds are heard from the perspective of that entity’s ear point.  Six-dimensional aural realism is maintained by biasing the sound output slightly to the left/right, front/rear, and above/below.  In addition, the volume level of the sound output is varied to account for the distance of an entity from the selected ear point.  SoundStorm contains digital sounds for aircraft, ground vehicles, dismounted Infantrymen, direct and indirect fire munitions, and missiles and can import many .WAV files to be associated with a PDU.  For the 160th SOAR(A) STOW-A exercise, three SoundStorm systems were utilized.  One SoundStorm was in the Company Commander’s Janus cell and the other two were used in each of the Platoon Leaders’ Janus cells.  Ear points were attached to the entities corresponding to the locations of the soldier on the battlefield in an effort to create a sensation of being immersed in battle.  This capability also allowed the Rangers to base their actions on aural cues, as they would in actual combat.  Both the platoon leaders and company commander were forced to react to combat situations and communicate on tactical radios by having to overcome the loud volume of the battlefield sounds as they would in the field.  During the exercise, battlefield sounds contributed to the overall realism of the training experience by helping to immerse the soldiers in a simulated battle environment.4.0 EXERCISE SUCCESS.  This exercise was conducted on the evening of 6 and 8 October  1998 and provided a useful training experience for all involved, including our technical support team.Author BiographiesALEYSHA PASCHAL - Biography to be providedTHOMAS LASCH  is a Project Director in the Product Manager for Command, Control, Communications & Computers Simulation Systems (PM-C4ISS), STRICOM.  He is currently assigned as the Project Director for the Synthetic Theater of War - Architecture (STOW-A) program.  Mr. Lasch holds a Bachelor of Science degree from North Georgia College and has served in a variety of command and staff positions is the United States Army.  He is an Honor Graduate of the Army Management Staff College (AMSC).  He was formerly assigned as the Director, Training Analysis Computer Support & Simulations, Combat Maneuver Training Center (CMTC), Hohenfels, Germany, where he served from 1990-1995.