Goals for this Workshop-----------------------* Establish analytic use cases for Advanced Distributed   Simulation* Develop Standards of Practice for analysis using Advanced  Distributed Simulation* Explore methodologies that could be embraced by the  analysts while employing the FEDEP* Identify key issues in Distributed Data Collection (DC)  and Analysis	Key Points----------* FEDEP is being used by the analytic community to specify   their federations  - Explanation:  ANL Forum papers highlighted successful     use of the FEDEP to shape analytic federations. May     need to refine the use of the FEDEP on a case by case     basis. May need additional high level documents     (Federation Implementation Document)  - Recommendation: Solicit analysis community input on     analysis overlay of the FEDEP. Develop more refined     analysis use cases for federations.* Analysts must be involved in the complete FEDEP   development  - Explanation:  There are cases in which federations can     provide erroneous or misleading results due to     interactions between federates. Careful consideration     of the interactions by the analytic community can     illuminate these artifacts.  - Recommendation:  The analytic community should be     involved throughout the FEDEP to ensure:       Federation purpose is understood       Artifacts are precluded or minimized       Experimental design is defined and implemented* Federate-based data collection may be an advantageous   approach for analytical federations  - Explanation: Several programs have adopted a strategy     through which an interface layer is inserted between     the native simulation software and the RTI/Federation    Ambassador. This layer supports the logging of    simulation data locally without forcing its publication     over the RTI.   - Recommendation: The Data Collection WG will investigate     this approach as an adjunct to federation based methods     currently under development and provide recommended       changes to be incorporated in the draft standards.Future Plans--------------* Increase discussion on Reflector* Solicit MORS and other analysis forums for participation   in requirements generation* Next Workshop  - Solicit papers with Lessons Learned  - Continued focus on Analysis Overlay to FEDEP and Data      Collection  - Interim Meeting (TBD Jun-Jul 99)Working Group Status--------------------* Data Collection Working Group (DCWG)  - New WG leader sought (Tom Neuberger stepping down    due to new job demands)- Continuing investigations of federate-based and   federation-based data collection methodologies,   experiences, trade-offs.* Analysis in ADS Working Group (AWG)  - Presented the Analysis Process Overlay (see paper    99S-SIW-142) in both the ANL and PROC forums.  - Soliciting input/feedback on the overlay.  - Collecting analysis use cases for federations.Recommended Reading List Nominations------------------------------------* 99S-SIW-142* 99S-SIW-001* 99S-SIW-055Paper/Presentations-------------------There were 10 papers presented and an invited presentation.Below is a quick summary of each paper/presentation withthe presenter noted in parentheses after the title:99S-SIW-203:  An Incremental Approach to Development of a   C4ISR Analysis Federation (Greg Roszyk)  Assesses performance of and within the ISR Cycle and  discusses limitations of standalone models and   the approach to create separate federations for  each INT.   99S-SIW-001:  Non-Monotonicities in HLA Federations   (Andreas Tolk)  Conjectures that structural variances in the model cause  non-monotonicities in HLA Federations, describes   use of a Neural Net to reduce non-monotonicity in  the model of Dewar, and clearly shows that artifacts of  individual federates (models) caused unexpected results   for the federation.99S-SIW-055:  Design of JWP Trailblazer Federation in   Support of Analysis (Laura Feinerman)  Describes experience and lessons learned from using a  federation for experimentation and the development of  a Federation Implementation Document (FID).99S-SIW-033:  Enhancing Performance in Analytic Federations  (Dave Seidel)  Describes the approach and experiments in enhancing   performance in analytic federations and observes that   RTI tweaking did not improve performance.99S-SIW-142:  Analysis Process Overlay for the FEDEP  (Andy Melton)  Presents AWG drafted guidelines for analysis using ADS   in the context of HLA via a FEDEP overlay. Presentation: Analysis and Distributed Simulation: Worthy  Goals … Big Challenges (LTC Dan Maxwell)  Asserts JWARS use as context for high resolution probes  and discusses various reasons for federating models and   simulations together.99S-SIW-037:  Investigating the Impact of Simulation   Communications Patterns on Distributed Data Collection  Strategies (Pauline Wilcox)  Categorizes ADS using an abstraction mechanism featuring  distribution of analysis and simulation network  traffic patterns and describes configuration to collect   data on LAN/WAN message rates.99S-SIW-084:  Lessons Learned from an Implementation of  a Fully Distributed Data Collection Tool (Graham Shanks)  Discusses data collection requirements, tools, logging  techniques, simulation protocol, and the use of an   intermediary API between federate code and Federate   Ambassador.99S-SIW-176:  How to Plan and Execute Data Collection and  Analysis for HLA Federations (Paul Perkinson)  Provides a detailed roadmap for data collection and   analysis in HLA federations and discusses the Data   Collection Tool (DCT).99S-SIW-022:  Data Collection in an HLA Federation   (Jerry Black)  Discusses data logging alternatives, selection  of an interface API to the RTI to do data logging,  and use of latency test software to assess impact  of the logger interface.99S-SIW-156:  Fielding an Extensible After Action Review  System to Support JCOS and STOW (Lizann Messerschmidt)  Discusses AAR System and its use of the Logger Data   Interchange Format (LDIF) specification, translation of   DIS logger files, enhancements for extensibility and      portability features.