Product Support Decision Support SystemRobert B. StevensTASC Inc.Suite 201, 700 Boulevard SouthHuntsville, AL 35802 HYPERLINK "mailto:rbstevens@tasc.com" rbstevens@tasc.comKeywords:Logistics, modeling, simulation, decision makingABSTRACT: In the past 20 years, every branch of the Armed Forces has adopted simulated warfare training.  Historically, the Army has created/utilized logistical Modeling and Simulation (M&S) tools when needed as the weapon system moves through the acquisition process and in some cases for the sustainment of the life cycle.  The Army traditionally has used M&S to support global logistic decisions, manage supplies, and test Research and Development (R&D) in the acquisition process.  One of the key areas of Acquisition Reform is the increased use of M&S in all phases of life-cycle management of defense systems.  Dr. Jacques S. Gansler, past Under Secretary of Defense (Acquisition & Technology), recently emphasized this policy in his memorandum endorsing a joint DoD-Industry initiative to define a roadmap for Simulation Based Acquisition (SBA).  Typically, modeling and simulation tools are used to support Concept Development, Requirements Definition, Engineering Development, and Operations and Support (e.g. training).  The tools have been focused on immediate needs and discarded or converted for use on other programs as required.  Presently, there are no known logistics simulation models available with a capability to analyze long-term sustainment options during an operational scenario to support the Army, joint, and coalition force logistics planning at the weapon system level.  Existing simulations are designed for generic logistical units/elements and programmed to support a wide range of combat service support organizations in combat scenarios with available software linked to proprietary operating systems and hardware.  Software designs, especially the underlying representation of terrain, preclude representing the detailed functionality required for resolving logistical problems/missions necessary to conduct logistics studies and analysis at the weapon system level.  The application of scientific methodology to DoD M&S requires specific and formally articulated methods and procedures.  The Army is poised for a major paradigm shift in the application of logistical M&S.1.  BackgroundThe United States Army Transformation Vision is to develop the tools and processes by which to make it’s military power more responsive and lethal over the next decade.  This transformation of force projection is not limited to combat firepower, but must extend to combat support and combat service support activities as well. The Army will not only reshape how it fights, but how to get to the fight, and most importantly, how to stay in the fight. In many aspects, the field artillery community is a leading beacon in this endeavor; however, it is the Multiple Launch Rocket System (MLRS) Program Office, which has taken this bull of a task by its proverbial horn.Over the next decade the MLRS community will have in the field three common but separate weapon systems.  The legacy M270 MLRS launcher, the interim recapitilized M270A1 MLRS launcher, and the Objective Force wheeled version High Mobility Rocket System (HIMARS).  The MLRS logistics community will be faced with maintaining and supporting these three separate weapon systems which operate numerous common parts, modified parts, and different parts that serve the same function.  Resulting in hundreds of highly technical repair parts that must be closely managed between all three MLRS systems. In order to meet this challenge the MLRS Project Office is developing a system’s application to simulate product support requirements for the Multiple Launch Rocket Systems, as well as an aggressive initiative to support future acquisition and sustainment alternatives. Future MLRS product support requirements will center on seamless support, velocity not volume, and reducing demand by reducing the load. The most important aspect of all product support requirements is that materials must go to the right warfighter in the right amounts at the right time. To solve this complex issue, the Multiple Launch Rocket System (MLRS) Project Office located in Huntsville, Alabama has embarked on an aggressive and comprehensive initiative to design, develop, and implement an accessible product support decision support simulation tool. Once fielded, this simulation model will provide the program office and the warfighter a process to define effective support concepts and to predict specific MLRS logistic requirements and alternatives for a multitude of situations.    2.  Logistic Simulation The goal of logistic simulation is accurately capturing the essential logistical data and inserting the data into a real time environment model. A product support life cycle simulation tool must model all the variables of supportability for a system from acquisition to obsolescence.  During the past decade, modeling and simulation tools have been developed successfully in supporting Concept Development, Requirements Definition, Engineering Development, and limited Operations and Support. With the unique success of these various modeling techniques, the next logical step is to expand this process to a specific logistic community and weapon system. This shift in thinking can also be applied during an operational scenario to support Army, Joint, and Coalition force logistics at the weapon system level.  The Product Support Decision Support simulation tool under development by the MLRS program office will be used to determine the supportability requirements for current fielded systems and for future acquisitions. The aspiration of this decision support tool is the reduction of initial procurement and logistical sustainment costs over the life cycle of the system and the successful integration of logistical requirements onto current and future battlefield environments.  3.  Paradigm ShiftHistorically, the Army has created logistical Modeling and Simulation (M&S) tools to support mission-based requirements. There has been little justification in the past to track a weapon system as it moved through the acquisition process. Rarely have logistical M&S objectives or focus been on total sustainment of the life cycle and battlefield integration.  The previous tools have been focused on immediate needs and discarded or converted for use on other programs as required.  Under the concept ‘Faster, Lighter, Cheaper’ the Army is poised for a major paradigm shift in the application of logistical M&S. Logistic managers must be better equipped with tools that focus on battle sustainment and tactical representation if they are going to meet the challenges of managing 21st century logistics. A decision support tool is needed to provide the capability to increase effectiveness of logistical planning by increasing the realism and scope of actual combat service support (CSS) requirements. To make a decision requires more than one alternative course of action be made available to the decision-maker.  Presently, there are no known logistics simulation models available with a capability to analyze long-term sustainment options to provide real-time alternatives to logisticians. Current models frequently fall short in the ability to capture and insert real world data. Present software designs, especially the underlying representation of terrain, exclude representing the detailed functionality required for resolving sustainment logistical problems at the weapon system level.  Existing simulations today are designed for generic logistical units and programmed to support a wide range of combat service support functions in combat scenarios.  Future logistical software designs once developed should facilitate reduced investment costs, accelerate production, and enhance logistical support plans for future deployments at the weapons system level. 4.  System RequirementsThe Multiple Launch Rocket System (MLRS) Project Office and its support logistic community are working on such a program using the following baseline requirements:  (1)	Existing computer-based battle simulation model that can be modified to calculate reliability, maintainability, and sustainability alternatives;(2)	databases and operational scenarios required to simulate logistics support alternatives, track total ownership cost options, and analyze cost reduction alternatives; and(3)	perform on a standard personal computer with a Windows@ operating system that can be web-linked to LOGSA logistic integrated databases.The road to meeting these objectives requires considering of some key elements for total system integration and development. Among these requirements are Life Cycle Management, Software Designs, Decision Support System, Post Fielding Support Analysis Capability, and Integrated Logistics Simulation.5.  Life Cycle Management	Life cycle management of military equipment represents the integration of force structure decisions, current and future operational needs, modernization, fielding, along with supply and maintenance sustainment. The Army has normally regarded each of these activities separately. In an increasingly resource competitive environment, integrated life cycle management becomes the principal concern for planning and programming resources. A viable logistic simulation decision tool with mixed-integer linear programming is essential to support weapon systems and better service life cycle management activities.  Today, logistical simulations do not analyze the function of supporting individual weapon systems. What present logistic simulations normally capture are the amounts of supplies and services needed to support organizations in a generic sense. Simulations presently do not capture logistics as a collection of activities associated with acquiring, moving, storing, and delivering supply chain commodities to the warfighter.  More importantly, critical individual weapon systems are not managed closely in the logistics’ supply chain, including the necessities of manufacturing spares, retailing parts, transportation, distribution, warehousing, material handling, and inventory management.  All these activities require expenditures, both in funds and resources. Recent history reveals that smaller overseas peacetime deployments for high-tech weapon systems are normally driven by cost. These costs become a critical variable in determining mission success.  Capturing these costs up front and having the ability to influence the costs will greatly enhance the ability of military logisticians to perform their jobs more efficiently and effectively while meeting the requirement of velocity over volume. 6.  Software DesignsThe Army’s increased reliance on quality large-scale simulation capabilities, especially constructive wargame models, now requires more sophisticated logistical models than ever.  Constructive wargame models typically use fixed databases or make numerous assumptions. The databases are focused on predetermined logistical support capabilities, and reactions to stressful combat situations. The assumptions and databases are based merely on designers’ best estimates, and in many cases logistical support capabilities. Reactions based on real time data are not modeled at all.  For example, equipment availability is an important factor in determining the combat effectiveness of a weapon system.  While there has been a significant quantity of research data generated to show availability curves for a particular weapon system over time, most constructive wargames have not taken this data into account.  Many wargames assume that a weapon system will be as available at the end of a week of combat as it is at the beginning of that week.  To solve these logical shortfalls, real world data must be integrated into the play. The possible variables could be Mean Time Between Failures (MTBF), Mean Time To Repair (MTTR), and Mean Time Between Replacements (MTBR). Decisions made without these critical data elements in the wargame does not realistically portray availability of the weapon system. The use of the simulation without this realism can provide a false sense of reality to the warfighter. The false sense will inevitably result in an over or under supply availability of costly resources. 7.  Decision Support SystemA simulation decision support tool must be designed and built using algorithms and real-time databases, and allow the logistic community to simulate logistical sustainment alternatives for specific mission scenarios.  Key features of the system will be its capability to model support concept alternatives, simulate operational scenarios, evaluate logistics decisions, and then optimize tactics, techniques, and procedures to minimize total cost of ownership.The key parameter in developing this logistic simulation model is that it must operate in conjunction with existing accessible database programs already fielded and widely accepted. A logistical simulation model must provide users a short-term return on investment in terms of resources saved because of decisions supported by up-front simulation enhanced by real time data. Unlike standard war gaming models, logistics requires real time information that is normally less than a month old.  Incorporation of real time accurate data will conserve costly resources while providing viable and rewarding alternatives.8.  Post Fielding Support Analysis The key to any successful decision support tool is the availability of current and accurate information from real-time data.  The Army’s Logistical Support Agency (LOGSA) has been actively involved in developing a tool that could search the numerous Army logistical databases and deliver that updated data on demand.  This LOGSA tool called the Post Fielding Support Analysis (PFSA) has that capability.  The development of the PFSA capability will take advantage of the latest technology available in the Army and to the logistics community as a whole.  The PFSA will access information in available LOGSA databases and data warehouses in order to permit program or logistics managers to track and forecast equipment performance to support life cycle business management decisions on a daily basis.  The successful development of the PFSA constitutes the long-awaited access to active data so critical to the production of a viable logistical simulation model.  In essence, PFSA becomes the ‘missing-link’ between today’s stagnated logistical models and the active real-time logistic simulation programs of tomorrow.  The MLRS Project Office is taking full advantage of the PFSA development and is coordinating the linkage between the Product Support Decision Support model and the accessible LOGSA databases.  When combined, users who are able to access the secure LOGSA website will have instant access to the MLRS model as well.  Working in conjunction with each other PFSA and PSDSS will offer users within the MLRS Project Office the ability to make informative decisions covering the scope of reliability, maintainability, and sustainability of MLRS systems quickly and affordably.  The future potential of PSDSS will be the complete accessibility to soldiers down to the organizational level.  Where decisions affecting unit stockage levels, support requirements and deployments can be made with the latest data available within the Army Management Information System.9.  The TruthIn today’s Operations Other Than War conflict environment of police actions, humanitarian support, and contingency operations, the cost of doing business has become a driving factor for military operations as well to support infrastructure.  Failure to capture and control these ‘up-front’ support cost are driving mobilization, deployment, and sustainment rates to astronomical levels, and undermining the definition of ‘mission accomplished’.  The software technology is available, and the geo-political environment is ripe for the introduction of modeling and simulations for the military acquisition and support communities. The MLRS Product Support Decision Support System is a natural evolution from current logistic models and other analytical programs.  The World Wide Web has become the highway for information, accessible wherever a modem and telecommunication are connected.  The United States Army is becoming an ever-increasing paper-less society where technology and automation meet on the battlefield.  In a war where electrons and databases increase the odds of victory we can no longer ignore concepts and processes that bring us closer to the truth.Author BiographyROBERT B. STEVENS is a senior technical staff member for TASC, Inc., Huntsville, Alabama and a logistic consultant for the Multiple Launch Rocket System Project Office at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama.  He is also a senior logistics officer in the US Army Reserves and serves as the Chief, Logistic Simulation Branch, for the 87th Training Division, Birmingham, Alabama.References [1]	Andrews, Dee H., “Enabling Technology:  Analysis of Categories With Potential to Support the Use of Modeling and Simulation in the United States Air Force,” Air Force Research Laboratory.[2]	Brown, CMDR David P.,  “Simulation Based Acquisition: Can It Live Up to Its Promises?” Modeling & Simulation, pp.12, January-February 1999. [3]	Farquhar, P. and Y. Nakamura, “Utility assessment procedures for polynomial-exponential functions,” Naval Research Logistics, 35:597-613, 1988. [4]	Haddawy, P. and S. Hanks, “Representation for decision-theoretic planning:  Utility functions for deadline goals,” Proceedings of the International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, 1992.[5]	Pugh, Kari and Collie Johnson, “Building a Simulation World to Match the Real World,” The Joint Simulation System, January-February 1999, p.2.[6] 	Sanders, Dr. Patricia, “Study on the Effectiveness of Modeling and Simulation In the Weapon System Acquisition Process,” October 1996.[7]	Smith, Timothy J., “Scientific Methodology for Military Theory, Modeling, and Simulation,” pp. 1-5. [8]	Towne, D.M., “A Configurable Task Environment for Learning Research,” (ONR Final Report No. 115), Los Angles: Behavioral Technology Laboratories, University of Southern California, 1997. [9]	Watson, S. and D. Buede, Decision Synthesis, Cambridge University Press. 1987.  FILENAME \p S:\MLRS\articles\Article forDSS SISO 6_29.doc	 PAGE 5D255-01-Article 6-29-01