Consolidated Bios for Special Event Panel MembersName:  Mr. Russel RichardsonCompany: SAIC IncTitle of Presentation: HLA RTI 1.3 Performance Results using the DMSO BenchmarkRUSSEL RICHARDSON has 17 years experience in the modeling and simulation domain with an emphasis on analytical wargaming.   Presently he is managing several HLA activities for SAIC's Simulation and Information Technology Operation in Arlington, VA.  Besides for HLA activity he is actively involved in applying simulation to army C2 systems, decision aids, and information operations.Name: Mr. Ernst PayneCompany: Raytheon SystemsTitle of Presentation: Real-time Performance of RTI Version 1.3ERNST PAYNE is a senior engineer with Raytheon Systems located in Dayton, Ohio. After many years in the hardware side of the computer field, Mr. Payne graduated from Wright State University with a BS in Computer Engineering. He has a lot of experience in real-time person-in-the-loop simulation and crewstation research.  He has been actively involved in modeling and simulation domain, and distributed simulation research for nearly five years.  He is presently supporting HLA and Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) research at the Air Force Research Laboratory, Air Vehicles Directorate located at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio. Name: Mr. Keith BriggsCompany: iMT CorpTitle of Presentation: HLA Support for Proliferated Mine ObjectsKEITH BRIGGS has supported the development of countermine simulations for the Countermine Division of the US Army's Night Visions Labs for the past four years.  Keith is an active participant in the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) and is currently serving as Chairman of the Run-Time Infrastructure and Communications Forum, as a drafting member of the Real-Time Platform Reference FOM Standards Development Group (SDG), as an assigned reviewer and active participanton the HLA SDG, as a SISO Standards Activity Committee (SAC) member, and as the SAC Technical Area Director for the development of synthetic environment and sensor representation standards.  Mr. Briggs is the founder and president of iMT Incorporated, a simulation systems company, and the founder and director of HLA Products, developer of JAVELIN – a Java based RTI for the real-time embedded and web based HLA markets.Name: Mr. Bret GivensCompany: Veridian CorpTitle of Presentation: Migration of Legacy ApplicationsBRET GIVENS received his Bachelor’s degree in Computer Engineering from Wright State University (WSU) in 1985.  He then joined the Civil Service as an electronics engineer working in the Aeronautical Systems Division at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, where he developed and integrated software and hardware ranging from microcomputers to supercomputers.  After earning his Master’s degree in Computer Engineering from WSU in 1990, he provided modeling and simulation support to the RCA Service Company and Systran Corporation.  He now works for Veridian, which was formed last year by the merger of Veda and Calspan SRL and the recent acquisition of RAIL and Pacific Sierra Research corporations.  Bret has more than twelve years of technical experience in software engineering and is currently supporting the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) Project at AFRL/VACD.  He is also the secretary of the Research, Development & Engineering (RDE) Forum for the Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW), Treasurer of the Dayton IEEE Computer Society, and chair of the Veridian/Dayton Software Engineering Process Group.Replacement for Margaret Horst: (She has a very sick close relative)Name: Mr. David RobertsCompany: Georgia Tech Research Instate Title of Presentation: Building an HLA Radar Federation from Legacy SimulationsDAVID ROBERTS is a member of the Distributed Simulation Systems Group in the Information Technology and Telecommunications Laboratory at Georgia Tech Research Instate (GTRI).  He received his B.S. from Cornell University in Operations Research and Industrial Engineering in 1990 and his M.S. from the Johns Hopkins University in Computer Science in 1993. He is currently pursuing his Ph.D. in Human-Machine Systems Engineering from Georgia Tech, looking at the development of human behavior models to support the design and operation of advanced distributed simulation and training. At GTRI, Mr. Roberts has been leading efforts to design, implement, and use tools to support the migration of legacy simulations to HLA. Prior to being at GTRI, he led systems integration efforts on the STOW-97 and War Breaker programs and has been involved in modeling and simulation since 1990. He is past chair of the Testing Forum and past Vice Chair of the Human Decision Making and Behavior Generation Forum of SISO. Name: Mr. Michael KamrowskiCompany: Raytheon Missile SystemsTitle of Presentation: Live HLA Experiments Supporting a Missile System TestbedMICHAEL KAMROWSKI is a senior systems engineer at Raytheon Missile Systems Company in Tucson, AZ.  He received his BS degrees in Electrical Engineering and in Computer Science at the University of Utah, an MS in Business Management at the University of Northern Colorado, and an MS in Computer Engineering at the Air Force Institute of Technology. He has worked most aspects of the acquisition process including: F-22 EMD software simulation; ALCM Test Team; Peacekeeper and Minuteman integrated test facilities; Cheyenne Mountain Space Track Operations; and flight simulator and network research at Armstrong Laboratory.   The last four years he spent as part of the Raytheon Missile Systems staff, focusing on integration of modeling and simulation technology across the Raytheon business units.Name: Mr. Patrice MelocheCompany: CAE ElectronicsTitle of Presentation:  Joint FAA/Army/NASA FederationPATRICE MELOCHE is a senior software engineer for CAE Electronics Ltd at the U.S.Army AMSIM facility, Moffett Field, CA. He is involved in the design and development of real-time flight simulation applications and utilities.Name: Ms. Karen WilliamsArmy: STRICOMTitle of Presentation: HLA Use Case Results MatrixKAREN WILLIAMS is a systems engineer at the US Army , Training and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM).  She has a B.S. in Physics and an M.S. in Engineering.  Ms. Williams has been at STRICOM for 8 years focusing on distributed Modeling and Simulation. She has managed the DIS program and help to initiate STRICOM’s activities in HLA.  She has served on the SIW RD&E Planning and Review Panel (PRP) and is currently is a member of the I/ITSEC R&D and Emerging Concepts Sub-Committee.NOTE:  Margaret has notified us that Mr. David Roberts will be our briefing.Name: Ms. Margaret HorstCompany: Georgia Tech Research InstateTitle of Presentation: Building an HLA Radar Federation from Legacy SimulationsMARGARET HORST is currently a member of the Distributed Simulation Systems Group in the Information Technology and Telecommunications Laboratory at Georgia Tech Research Instate located in Atlanta GA.  She earned a Master of Science degree in Electrical Engineering from Georgia Tech in 1980, an M.S. in Physics from Emory University in 1974, and a B.S. in Physics from Spring Hill College in 1972.  She has been on the research faculty at Georgia Tech since 1975, where her research has concentrated on radar simulation and electromagnetic propagation and backscatter modeling.  For the last two years, she has worked with the Distributed Simulation Systems Group in support of HLA federate compliance testing and the development of middleware tools in a Distributed Simulation Interface Framework to assist legacy simulations in their migration to HLA.  She is active in the Research, Development and Engineering Forum and the Federation Development Process Forum of SISO. 