Base Object Model (BOM) Study/Drafting Group CharterBackgroundAt the Fall 1997 Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW), the SISO Conference Committee (CC) and Standards Activity Committee (SAC) held a "Reference FOM Concept and Study Group" meeting to discuss the subject of Reference FOMs (RFOMs) definitions and standardization.  As a result of the meeting a study group was formed to pursue the development of an unambiguous definition of Reference FOMs, the establishment of necessary terminology, and the recommendation of SISO support for RFOMs.   From September 1997 to March 1998 the RFOM SG worked to define  "Reference FOMs" in the context of the needs of all SISO communities.  As a result of this effort a capstone RFOM definition was unanimously agreed upon, and five independent models (Classes) of Reference FOMs were identified.   One of the RFOM Classes identified by the RFOM SG was the Base Object Model (BOM).  BOMs were defined and recommended as a promising technology for HLA use.As defined by the RFOM SG, a Base Object Model is  "a simulation component representing a single aspect of federation interplay that can be used as a building block of FOMs and SOMs."  The BOM is documented as a subset of the data required by the Object Model Template (OMT) specification augmented with additional meta-data and consists of one or more classes, interactions, associated attributes, parameters, and relevant parent class data.  As defined, a BOM represents a single set of Object Model data, and provides a distinct way to represent individual simulation interaction components; components that can be used to build or modify a federation.Because of the reuse potential of BOMs and support they provide for the Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP), two members of the RFOM Study group co-authored a paper presented at the 1998 Fall SIW entitled, "Base Object Models (BOMs): Reusable Component Objects for Federation Development" (98F-SIW-034).   The paper explored the BOM concept, describing how BOMs may be built and used. This paper identified BOMs as a promising methodology for rapidly developing SOMsand FOMs, and promoting  FEDEP automation and reuse.  As a result of the paper presentation and community interest, BOMs were specifically identified by two groups within the Outbrief Summary Report (OSP) as a potentially useful mechanism for reuse and FOM construction.  Those groups included the Sensor Modeling (SENS) Forum, and the Federation Development Process (PROC) Forum.Based on the community interest from the Fall 1998 Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW), the CC encouraged the PROC group to solicit papers and organize a special session regarding BOMs.  Furthermore, it was recommended by the PROC group that a study group be formed to investigate technical and operational issues related to BOMs. At the Fall 1999 SIW the SAC approved the formation of a BOM Study Group (SG).  The BOM SG kick-off meeting is scheduled to commence at the Spring 2000 SIW.  In order to provide a qualified recommendation to the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO) community, a Terms of Reference (TOR) has been defined to provide direction and guidance for a Study Group's investigation of the BOM Methodology.Terms of ReferenceThe SISO SAC set forth the Base Object Model (BOM) Study Group (SG) Terms of Reference (TOR) to guide the volunteer study participants in the investigation of technical and operational issues related to BOMs.  The TOR for the proposed BOM Study Group contains the consensus rationale for a BOM, the issues to be explored and expanded upon, and a proposed schedule of activities.BOM RationaleThe High Level Architecture (HLA), developed in response to the Department of Defense (DoD) Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Master Plan, facilitates interoperability among all types of models and Simulations including C4I systems, and encourages the reuse of simulation components.  HLA's uniqueness is its object-based design, which enables federation developers the flexibility to define (or refine) their own set of simulation components for interaction.  The collection of these simulation components is typically identified within Federation Object Models (FOMs).The promise of a FOM is that it provides a higher potential for a distributed environment to leverage the intrinsic capabilities of simulations and models within a federation.  Therefore, properly developed FOMs allow for a greater opportunity to fulfill exercise and experiment requirements than do the limited protocols established for predecessor interoperability standards such as Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS)  and SimNet.Thus, the flexibility offered by FOMs allows for greater expansion of the battlespace environment. Achieving this interaction flexibility, however, requires extensive design and development of FOMs among representatives for each federate. The sequence of activities recommended to build and maintain HLA federations is well described within the HLA Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) model. The burden for developing and documenting FOMs has been lessened through the Object Model Template (OMT) and HLA implementation tools intended to support FOM construction.  However, the task for developing FOMs still remains intricate and time consuming.Tools and mechanisms are needed to facilitate rapid development and deployment of federations.  Otherwise the extensive effort and compromise required in developing FOMs may drive the community to a restrictive FOM reuse philosophy.  Long term exclusive use of one or two static FOMs would severely limit the flexibility, capacity, and capability of simulations to be able to fully reflect their intrinsic capabilities within a virtual environment.  Furthermore, a restrictive FOM reuse philosophy would unintentionally limit HLA's capability to support a diverse range of conceptual and operational simulation domains.  In order to divert these potential consequences, it is in SISO's best interest to identify and explore methods that support and promote the reuse of simulation components and encourage agile, rapid, and efficient development and maintenance of FOMs.   One potential reuse methodology of particular interest to the community are Base Object Models (BOMs).  The BOM methodology provides a building block mechanism for federation development and is a promising HLA technology deserving of further investigation by a SISO endorsed Study Group.Issues to InvestigateA precise understanding and broad community agreement on the form, content, and standardization processes of BOMs are critical to community adoption and use.  Therefore, the BOM SG TOR investigation shall include the development of an exhaustive definition of BOM elements, characterization of BOMs as OMT reuse components, recommendation of additional SISO data standards to support BOM reuse, and the creation/testing of a SISO prototype BOM set (the scope of this effort will depend on volunteer and sponsorship constraints). The result of this study will provide a case for SISO BOM standardized and policy, and facilitate greater reuse within the HLA community.  Specifically, the SISO CC and SAC desire the Study Group to investigate the following issues:Study Definition.  The SG shall recommend unambiguous and comprehensive definitions and terminology. The currently applied term and definition of  "Base Object Model" serves an adequate and unanimous high level definition established by the RFOM SG, however a more specific definition(s) need to be developed that details the components of such a model.  It is expected that such a comprehensive definition would be derived from the original RFOM BOM definition.Determine level of BOM interest in the SISO community, and determine how BOMs might be employed to satisfy SISO goals, methods and mechanisms.  Tasks include:Identifying potential early adopters of BOMs in a FOM development methodology.Determine if BOMs should be SISO endorsed, and if so, what type of SISO product (standard, guidance, recommended practice, other).   Also, determine SISO process for BOM endorsement.Suggest any unique means of acquiring, qualifying, maintaining, and distributing such models to the benefit of the SISO community consistent with ongoing efforts by SISO and other agencies. Determine how and where BOMs are stored and tracked.Investigate potential on-line repository that might be used.Investigate salient characteristics and unique qualities required to describe BOMs.Identify and recommend potential OMT extensions.Formalize on the requirements meta-data required to support BOM selection and reuse.  Include suggestions for capturing, and storing meta-data, and the effort required to match existing BOMs with federations (FOMs) being developed or updated based on the available meta-data.Investigate BOMs capability to satisfy and/or augment elements of the FEDEPDetermine how BOMs fit with the FEDEP "piece part" concept, Determine how BOMs support HLA Reuse.  Identify a "BOM Selection and Use" FEDEP overlay.Explore the various types of BOMs that might be used.  Two that were identified in paper 98F-SIW-034 were: 'Interaction-based BOMs' and 'Attribute/Pair-based BOMs'.  Codify others as identified by the community. Develop an estimate of resources required to support the standardization of a typical BOM Reference FOM.  If additional sponsorship (funding) or sufficient volunteers are available, build a prototype BOM set to: To prove out BOM theories and concepts, and To verify and validate BOM SG findings.The BOM SG will investigate, analyze, and discuss this matter on re-occurring basis, will develop recommendations for resolution, and will present a report of their findings to the SISO CC and SAC prior to the Spring 2001 SIW.Schedule of ActivitiesThe following are the key dates and activities to be followed by the SG to meet the BOM TOR requirements.Sept 1999 - SAC Approves Study/Drafting GroupMar 2000 - Initial BOM SG Kick Off Meeting at Spring 2000 SIWMar 2000  -  Mar 2001 - SG to meet (via teleconference) on re-occurring basis, build/test BOM setSep 2000  - Iterim BOM SG  Meeting at Fall 2000 SIW - Report Status to SACMar 2001 - Complete SG reportMar 2001 - Present SG Report at Spring 2000 SIW 