Wednesday, 16 September, 1998The C4I Forum opened at 08:00 with a brief introduction by the C4ISR Track Manager, Mr. Joe Lacetera, followed by the C4I Forum Chair, Mr. Bill Sudnikovich. Mr. Sudnikovich  welcomed everyone, and introduced the forum PRP.Other topics of the introduction session included: Encouragement to get on the reflectors and collaborate, and to consider, over the period of the workshop, what working groups may be necessary in order to begin the standards development process in order to be able to recommend a standards development activity no later than the Spring ’99 SIW.The subject of a Mid-Winter interim meeting to resolve issues and work the standards activities was also broached.The following papers were presented in the morning session:98F-SIW-143	Battlefield Communications Network Modeling98F-SIW-117	JSIMS Approach to C4I System Interoperability98F-SIW-038	Situational Awareness Tactical Internet Data Server (SATIDS) - Integrating C4I with the Virtual World 98F-SIW-070	Unit Order of Battle Data Interchange Format and Access Tool98F-SIW-074	HLA-Compliant Decision Support Tool for Mission Planning98F-SIW-136	Course of Action Analysis for Corps and Division Level Military Decision-MakingAfter lunch, the forum re-convened in a joint session with SNE and SENS. The following papers were presented:98F-SIW-051	FIRESTORM98F-SIW-121	Use of HLA to link a Naval EW Simulation (EWEF) with other simulations98F-SIW-190	Ultra Wide-band (UWB) Impulse Radar Imaging for Inter-Vehicle Embedded Simulation (INVEST)Following the joint session, the C4I forum then heard  the final paper of the day:98F-SOW-163		JTT Simulation Using an HLA ApproachThe forum then conducted a working session to discuss issues, including:Getting the strawman Communications SOM presented at the last workshopon the C4ISR web page for comments – will decide in the spring whether togo forward with an SDG for it.How do we work to broaden acceptance of HLA and SISO standards in Government and industry?Inviting an SAC person to briefly talk with the forum on what types of SISO productsare most appropriate to meet our goals, and how to smooth the bumps in the road.The day ended with a joint panel discussion with SNE and SENS.The majority of the panel discussion centered around the question as to whether processing of environmental effects (such as RF propagation) should take place within a given simulation, or be deferred to a centrally-located environmental-effects server. After a lively discussion, the forum adjourned at 17:30Thursday, 17 September, 1998The forum re-convened at 08:00, and the following papers were presented:98F-SIW-115 	Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS) Experiment: Representation of Command and Control Behavior in the Fire Support Automated Test System98F-SIW-027	Reconciling Emerging Infrastructure Standards to Promote C2-to-Simulation Interoperability98F-SIW-227	Object-Oriented Analysis to Support C4I Reference FOM Development98F-SIW-259	The Army’s Approach to Modeling and Simulation Standards for C4I Interfaces:	Defining a Technical Reference ModelAfter the morning break, Phil Zimmerman gave a short talk on how SISO standards are generated in response to Wednesday’s work session, after which 3 additional papers filled out the morning program.98F-SIW-079	A Commercial Notebook Architecture for Link-16, VMF, and HLA Routing and	Protocol Conversion; JMMTIDS98F-SIW-167	The Advanced Research Center Telecommunications Interface Console (ARCTIC)	Gateway Supports the 32 Army Air and Missile Defense Command (AAMDC) Warfighter98F-SIW-214	RTI Performance in Sending High Volume DataAfter lunch, the following papers were presented:98F-SIW-222	Rapid Application of a Geospecific Virtual Operations Area in Support of Joint Air Operations98F-SIW-072	Datalink Usage at TACCSF98F-SIW-120	Migration of MLRS Family of Simulations to HLA Using a HLA Based PrototypeFollowing the final paper, another work session was held to review the forum, plan items to be accomplished before the Spring SIW, and construct the Outbrief.It was decided that in the near term, working groups must be formed to explore potential standards activities. These working groups will be formed and report via the C4I reflector, and should be readyby the  Spring 99 SIW with terms of reference and/or a strawman taxonomy and be ready to go to SACfor the formal standards development process.It appears that the Base Object Model concept may be best approach for our initial products, and products that support coupling simulations to live C4I systems are of high priority.