Modeling Strategic and Cascading Effects in the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS)Major Scott C. JohnstonAF Research Laboratory, Warfighter Training Research Division (AFRL/HEA)6030 South Kent StreetMesa, AZ 85212-6061(480) 988-6561, ext 259;  DSN: 474 HYPERLINK mailto:scott.johnston@afams.af.mil scott.johnston@williams.af.milKeywords:Civil Environment; JSIMS; JV2020; Distributed SimulationABSTRACT: Advanced Distribution Simulations (ADS) have typically been heavily focused on battlefield forces: entity level interactions of combat forces, the dynamic air/land/sea environment of combat, and the C4ISR of those forces. This has been satisfactory for the events addressed so far by our military forces, but the “Revolution in Military Affairs” symbolized by precision engagement weapons and Joint Vision 2020 has introduced important Strategic/Operational level concepts which require modeling new aspects of the civil/military environment.The Joint Vision 2020 strategies place a premium on modeling the structure of the opposing country, specifically its fuel, power, food, transportation and communications networks, and the ability of their operators to compensate for the effects of precision engagement strikes.  It is important not only to model the networks’ basic structure, but to also model their reasonable efforts to continue functioning while under attack; this has become just as important for understanding strategic precision attack as is representing the opposing force commander for understanding close combat.  The JSIMS approach provides a representation of these effects and interactions using an Input/Output economic model of the effects of attack on key production and transportation facilities.1.  Joint Vision 2020There are several challenges facing the modeling and simulation community today.  The reduction in cost coupled with the increase in power of readily available processors has made modeling and simulation technologies available to a much wider audience.  Along with the wider availability has come a more selective audience, the bar has been raised on what is acceptable and what will gather dust in the corner.  Users today require a much higher degree of realism and they want new requirements met faster.  We have found this to be especially true in exercising battlestaffs in the proper application of strategic attack and precision engagement.  Understanding and appreciating the influences of Centers of Gravity (COG) and strategic/cascading effects coupled with other strategic concepts will allow warfighters to achieve the Joint Vision 2020 force that is dominant across the full spectrum of military operations - persuasive in peace, decisive in war, and preeminent in any form of conflict.1.1  Strategic attack and precision engagement [1]Strategic attack is defined as those operations intended to directly achieve strategic effects by striking at the enemy’s COGs.  These operations are designed to achieve their objectives without first having to necessarily engage the adversary’s fielded military forces in extended operations at the operational and tactical levels of war.  In classic theater warfare, those objectives typically centered on destruction or disruption of the enemy’s COGs, which were the characteristics, capabilities, or localities from which a force derived its freedom of action, physical strength, or will to fight.  This was the objective during both World War II and DESERT STORM.  In modern operations the adversary may be a large nation state with a highly sophisticated political, economic, and military structure or a nonstate terrorist group that relies on clandestine support.  Regardless of the opponent, it is the operation’s direct impact on assigned strategic objectives that is important.  Strategic attack objectives often include producing effects to demoralize the enemy’s leadership, military forces, and population, thus affecting an adversary’s capability to continue the conflict.  This function may be carried out in support of a theater CINC or as a stand-alone operation by direction of the NCA.  Strategic attack may also be conducted against fielded forces.  For example, strategic attack may be conducted against identified COGs such as major reserves or politically significant military formations, space launch and support elements, or forces used for strategic nuclear attack.  However, the determining factor is that strategic attack should affect the enemy’s entire effort rather than just a single action, battle, or campaign.  Strategic attack should produce effects well beyond the proportion of effort expended in their execution.  It is the effect of a relatively few well-placed systems, weapons, or actions on a few targets or target sets of extreme value that distinguishes strategic attack from other functions, especially when compared to the forces typically needed for tactical- or operational-level actions.  It provides the theater commander with the option of creating decisive, far-reaching effects against an adversary while avoiding loss of life and expenditure of critical assets.  Strategic attack is a function of objectives or effects achieved, not forces employed.  It is not limited to nuclear operations, heavy bombers and intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs), or total devastation of an enemy’s war-making capacity.  In fact, many strategic actions tend to be nonnuclear conventional or special operations against more limited war or contingency operations objectives, and will increasingly include attack on an adversary’s information and information systems.  The means, methods, and aim of strategic attack can be tailored to the objective or objectives being sought.  Strategic attack can be a radical and potent option and can utilize a variety of weapons, forces, tactics, or warfare to attain the desired “strategic objectives or effects.”Increasingly, air and space power is providing the “scalpel” of joint service operations - the ability to forgo the brute force-on-force tactics of previous wars and apply discriminate force precisely where required.  Precision engagement is the ability to command, control, and employ forces to cause discriminate strategic, operational, or tactical effects.  Integral to precision engagement in combat operations is the ability to have superior situational awareness, and to mass force anywhere and attack any facet of the enemy’s power.  However, reliable precision air weapons, combined with high-speed, high-capacity modern information systems, have redefined the meaning of mass.  Mass no longer means many hundreds of aircraft attacking a single target, as it did during World War II or the Korean conflict.  It is the effect, rather than forces applied, that is the defining factor.1.2  Centers of gravity [2]Targeting priorities can be gauged by understanding enemy centers of gravity.  The center of gravity is a label that planners and strategists find useful for devising maximum payoff courses of action.  Some military theorists hold that any function of vital importance to the enemy is a center of gravity, whether or not it is vulnerable.  Those things that are both critical and vulnerable are normally the best candidates for direct attack.  Likewise, some people argue that there can be only one center of gravity, while others assert that a single center of gravity, if it exists, can only be identified after the fact.  Planners need to look for multiple candidate centers of gravity tied to theater objectives.  Joint Force Commanders (JFCs) establish broad planning objectives and guidance for attack of enemy strategic and operational centers of gravity and interdiction of enemy forces as an integral part of joint campaigns and major operations.  Where possible, specific operations may be conducted to attack directly strategic centers of gravity by air, missile, special operations, and other deep-ranging capabilities.  The “real” center of gravity may not be reachable initially and defensive considerations may compel the commander to strike first at something other than the final objective.  The route to the center(s) of gravity may not be a straight line.Key features of a center of gravity are its importance to the enemy’s ability to wage war, its importance to the enemy’s motivation and willingness to wage war, its importance to the enemy political body, population, and armed forces, and the enemy’s consciousness of these factors.  There may be several potential centers of gravity, each of which can have different degrees of vulnerability, effort required, immediacy of effects, lasting effects, and probability of results.  National and coalition strategic priorities will normally determine which courses of action are acceptable, while military capabilities establish which are feasible.  The enemy’s key military capabilities or forces are often the preferred center of gravity because neutralizing them is often the most certain way to gaining victory.  The proper selection of targets in the industrial/economic/military/social structure of a modern nation, and their subsequent destruction by attack, can weaken or topple an enemy government.  Effective planning requires systematic analysis of the target systems in the light of war plan objectives.  Operations that increasingly rob the enemy of capabilities and increase friendly options increase the enemy’s difficulties.  Friendly forces gain significant advantages from reducing enemy capabilities to maintain situational awareness, protect their forces, perform combat and support functions, communicate in preferred modes, and move effectively.  These conditions make it increasingly difficult for enemy forces to effectively oppose our own forces and can gain a succession of advantages for friendly forces, in some cases having a cascading effect.2.  JSIMS Overview [3]Prior US national military strategy is shaped by the dynamic, global interests of the US in the post-cold war era.  US military force levels, structure, and doctrine continually respond to new global engagement requirements as they evolve.  The effectiveness of these responses is directly related to the training that precedes them.  Realistic and relevant training is an essential component of creating and maintaining readiness.  Training brings its own set of challenges mirroring many of the broader challenges of national military strategy.  These training challenges stem from several sources:Joint and multinational character of contemporary military activities.Numerous, nontraditional applications of military power.Requirement for rapid planning, rehearsal, and response to contingency operations. The need to improve efficiency and effectiveness in training. Increased reliance on synthetic training environments can satisfy many of the training and education responses to these challenges.  However, the existing modeling and simulation (M&S) tools, such as the Joint Training Confederation (JTC), are not suited to current challenges.  In 1993, the Services began to define a process for shared cooperative development of a follow-on to the JTC.  After significant effort, the Services agreed to begin the development of the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS), a single, seamlessly integrated simulation environment.The Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) will provide readily available, operationally valid, computer-simulated environments for use by the CINCs, their components, other joint organizations, and the Services to train, educate, develop doctrine and tactics, formulate and assess operational plans, assess warfighting situations, define operational requirements, and provide operational input to the acquisition process.  The objective of JSIMS is the creation of a comprehensive set of training, education and mission rehearsal tools.  JSIMS will be developed from requirements provided by joint, Service and other agency users.  JSIMS will incorporate new technology to enhance the realism of training while simultaneously reducing the need for dedicated training resources.  JSIMS will be the primary M&S tool to support future joint and Service training, education, and mission rehearsal.  At initial operational capability (IOC), JSIMS will  focus on training joint force commanders (commanders of unified commands and prospective joint task force commanders) and staffs, and principal subordinate Service and functional component commanders and staffs in operational and strategic-theater joint tasks.  JSIMS will be progressively developed into a robust, interactive joint synthetic battlespace (JSB) for training strategic-national joint tasks and joint and Service tactical tasks in all phases of operations (mobilization, deployment, employment, sustainment, and redeployment).  At full operational capability (FOC), JSIMS will have a comprehensive capability to satisfy a full range of training, education, doctrine development and mission rehearsal needs.  The initial goal for the JSIMS program will be to provide a replacement for the current Aggregate Level Simulation Protocol (ALSP)-based Joint Training Confederation (JTC).  The primary target audience for ALSP was the Joint Force Commander (JFC), and JSIMS will incorporate all the functionality necessary to fulfill JFC training requirements.  The JTC also provided capabilities to support Service and multi-component training requirements, albeit at significant costs in planning and preparation time, personnel, and other resources [4].JSIMS is not merely a replacement for the ALSP JTC; it will contain capabilities currently omitted in the JTC and, therefore, be far more realistic and efficient in the JFC training environment.  JSIMS capability at IOC may be constrained by current technology, but it will be designed to incorporate emerging technology and improve as later versions are fielded, exceeding the current capability and including support for Service and Professional Military Education (PME) uses. Figure 2.1:  JSIMS BattlespaceThe JSIMS simulation environment, in contrast to the JTC, will provide an integrated representation of the battlespace domains.  In addition to integrating land, maritime, and air/space domains, JSIMS will encompass other linked capabilities, such as  transportation, logistics, intelligence, C4, special operations, and information operations.  As shown in Figure 2.1, the JSIMS core will include common and joint representations and simulation Services, a run-time hardware and software infrastructure and interfaces.  JSIMS efficiency, composability, and tailorability will allow it to represent tertiary domains when JSIMS is used for focused Service, functional, and mission rehearsal training and education.  High Level Architecture (HLA) will enable JSIMS to exchange data with other systems such as weapons platform simulators. To achieve the JSIMS vision, an ambitious, trailblazing partnership has been established among the individual services/agencies and CINCs.  These Executive Agents define JSIMS requirements through the United States Joint Forces Command (US JFCOM) Joint Warfighting Center (JWFC) located at Suffolk, VA.  Development is overseen by the JSIMS Alliance Executive Office (AEO) in Orlando, FL.  The AEO coordinates the service development efforts and their integration into JSIMS.  The individual programs contributing to the JSIMS vision are shown in Figure 2.2.Figure 2.2:  JSIMS Alliance PartnersJSIMS will increase the training resources available to commanders for joint training worldwide, reduce the time required to prepare for training exercises, and expand tasks that can be trained using simulation.  In this sense, JSIMS shall also contribute to more effective use of other training resources.Under the Joint Training System (JTS), joint training objectives are evolving faster than the existing M&S infrastructure.  JSIMS is the means by which M&S capabilities keep pace with the increasingly complex training environment facing joint and service commanders in the post Cold-War world.3.  Civil Environment Model [5]The Civil Environment module of JSIMS is the set of behaviors associated with non-battlespace objects, both physical and conceptual, which support a country’s ability to wage war.  The CE interacts closely with both the JSIMS Synthetic Natural Environment (SNE) and battlespace elements.  The CE is a component of an overall JSIMS training environment that uses primary damage model results from the respective domains to determine strategic and cascading effects on the overall battlespace.3.1  TaxonomyThe According to the Uniform Joint Task List (UJTL), the civilian and military taxonomy is composed of objects which are associated with either the civilian infrastructure or the military infrastructure.  Civilian infrastructure includes national information systems (communications, mass media), transportation networks (ground networks, water transport, major airports), power production facilities (power generation, distribution controls), industry and manufacturing (raw materials, factories, depot level repair), petroleum, banking and finance, water systems, agriculture and food supplies, and government bodies and actions.  Military infrastructure includes national headquarters (national command authorities, national military Hq, Service Hq, paramilitary force Hq, national intelligence agencies), strategic forces (offensive forces, defensive forces, space lift), strategic storage and reserve stockpiles, military development labs, and national strategic communications and sensors (defense information infrastructure, sensor systems).  The civil environment model of JSIMS focuses on the civil infrastructure.Organizationally, the CE is one of three models involved in the overall battlespace environment.  These three are the CE, SNE, and battlespace element.  Each of these models is responsible for modeling the components assigned to it.  For example, the Land model is responsible for modeling Land battlespace components, the Maritime model for modeling Maritime battlespace components, and the Air and Space model for modeling Air and Space battlespace components.The synthetic and natural environment structures (e.g. bridges, highways, power lines, dams) that belong to the SNE are modeled by the SNE model.  The SNE model is therefore responsible for creating the damage model for structures belonging to the SNE (i.e. for providing damage assessment data to the CE as damage occurs to SNE objects and for responding to reduced product output data from the CE as the reduction occurs).  In a similar fashion, battlespace elements (e.g. trucks, tanks, ships, aircraft, C2 nodes) are modeled by the Service developers.  The Service developers are therefore responsible for creating the damage model for objects belonging to their respective domain (i.e. for providing damage assessment data to the CE as damage occurs to battlespace objects and for responding to reduced product output data from the CE as the reduction occurs).  Although the CE developers will not build the damage models for SNE and battlespace elements, the CE model will use the resulting damage assessment information received from the SNE and battlespace element damage models as inputs into the CE model to determine the strategic and cascading effects of the primary damage (see Figure 3.1).  The CE may also use additional initialization data or simulation events to compute the changes in capacity.  The CE model will provide production output data to the SNE and battlespace element models in terms of the amount of food, fuel, transportation, communications, and power that can be produced after the damage has occurred, but it is the responsibility of the SNE and battlespace element models to determine the effects of this reduced production output upon SNE and battlespace element objects in the simulation (e.g. vehicles, ships, aircraft, stockpiles, food supplies, petroleum, highways, rail lines, bridges, pipelines, power lines, depot repair, sensor systems, C2 systems, etc.).  Figure 3.1:  CE Model Interfaces3.2  Input/Output economic modelThe cascading effects of strategic strikes will be represented first by an input/output economic model of the target country.  This model will automatically take into account not only the primary effect of strikes (losing immediate production capacity at the target plant) but also the secondary and tertiary effects of cascading shortages, diversion of resources in order to repair damage, etc.  The transportation and supply networks in an opposing country could be represented at the entity level.  However, this simple approach would require an enormous increase in the size of a simulation.  It would imply an enormous effort to produce many case-by-case chains of cause and effect to represent even some of the potential cascading effects.  Therefore, JSIMS will model networks and commodities at a more abstract and efficient representation, as shown in Figure 3.2.  JSIMS CE will develop input/output economic models of production and distribution, including treatment of large sub-regions within the target country.  These input/output models are commonly used by the US Government to analyze the US economy and in developing competitive strategies that capitalize on bottlenecks inside the opposing country.Figure 3.2:  CE Model Key ComponentsRepresentation of the strategic effects of strikes on the transportation network will be represented by dividing the country into sub-regions and defining commodities in the model not just by their type but also by their location.  The data for a specific region will be developed by the exercise designers.  Which sub-regions are adjacent to which determines an aggregate-level transportation model. Thus, “fuel in sub-region A” might be a required input to produce “food in sub-region B” (along with trucks and fuel to operate them).  Because there is a choice of routes, a simple linear programming utility will be used to plan transportation – and to replan after strategic strikes, after demands shift, etc.  Alternative production technologies are also represented in almost exactly the same was as alternative transportation routes.Albeit inefficiently, standard entity level simulation could represent the effects of striking transportation networks.  However, to faithfully represent the cascading effects of strategic strike, it is not enough to model the simple flows through the networks, even modified by the combat processes.  This is because the fuel, power, food, and communications flows are intimately linked into the civilian economy through production processes.  Without fuel, food production stops, transportation stops, and both civilians and soldiers begin to go hungry after supplies are drawn down.  Vast quantities of water are needed for producing chemical and certain biological weapons, making water systems strategic targets.  Of course, the various actors in the economic system will react to wartime damage to try to substitute inputs, alter prices, and so on to meet basic military and nutritional demands.  When the technical interdependencies of various sectors is combined with the intelligent response within sectors, a very non-linear and interconnected system results.  There are many indirect and competing effects (which can be exploited in synergistic ways for military goals), such as the following: soldiers need food and fuel, but food production requires fuel, which in turn requires efficient food production so that sufficient labor will be free to produce fuel rather than just feed themselves, and so on.Fortunately, the techniques of Input/Output modeling in economics are ideally suited to representing the interaction of different economic sectors.The I/O economic model utilizes damage assessment inputs from the SNE and battlespace elements to predict the amount of each product that may be produced.  The battlespace elements use this as input to their Logistics models (for Ground, Air, or Sea) to determine how much of the products may actually get to the battlefield.    3.3  Technology switchingIn war, the opponent always reacts.  For example, the above methodology is quite sufficient to represent a fairly static, peace time situation.  Naturally, goods are transported by the most efficient possible means, within the given capacity constraints, such as carrying goods in trucks on highways.  But in wartime, such efficient options may be closed by combat.  In war, the opponent would immediately resort to less efficient but still effective methods, such as carrying goods by human porters on jungle trails.  While trucks may be easy to shoot and the limited number of highways might be easy to close, the porters may be hard to detect and the number of jungle trails could be enormous.  It is important to the realism of a situation such as JSIMS that such economically inefficient but militarily effective options be represented.  In term of mathematical economics, this is called “technology switching”, and it is clear from the Vietnam-esque example above that it is of major military importance.  This capability is included in the CE mathematical model.   3.4  Pre-Exercise preparationAs a part of scenario setup, data is defined to support the I/O Economic Model calculations.  In particular, prior to running the scenario, the developer of the scenario is responsible for defining components of the CE model.  A level of fidelity decision must be made as to how many components will be represented of the opposing country’s:economic/logistical infrastructure (power plants, transportation facilities (both nodes and links)) to be represented as capital assetsflows of goods and services (civilian food and fuel, military food and fuel, electricity, transportation services, etc.) to be represented as production and demand flowsFor the purpose of illustration, we assume that there are “aggregate ground transport capacity” and “aggregate electric power production capacity” objects in the CE.  However, the infrastructure might be represented in more or less detail, depending on the needs of the scenario.  Electric power production might be split into hydroelectric power production and other, for example.In addition, the scenario developer is responsible for linking the simulated objects in the SNE (power plants, roads) to the CE objects (stocks of capital).  For example, if a scenario calls for the targeting of hydroelectric generation facilities, the SNE developer must provide a damage model so that dams can take damage from detonations.However damage is computed, the CE “aggregate electric power production capacity” object would need to register interest in the damage state of all structures involved in the direct generation of power.  This will allow the aggregate capacity number to be changed whenever facilities are destroyed or repaired.  Note, however, that the ability to generate power depends on more than just the available capacity:  a coal-fired plant with 100% of its capital capacity intact but only 10% of its coal supply delivered will produce only a fraction of its potential output.3.5  Exercise executionUsing the example above, the scenario assumes that an attack is being carried out by blue forces with destruction of segments of red force transport, power and C2 assets.  Specifically, it is assumed that strikes have been made against highways (cutting transport of food and fuel to the forces), a hydroelectric dam (reducing overall power production), and to a Division HQ (reducing overall C2 capability).  Strike damage assessment of individual segments of the highways is computed by the SNE in response to detonation events.  The segments change state, and the CE “aggregate ground transportation capacity” (AGTC) object receives notification because it registered interest.  Damage assessment of the hydroelectric dam is also computed by the SNE in response to detonation events.  If the dam changes its state to damaged, catastrophic failure, etc., then the CE “aggregate electric power production capacity” (AEPPC) object receives notification because it expressed interest.  One possible economic scenario would require use of the AGTC to transform the input good of  “food in storage” to the output good of “food at the front”.   Destruction of AGTC would restrict the production / delivery of food to front-line troops, even if the stocks of food were not hit.  Similarly, the reduction in AEPPC might be considered as a both a short-term limit on the delivery of food (electric equipment being required to help transport and coordinate food delivery) and a long-term limit on the production of goods and services essential to rebuild the target country.  The former would affect the outcome during the course of the scenario, while the latter would change to the end state of the war - possibly achieving strategic goals such as containment of future aggression.As the CE model is notified of battlespace element changes, the rates of production of goods and services need to be recomputed, and the changes in food, fuel, ammo, etc. supply rates need to be published to all entities (including exercise controllers) which expressed interest.  The reduced supply rates are provided to the battlespace elements for use in its model calculations.  The entities themselves would need to limit their movement if fuel was not available, and limit their firing if ammunition was unavailable, with the level of fuel and ammunition being jointly affected by usage, organic stocks, replenishment rates, and so on.3.6  Post exercise reviewThe post exercise review phase of CE would be proceeding in parallel with the simulation execution and would continue after the simulation was ended. The continuous review software would need to be able to monitor the state of the CE economic objects, as well as the stream of events being routed to them in response to battlefield events. An important responsibility of post exercise review in handling CE would be to monitor the accomplishment of strategic goals which do not immediately change the outcome of the battle.  For example, heavy destruction of food production facilities might not change the outcome of a 60 day war (stocks might last that long), but the burden of repairing the damage might suppress the target country’s warmaking potential for years to come.  The same economic model that models the day-to-day production could be used for the assessment of long-range strategic effects, given the state at the end of the war.4.  References[1]  Air Force Basic Doctrine (AFDD 1), 1 September       1997[2]  Joint Force Air Component Commander (JFACC)       Primer, Deputy Chief of Staff, Plans and       Operations; Headquarters, United States Air Force,        February 1994[3]  JSIMS Concept of Operations (CONOPS), Version      1.0, 15 August 1997[4]  AF Concept of Operations for JSIMS, Version 1.0,      24 July 1998[5]  JSIMS Civil Environment Definition, Description,        and Scope, Version 2.0, February 1998DisclaimerThe views expressed in this paper are those of the author and while every attempt was made to report the events factually the results are not to be construed to represent official positions.Author BiographyMAJOR SCOTT C. JOHNSTON is assigned as a Senior Simulation Scientist at the Air Force Research Laboratory, Warfighter Training Research Division in Mesa, Arizona.  Major Johnston holds both a B.S. in Computer Sciences and a M.S. in Artificial Intelligence from the University of Florida.  He has held numerous positions during a period of more than 14 years; researching, developing, implementing, and using Modeling and Simulation (M&S) tools in support of major Air Force and Joint theater-level battlestaff training exercises.  His former position at the Air Force Agency for Modeling and Simulation (AFAMS) in Orlando, Florida, was as the Chief of the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS)/ National Air and Space Model (NASM) Branch, managing the development of the next generation Air Force battlestaff training M&S tool.  EMBED Word.Picture.8  