 Computer Generated Forces Air Defense Artillery: Providing a Viable ThreatDerek S. BryanDavid B. CavittBoris DobrydnevJoshua A. RodeMichael A. WhiteBMH Associates, Inc.5365 Robin Hood Road, Suite 100Norfolk, Virginia 23513-2441. U.S.A  HYPERLINK "mailto:dbryan@bmh.com" dbryan@bmh.com,  HYPERLINK "mailto:cavitt@bmh.com" cavitt@bmh.com,  HYPERLINK "mailto:dobrydnev@bmh.com" dobrydnev@bmh.com,  HYPERLINK "rode@bmh.com" rode@bmh.com,  HYPERLINK "white@bmh.com" white@bmh.comJohn LowryUS Army Aviation CenterDirectorate of Training, Doctrine and SimulationFort Rucker, AL 36362  HYPERLINK "mailto:lowryj@rucker.army.mil" lowryj@rucker.army.milKeywords: ADA, CGF, OTBSAF, AVCATT-AABSTRACT: Traditionally, Computer Generated Forces (CGF) development in the Semi-Automated Forces (SAF) community has required more realistic representations of friendly forces (BLUFOR) than of opposing forces (OPFOR).  One goal of the Army’s Aviation Combined Arms Tactical Trainer – Aviation Re-configurable Manned Simulator (AVCATT-A) program is to provide a viable OPFOR ADA threat for its Manned Modules (MM) through the use of real-world behavioral and physical models within OneSAF TestBed (OTBSAF).This paper presents several of the methodologies that were used to develop a real-world OPFOR ADA representation for AVCATT-A including:1. Knowledge Acquisition/Engineering (KA/E)2. Behavioral Models – React to Air Contact, Process/Provide Target Information Over ADA Networks, Engage Aerial Target3. Physical Models – Detonation, Guided Missiles, Infrared Seeker4. Fair fight between the MM and the CGFComplementing military crew and collective training through simulation requires tactically correct behaviors and representations.  SAF technologies allow the development community to provide state-of-the- art training systems to the military.  As training systems like AVCATT-A become more prominent, the military will be able to provide more realistic training to its warfighters at a lower cost.1. Introduction Using Computer Generated Forces (CGF) to augment training may no longer be considered a new concept.  In fact, the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marines all have developed simulators that utilize CGF, and other technologies, to enhance the realism of their training environments.  One example is the use of JSAF to provide a synthetic battlespace for fixed-wing pilots as part of the Air Force’s Distributed Mission Training (DMT) initiative.Now that the initial challenges of integrating training components have been overcome, many within the CGF development community are focusing their efforts in new areas.  The development of more realistic physical and behavioral models is one of these areas that aim to enhance the training that our warfighters receive.  How does the development of tactically correct physical and behavioral models occur?  In addition, how does one ensure that the product satisfies all of the required training objectives?  The following discussions will attempt to answer those questions, and many more.2. The PastRudimentary models of ADA in early SAF systems provided the ability to activate radar warning receivers on the virtual training devices and stimulate the aircrews into reactions that exercised the Military Decision Making Process (MDMP) in rotary wing aircraft simulators.  The ability to simulate the different modes of search, track, acquisition and terminal guidance was limited. Additionally, visual acquisition of the helicopter simulators by ADA systems, with subsequent transition to weapons engagement, had to be “played” by the SAF operator one-on-one. A SAF operator who changed the speed, direction and lethality of the entities to provide a challenging but not overwhelming threat to the soldiers being trained portrayed the maneuver of the ADA systems. This was usually only as effective as the skill of the operator. The shortfall here is that it was very hard to duplicate the exact threat system action/reaction to a second group of soldiers receiving the same training.3. The PresentThe Aviation Combined Arms Tactical Trainer – Aviation Reconfigurable Manned Simulator (AVCATT-A) system aims to provide a realistic synthetic training environment (STE) in which Army aviators can conduct collective training to standards specified in the Mission Training Plans (MTP).  Currently under development, the program requires integration between CGF technologies, as well as manned modules (MM) representing U.S. Army Rotary Wing Aircraft (RWA) [1].Requirements for the AVCATT-A system are identified in the System Level, Training Environment, MM, and Mobile Facility System/Subsystem Specifications (SSS).  The SSS address all requirements to provide a flexible, dynamic training environment.  The SSS requirements are evident throughout all phases of AVCATT-A software development, from the conceptual model (CM), to the software test description (STD).  This trace allows for a common framework between system components that may be used to support any verification, validation, and accreditation (VV&A) activities.3.1 OTBSAFThe CGF components of the AVCATT-A system are being developed within the Army’s OneSAF Test Bed (OTBSAF) simulation program.  OTBSAF is a government-owned, distributed simulation program configured to operate on a low-cost personal computer (PC) using the Linux operating system [1].  OTBSAF supports individual, team, collective, and combined arms training and provides the simulation infrastructure necessary to create real-world physical and behavioral models.  Semi-automated forces (SAF) programs such as OTBSAF are continually proving their utility in complex, dynamic environments such as AVCATT-A.3.2 KA/KEKnowledge Acquisition/Engineering (KA/KE) for AVCATT-A CGF was predicated on a thorough analysis of the requirements found in the Training Environment SSS (TE-SSS).  The challenge was to capture the essence of the real-world physical characteristics of air defense artillery equipment and systems while avoiding the pitfalls of trying to emulate, rather than simulate them.Recognizing this, the subject-matter experts (SMEs) and software engineers comprising the development team collaborated to determine the critical elements necessary to meet system requirements.  One issue was to determine what facets of ADA needed to be modeled.  Another factor was to determine how a potential enemy might employ the systems in an integrated fashion.  The vehicle chosen to convey this information was the conceptual model (CM).  The CM depicts those elements of the real world that meet TE-SSS requirements.  The development team analyzed the real-world elements of ADA equipment and systems, determined which ones needed to be treated as individual components (such as infrared and optical-visual sensors) and formulated a list of “common models” needed to represent ADA.  In keeping with current Department of Defense (DoD) directives, the team was able to reuse a number of common models previously created for other DoD applications, enhancing AVCATT-A, without the increased expense of new development.Furthermore, the team scrutinized the behaviors required by the SSS, identified the steps involved in each process and prepared state transition diagrams providing a logical depiction of the behaviors.  The resultant CM contributed to a more streamlined development process, since the developers and SMEs had a common understanding of programming objectives.   The AVCATT-A TE-SSS provided a list of eleven opposing forces (OPFOR) and seven blue forces (BLUFOR) air defense equipment and systems that the Army feels adequately represents the battlefield environment within which Army aviators are likely to operate.  The SSS also listed 10 basic behaviors the OPFOR ADA elements must perform in order to present a realistic threat representation to support the list of collective tasks from the MTPs AVCATT-A is required to support.Since AVCATT-A is to be operated in an unclassified environment, the models and underlying data must all come from unclassified sources.  A large portion of the technical data pertaining to both OPFOR and BLUFOR ADA equipment and systems was readily available through open sources, such as military publications and web sites on the Internet.  Similarly, information on how OPFOR and BLUFOR organize and employ these systems was generally accessible.   3.3 Physical System/Subsystem RepresentationsStimulants a trainee would expect to receive during training drove many requirements for the AVCATT-A system.  Visual inputs, in particular, were identified as key to providing a realistic training environment for the RWA aviators.  This requirement was satisfied, partially, through the implementation of tactically correct physical system/subsystem representations.  These representations are evident through the implementation of real world vehicle and unit compositions including the following ADA batteries: SA-8, SA-9, SA-13, SA-15, SA-19 (2S6), ZU-23, ZSU23-4, S60, Crotale, Roland, and Rapier.The trainee needs these representations because they stimulate visual and behavioral cues that will drive the decision-making processes that occur in warfare.  For example, if in the real world a trainee would expect to see a BTR60-PU command vehicle near a SA-8 battery, the simulation should contain the same representation.  The role of the command vehicle, as is the case with AVCATT-A, may not be tactically significant with respect to the desired training objective.  The representation, however, will be tactically significant, especially for RWA in the presence of ADA.3.4 Physical ModelingInspection of the following OTBSAF physical models revealed an inability to satisfy AVCATT-A SSS requirements: detonation, guided missiles, and infrared seeker.The existing implementation of the detonation model was not based on a mathematical foundation and was to some degree approximate. It may have worked well for some simple cases such as detonation between slow moving objects or detonation between a missile and a building. AVCATT-A requires a higher-fidelity representation. The model has to detect detonations between fast moving ADA missiles and their targets including rotary wing aircraft and fixed wing aircraft (FWA). Moreover, under increased simulation workloads low tick rates and large time intervals between consecutive ticks may occur. For these conditions, the original detonation model did not detect a substantial percentage of real-world detonations.The new detonation model is concise, straightforward, and based on solid, mathematical principles. The model assumes both the missile and target velocities to be constant during the time interval between two consecutive ticks. This assumption is good if times between ticks are small in comparison to characteristic velocity changes. Although it is possible for the detonation model to fail for extremely low tick rates, the consideration of this situation is impractical because all models within the simulation, including detonation, would be incapable of achieving even basic performance-related functions under these conditions.  The new detonation model has been proven to detect valid detonations beyond expected simulation workload within the AVCATT-A training environment.The guided missile model was also deemed inadequate for AVCATT-A and required modifications in both the guidance and flight dynamics components. Initial testing resulted in low engagement success rates against “dumb” targets, such as hovering helicopters that were not utilizing countermeasures. Some ADA missiles utilize a lead pursuit algorithm to guide themselves to their target. In this algorithm, a missile does not fly to the current target location but rather is aimed to some interception point based on the missile and target velocities. The implementation of this algorithm within OTBSAF miscalculated the interception point. This error led to abnormally high miss rates. After this problem had been fixed, the missile hit rate improved. The execution flow of the flight dynamics within the missile model also reduced success rates for guided missiles. The model utilized the guidance direction calculated from the previous tick of the model rather than that of the current update. Thus, the missile was often guided in the wrong direction and was not capable of intercepting its target.  This inaccuracy was exaggerated against fast moving targets. Previously, the missile flight dynamics model did not prevent missiles from climbing above their maximum altitude. This problem was corrected, and as a result, simulated missiles cannot achieve an altitude higher than their real-world limits.  In addition to the improved representation and performance, all of these changes have allowed a developer to more precisely control and tune the model.   Theoretically, the model could perform better than its real-world capabilities, but the data inputted into the model and the behavior of their targets reduces its success rates, just as it does in the real world.The following infrared missiles were required to satisfy AVCATT-A requirements: SA-9, SA-13, SA-16, SA-18, and Stinger.  Infrared signatures are used as input to the guidance component of these missile models. Since no infrared seeker model existed in OTBSAF, one was created for AVCATT-A. Infrared seeker simulation is comprised of the following components: estimation of infrared signature from potential targets, calculation of radiation loss caused by a signal transition through the atmosphere, and determination of the sensor ability to distinguish a signal from background noise. Deployment of possible counter and counter-countermeasures is also addressed.To obtain the infrared signature of a target aircraft, the model uses a table of IR signatures. Data in the table is organized by aircraft type. The signature values can be measured, obtained from literature sources or can be estimated using radiation physics. Infrared radiation received by a detector depends on the mutual orientation of the target and sensor. Radiation signatures from missiles and jet aircraft have their peaks directly behind the engine and slightly below the centerline. A standard chart of radiation intensity is tabulated and used to estimate the radiation from a jet aircraft or a missile depending on azimuth and elevation angles. The AVCATT-A IR signature table has a simple form in which the IR signal intensity depends only on the angle between the vector from the detector to the target and the aircraft direction.Infrared signals experience absorption, scattering, reflection and diffusion while traveling through the atmosphere. Generally, transmission of infrared radiation in the atmosphere is very complex due to a number of physical effects in the atmosphere but the major factors in the signal attenuation are absorption and scattering by atmospheric gases and aerosol particles. For practical purposes, the signal loss can be described by an attenuation coefficient. The latter depends on the atmospheric conditions and altitude. The attenuation coefficient data are tabulated for clear and hazy atmospheric conditions, for winter and summer, for tropical, midlatitude and subarctic regions, and for altitude.An infrared seeker has to detect a signal from a target and distinguish it from background noise and noise caused by the sensor itself. There are many known ways to eliminate signals from clouds, a horizon line, sun, sky, etc. The basic principle is that all background sources have some angular size while the signal from the target can be considered to be a point. Therefore, background radiation should be disregarded in the signal analysis. The sensor's ability to detect a target is determined in the following way. The infrared signature from the target is decreased by the propagation loss in the atmosphere as compared with the seeker sensitivity threshold. If the signal exceeds the threshold, it means it is strong enough to be recognized and the seeker can acquire a lock on the target. The sensitivity threshold is a parameter that can be adjusted for any infrared seeker type.Aircraft protect themselves from IR guided missiles by using various methods, including passive and active countermeasures. Flares are an example of a passive technique. Flares are usually deployed after visual confirmation of a missile launch. The purpose of a flare is to cause the missile to break lock on the target aircraft and be guided towards the flare. This method is very successful against older, unsophisticated IR sensors. Modern ADA missiles employ various methods to reject a flare as a target. Missiles use complex circuit technology and elaborate signal processing to detect the presence of flares, although no method can provide an absolute defense. Rise time, two-color approach, kinetic and special discrimination methods are used to recognize a flare. Unlike other aspects of IR seeker performance, which are common to all seeker brands, anti-flare methods and capabilities are unique for every missile type. Currently, the simulated IR seeker utilized in AVCATT-A is either susceptible, or not, to flares based on parametric input.Infrared jamming is an active countermeasure technique capable of degenerating IR seeker performance. Jamming produces high levels of noise that decrease seeker sensitivity. One way to simulate the effect of jamming is to decrease the sensitivity threshold of the sensor. A more elegant way, however, is to decrease the signal from the target. The signal-to-noise ratio is a fundamental sensor property and increasing noise has the same effect as decreasing the detected signal. The model currently assumes a signal-to-noise ratio of 1 and jamming causes the signal to be reduced by a ratio equivalent to the imposed jamming power. In this approach there is no need to account for the radiation loss of a jamming signal, while the latter propagates from the target to the jammed seeker. The current implementation of jamming is similar to that of the flare model, on or off.3.5 Behavioral ModelingIntegrated air defense systems (IADS) are a threat to airborne missions because they can disseminate detailed target information to their subordinates in a timely manner [2].  Although more recent publications address the most likely Threat Air Defense equipment and organizations, Weapons and Tactics of the Soviet Army, David C. Isby dated 1988 provides a definitive discussion of how countries of the former Soviet bloc (and countries that use these ADA systems and equipment) employ integrated air defense systems.   The AVCATT-A system addresses training objectives concerning IADS.The implementation of Process/Provide for AVCATT-A utilizes a command, control, and communications (C3) ADA command center to detect and relay target information to ADA batteries on its AD network.  The command center is composed of a command vehicle, height-finding radar, and ranging radar.  The radars work in tandem to detect and report aircraft activities to their commanding unit within their real-world parameters.  See Figure 1 for a graphical depiction of Process/Provide.  If necessary, the command center will pass information to its ADA batteries in the form of one of the following commands: idle (no command), track, illuminate, or fire.  If the ADA batteries do not receive any commands from their command center within a specified period they will act in an autonomous fashion.  While performing autonomously, weapons systems within the battery will detect, track, illuminate, and engage targets without authorization from their superiors or comprehension of activities performed by other elements within their battery.  Only while linked to a C3 ADA command center will subordinates act in a coordinated fashion.Coordinated activities for Process/Provide occur in the following manner: 1) the radars within the C3 ADA command center detect and report track information to their commander, 2) the commander receives the information and decides which ADA battery to utilize based on target range and aspect angle, 3) the battery commander receives the target information, along with a track command, and assigns them to a weapons system within the unit, 4) the C3 ADA command center will continue to provide track information until the target is eliminated or out of range, 5)   the weapons system tracks the target, 6) once the target is within engagement parameters of the weapons system, the illuminate and/or fire command is given, 7) the target is engaged, 8) engagement results are reported to the battery commander.A related collective task, Engage Aerial Target (Engage), required modifications to satisfy AVCATT-A requirements for target engagements in the following areas: Identify Friend or Foe (IFF), target tracking and engagements, and simulating resupply times for ADA weapons systems.  Engage may be summarized by the data flow diagram in Figure 2.The threat environment within AVCATT-A requires both command-guided, or radar frequency (RF), and fire and forget, such as infrared (IR), missiles.   Due to this, it was imperative the weapons systems were aware of both friendly and enemy activities within their respective engagement envelopes.  To prevent fratricide, the appropriate ADA batteries were modified to utilize IFF before engagement would occur.  If IFF were not a component of a weapons system, a visual id of the target was required.  A condition referred to by US Forces as “bittersweet” occurs when mixed forces are within the parameters of a weapons system as detected with IFF or visual sensors.  Bittersweet will cause the rules of engagement (ROE) for an ADA weapons system to change to hold.Originally, target tracking and engagements by ADA weapons systems in threat-rich environments would occur for non-threatening targets.  Through analysis, it was determined that immobile and/or expired targets were being reported and commanded by elements within the ADA battery.  To resolve this problem, the behaviors were modified to cease reporting fire control solutions for those targets that were successfully engaged or were no longer a threat to friendly systems.  This not only made the behavior more realistic, but also improved the number of potential and successful ADA engagements.Reload and resupply times for ADA weapons systems are essential when promoting fair fight in a realistic threat environment.  The RWA pilots within the AVCATT-A training system will expect that engagement intervals of threat systems are equivalent to their real-world parameters.  To accomplish this, the ADA weapons systems within AVCATT-A were modified to include resupply times, as reload times were previously implemented.  As a result, ADA weapons systems will now wait a specified time interval between engagements after their base load has been expended.All AD units do not use the C3 behavior models to process target engagements. This applies to dismounted and mounted Man Portable Air Defense Systems (MANPADS). They provide fast, efficient, and mobile AD capabilities. These units utilize reactionary behaviors, which when triggered, cause them to autonomously target, track and engage threats as needed. Improvements have been implemented to further automate the mounted MANPADS React to Air Contact behavior in the following manner.  Previously, the Armored Personnel Carriers (APC) with mounted MANPADS would, if an enemy were detected, engage or withdraw. Engagements, however, would only occur with weapons mounted on the vehicles.  Therefore, there was no reason for including the infantry within the units, in addition to the fact that it detracts from the training realism. Modifications have been made to make use of the DI so that when an enemy threat is detected the DI will dismount from the APCs. Once dismounted, and the enemy are within range, the MANPADS will engage until no enemies are detected or a user specified threat threshold is met.  When the engagement is complete, the DI will remount on the APCs and continue their previous mission.4. Fair FightAs is the case with all training systems that include multiple modeling and simulation components, achieving fair fight is key to providing a realistic, viable training environment.  Fair fight is significant within the AVCATT-A environment when discussing relevant system components within the MM and the CGF including sensor capabilities and weapons modeling.Requirements specified in the TE-SSS that addressed fair fight for sensor capabilities were focused on the SNE.  For example, visual, radar, and laser components must be negatively impacted by the occurrence of battlefield obscurants, to include smoke.  Although this requirement does not insure fair fight between simulation models it does provide a common framework that may be utilized to engineer the desired training effect.  Similarly for weapons modeling, a CGF entity must not have an unfair advantage or disadvantage with respect to a MM while engaging targets with a similar munition.  At this time, all fair fight issues have not been solved within the AVCATT-A system, but have been identified by the SSS or by the pertinent development team(s). 5. First ImpressionsDuring the first demonstration of the threat MANPAD, the most immediate advantage was the true semi-automated behaviors demonstrated by the dismounting soldier entities. This was done without SAF operator intervention on reaction or behaviors. SP, AA, and missile systems were also demonstrated with results that are greatly improved over previous SAF systems. Truly a step in the right direction and an improvement in the synthetic natural environment (SNE) the Aviation Branch uses to train aviation crews.  6. SummaryThe development efforts described above were necessary to ensure the desired end state of the AVCATT-A system.  The TE-SSS, founded on Army MTPs, provided a requirements foundation with which conceptual models, system descriptions, and software design documentation, may be produced.  This methodology allows for traceability of the resultant product, as well as promoting solid systems engineering and software development practices.  As a result, the AVCATT-A system will enhance the training Army aviators receive through the use of real world physical and behavioral representations.7. References[1] Bryan, Derek and Michael R. Oakes, Craig A. Petersen, Michael A. White  (2001).  Bridging the Gap Between Simulation and Training, 01S-SIW.[2] FM-100-2, Air Defense Artillery Reference Handbook (Washington, DC: Headquarters, Department of the Army, 2000), Chapter 2.8. Author’s BiographiesDEREK S. BRYAN is a software engineer for BMH Associates, Inc.  He holds a B.S. degree in computer science from James Madison University in May 1998.  He is BMH’s lead software developer for AVCATT-A , has been involved with the BFTT AMN project as a software developer, and was the technical lead for his company’s efforts on the DMT-C2 Program, as well as the program’s integration lead.DAVID B. CAVITT is a software engineer with BMH Associates, Inc., Norfolk, Virginia. He received his Ph.D. in Computer Science from Old Dominion University. He has 12 years of experience in the use and development of simulations for military and engineering applications. His research interests include modeling and simulation, performance analysis, and distributed systems. Mr. Cavitt is a member of ACM and IEEE CS.BORIS DOBRYDNEV is a research scientist for BMH Associates, Inc.  He holds a M.S. degree in computer science and Ph.D. degree in physics from Old Dominion University.  He is a software developer for AVCATT-A, and has been involved with the BFTT AMN and JSAF FBE projects.JOSHUA A. RODE has been a software developer for BMH Associates since February 2000.  Currently, he is attending Old Dominion University in pursuit of a B.S. in Computer Science.  Mr. Rode developed numerous physical and behavioral models for the AVCATT-A system.MICHAEL A. WHITE is a Senior Systems Engineer with BMH Associates, Inc., Norfolk, Virginia, currently providing Knowledge Acquisition and Engineering (KA/E) support for the Army Aviation Combined Arms Tactical Trainer (AVCATT-A) program. Mr. White holds a B.S. in Professional Aeronautics and an MBA in Aviation from Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University.Figure 2: Engage Aerial Target Data Flow Diagram EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  -HeightAcquisition/Figure 1: Process/Provide Target Information Over ADA NetworksFindingRadar SolutionsSearch/Track/IlluminateCommandIdle/Track/Fire CommandEngagement Result