Real-Time PlatformReference FOMStandards Development Group18 March, 1999Simulation Interoperability WorkshopOrlando, FLMeeting MinutesIntroductionMeeting chaired by: RPR FOM SDG Chair Richard SchafferMinutes prepared by: RPR FOM SDG Secretary Doug Wood and Allison Griffin Support GroupAttendees: List comingNext Teleconference: 6 April 1999Next Meeting: Possible face-to-face meeting in May in the Boston area.  Announcements will be made on the reflector and posted to the web site.Actions:Action: Wood will make sure these rules make it into GRIM regarding CR39/49 - #4 & #14Action: Shanks will make sure the GRIM is consistent regarding CR43-#18.Action: GRIM needs to address TSPI update condition rules.Goals of RPR FOMFacilitate transition of DIS implementations to the HLAMaintain interoperability among DIS simulations once they are transitionedAgenda for this meetingIntroduction and recent activities	- SchafferGRIM Comment Resolution Review	- ShanksRPR FOM Comment Resolution Review - ReillyVote on release of FOM 	- SchafferVote on release of GRIM	- SchafferNew BusinessSchedule reviewRecent SDG HistoryDocument/VersionRelease/Due DateRPR FOM 0.6 Released10/14GRIM CM Plan open for comment10/26Final Change Requests for RPR FOM 0.710/29Teleconference to finalize RPR FOM 0.711/12Final ARs for Balloting approved by SAC11/20Ballot of GRIM CM Plan closes11/25AR Ballot of RPR FOM begins11/25AR Ballot of GRIM begins12/2RPR FOM & GRIM Ballot closes12/23Comment Resolution Meeting in San Diego1/7&8RPR FOM 0.8beta released to GRIM DG3/10GRIM 0.8v1 Draft released3/11RPR FOM SDG MembersChair: Richard SchafferSecretary: Douglas WoodFOM Drafting Group	Editor: Graham Shanks	Michael O’Connor   + VolunteersStandard Drafting Group	Editor: Sean Reilly	Keith Briggs   + VolunteersAssigned Reviewers	Jeff Fischer	Len Granowetter	Jim Hammond	John Hancock	Steve Monson	Steven Sheasby	Chris TurrellSISO Standards Handbook GuidanceComments on draft documents are collected at three levels.  When the SDG has a draft which is ready, it votes to submit it to the Assigned Reviewers for comment.  The draft is distributed and comments are collected via the SISO Comment Scheme.  Each comment is recorded and made available to the SDG and ARs.  At the end of the comment period, comments are resolved (acted upon) and the document revised accordingly.  Several comment periods may be needed before the necessary 75% majority votes that the document is suitable for public review.  It is important that every change to the document is traceable to a comment, so that the rationale for the change can be maintained.Community Ballot PlanThe SAC Chair, RPR FOM TAD, RPR Chair, GRIM DG Leads, and Support Group met at lunch.We’re the guinea pigs for the SISO Standards process.Recommendations:Ballot Pool is membership of SISO-ADMIN reflector (plus all other SISO members)Opportunity to join ballot group is announced on SISO-ADMIN reflector (and by other means to be determined by the SAC).  Individuals have 30 days to respond with contact information and information.By signing up to the ballot pool you indicate that you have a material interest in the RPR FOM and are committed to review and ballot the documents by the specified deadlines.SDG chair has maximum of 7 days to review for balance.SAC has maximum of 8 days to approve Ballot Group.Both SAC and SDG chair have opportunity to invite other participants if ballot group unbalancedVoters encouraged to vote on both FOM and GRIMThe RPR FOM and the GRIM are scheduled for balloting in the next 5 months.  The Standards Development Group (SDG) Handbook is in draft form but is available for use by SDGs.  The SDG Handbook does not outline the requirements for balloting of a Standard through SISO.  The current plan is to create a balllot group by e-mail and other mechanisms and allow people 30 days to sign up.  There are still remaining questions concerning the use of the terminology Ballot Pool and Ballot Group.  The SAC Chair recommended that the RPR FOM SDG Chair forward the SAC the Ballot Pool/Ballot Group requesting approval.  No response infers approval of the pool/group by the SAC.  The SAC Chair also stated that the SAC prefers the SDG utilize electronic balloting of the Standards.  There was a question whether the Ballot Group/Pool can be formed even if the documents are ready for balloting.The RPR FOM SDG will utilize the Comment Tracking System on the SISO site to ballot the documents and to collect comments during balloting.  Avote was taken at this meeting whether the documents are ready for balloting.  The results of the vote were that 25 were in favor of the documents going to balloting with 0 opposed. Community Ballot ResolutionMinimum of 30days for initial ballot.  (We could allow more.)10 days thereafter for mail ballots to arrive.75% of  ballot group must respond75% of responders must be affirmative.Proposed Ballot ScheduleMarch 23 - Issue announcement for Ballot Group Formation.April 23 - Ballot Group closesno later than May 10 - Ballot Group approvedMay 12 - Community Balloting beginsJune 11 - Community Balloting closesJune 14 - Ballot review startsJuly 13 - Ballot review meetingAugust 9 - Ballot review completesTechnicalGRIMPresented by Sean ReillyPurpose of the GRIMRPR FOM has mapped DIS fields into separate classes. GRIM provides mapping between DIS PDUs and RPR FOM classes.  Provides guidance to what is required, optional, and what are default values.Adds a set of usage rules above and beyond those specified in the Object Model Template.Mapping between RPR FOM and DIS.Increased support for default fields.Guidance and rational needed for extendibility.Create meaningful rules for "compliance" and "compatibility”.These terms have no meaning without a set of testable “shall” rules. Of course, as a reference FOM, users are free to change theses practices to meet their own development needs.  However, deviations may not have a-priori interoperability with other systems based on the RPR FOM.Contents of the GRIMGeneral FOM Guidance and RationalRPR FOM Class StructureProvides mapping from RPR FOM back to DISGuidance, rational, and modalities provided in text.RPR FOM Interaction StructureSimilar in format to Class Structure sections.Breaks down Interactions into Families for ease of description.Mapping from DIS to the RPR FOMNeeded to support transition of legacy DIS systems to HLAHistory of the GRIMSpring SIW 1997 (Orlando, FL)First formal mapping between RPR FOM version 0.1.5 and DIS.June Interim Meeting 1997 (San Diego, CA)All additional guidance and rational put into a single document.Spring SIW 1998 (Orlando, FL)Current document structure starts to take shape as a composite of chapters provided by multiple authors.July Interim Meeting 1998 (Newport, RI)RPR FOM stood up as SISO Standards Development Group (SDG)Fall SIW 1998New GRIM 0.4/0.5 provides a baseline for SDG documentation effort.January Interim Meeting 1999 (San Diego, CA)Debated and resolved 96 GRIM comments from the Assigned ReviewersSpring 1999 (today)Assigned reviewer comments have been incorporated into 0.8v1.Move on to community ballot?Summary of Assigned Reviewer Ballot of DocumentType of VoteCountPercent of Total"Accept As Is" Votes 111.11% "Accept with Comments" Votes888.89%"Reject" Votes00.00%Total9100%Assigned Reviewer CommentsAssigned reviewers generated 96 suggested changes.Drafting group divided comments into five “debate code” to frame the discussion:1) Minor Editorial, Suggest Bulk Acceptance. 2) Minor Editorial, Limited Debate Required. 3) Minor Technical, Suggest Bulk Acceptance.4) Minor Technical, Limited Debate Required. 5) Major Technical or Major Editorial, Major Debate Required.Trying for an approach different from suggesting resolutions.After debate, resolutions recorded in document change history.Debate Codes 1 & 3#1 - Minor Editorial, Suggest Bulk AcceptanceSpelling and grammar.Sentence wording unclear.Bad cross references, company name, assorted stuff.43 comments#3 - Minor Technical, Suggest Bulk AcceptanceChanges which clarifying existing guidance.Example: Comment #83 Graham ShanksI'd like to see the defaults for optional attributes in the tables in section 624 commentsDebate Codes 2 & 4#2 - Minor Editorial, Limited Debate RequiredCan’t decide if the comment is inaccurate or in the wrong section.Agreed that original needs fixing, but the replacement is worse. True?  If it is, we will change it.4 comments#4 - Minor Technical, Limited Debate RequiredShould be OK, but needs visibility.Agreed, but alternate solution suggested by drafting group.True?  If it is, we will change it.19 commentsCode 5 - Technical with Major DebateThe statement was made that use-cases are needed but not sure where it belongs.  It is also noted that SIMAN versions are not complete overlapping.  The response to this is that both SIMAN interactions will be maintained.  Also, aggregate was included because of Shanks need but RPR FOM 1.0 standard is targeting 1995 DIS.Comment #19		Steven Sheasby 	Add Examples to the GRIMWhile the GRIM covers the basics of using the RPR FOM, there are a couple of areas that could use examples to help demonstrate key concepts with the RPR FOM.Comment #30		John Hancock	Sunset for old SIMAN stuff?Will we be growing two SIMAN approaches in the RPR FOM, or does one have a pre-determined sunset? Explicitly enumerate the sunset and migration path. Comments # 28 & #31	 John Hancock	 The RPR FOM is not a FOMRename this thing, at least to RPR-RFOM (Where RFOM is minimally defined as a partial (or full if you can manage) FOM plus reuse Meta-Data.Clarify in all supporting documentation that the RPR-RFOM is the OMT-Data, plus the GRIM and any other required meta-data...Comments #21 & #22	Larry Rieger	IsGroupOf and IsPartOfIf we are going to use the Aggregate State PDU as a basis for the AggregateEntity class, it would be smart to also consider the IsGroupOf PDU and the IsPartOf PDU.  Same with EmbeddedSystems.None of these accepted for incorporation into the current document.In Progress AR IssuesIt is noted that Sean has touched base with most commenters at this SIW to resolve the outstanding issues.  There are still some outstanding punch list items but if these are taken care of then the documents should be ready for Community Balloting.DIS 1278.1a - 1995 Reference in Parameter TablesSome of the classes have not yet been filled in.Alignment StatementGraham and Sean worked on new, better language over lunch.Inappropriate Appearance or CapabilitiesAttribute definition column will be modified to reference appropriate “leaf node” types when this is a problem.Add statement to scope specifying that the GRIM defines the usage rules.Add clarifying language which describes how Radio ID is located.Remove Aggregate class until RPR FOM 2.0 effort.Emitter beam discussion does not accurately reflect 0.8 changes.Doug Wood volunteered to provide this text.Document Auto-numberingSection and Table numbers needs to be checked.Ready for Community Balloting?We had hoped to have ZERO outstanding issues by today’s meeting.The known remaining issues seem to be easily resolved.Did we miss any of the assigned reviewers comments?Can we vote to take the GRIM to community ballot on 3/25?The Chair stated that no vote will be taken on this tonight.RPR FOMPresentation and discussion led by Graham ShanksSummary of Comments/CRs23 commentsEntered as CRs (automatically closed)2 new CRsCR46 - editorialCR61 - use of OMDD namesProposalNew SCRs be automatically added as comments in the next roundComment Resolution StatusCRT draft 5 out next weekComments incorporated into RPR FOM v0.8Affirmative responses received from all commentorsVersion 0.7 Comments and ResolutionsComment resolution table is updated.Comment resolution table, CR table and FOM should all agree.There is a concern the there may be potential changes to lexicon and that the OMDD not going to correspond one to one. Where definitions are equivalent the OMDD should adopt them. Where OMDD is more general then propose adopting general form.  This comment has not been submitted yet but there is a need to submit it now.  This comment could be resolved as a minor editorial comment and closed.The Change Request system has also be collecting changes to the RPR FOM.  New SCRs will be automatically added as comments in next round of document review.  61 should be added to automatically entered in as comments in next round.Would have to open CRs for 2.0. If system is maintained would be no hassle to Shanks.It was stated that CR tool is there provides expedient method to get feedback on comments. As procedure matter, Roy should put in comment in ballot.There is a concern of what will happen if the Change Request author is not in ballot group.It was noted that there is a difference between the comment resolutions in the Comment Tracking System (CTS) and the Change Request (CR) tools.  The CR tool was the original method for tracking changes.  It was designed to provides software configuration management.  The CTS was designed to collect community response or comments on the current revision of a posted document.There was a proposal made to hold a teleconference on the issue of the CTS and the CR concerning comment 61 specifically [not CR CM tool].  It was also suggested that it would be best to address this comment (OMDD?) prior to balloting.  If this is postponed until after balloting it may require re-balloting of the documents.  The lexicon has been taken almost verbatim but there is a concern about the names.  The effect of names changes on implementers would mean they would have trouble with names. Don’t want impression that drafting group is sneaking change at last minute.The proposal is to discuss the OMDD change in preparation for the submittal of a comment during balloting.  Any changes would have to be reviewed by the Assigned Reviewers (process?).  Once balloting has begin no changes can be made without the submittal of a comment.  There is a proposal to form a group or tiger team to determine the best solution for the OMDD problem over a teleconference.Currently the Assigned Reviewer process is still open.  The statement was made that the OMDD problem should have been submitted by one of the Assigned Reviewers.A Motion was made to hold a  teleconference to address this issue.  A vote was taken and motion passes.  A teleconference will be set up to discuss the OMDD issue and the procedure for resolving the issue.  Briggs made a Motion to ask Jim Hammond to submit this comment as part of community ballot assuming we have approval to move to community balloting. No second.  Motion does not pass.It was agreed that Graham Shanks as editor of the RPR FOM would be responsible for making sure all OPEN Change Requests are submitted as comments during the balloting of the document.  The CRT will be used alone for community balloting and the CR tool will be turned off at this time.  The CR tool will be turned back on and used in the development of the 2.0 version of the document.Shanks notified all commentors on version 0.7 of the resolution to their comments.  RPR FOM 0.8 review (major issues)CR48 - #3Add CulturalFeature, Supplies and Expendables as subclasses of PhysicalEntityAdd MilitaryRadio and MilitarySensor as subclasses of MilitaryEntityAdd CivilRadio and CivilSensor as subclasses of CivilEntityCR39/49 - #4 & #14EmitterBeam class is now subscribable onlyTrackJamBeam subclass replaced by two new class: RadarBeam and JammerBeamThe RadarBeam object class has the following attributes: HighDensityTrack - boolean TrackObjectIDs - object ID listThe JammerBeam object class has the following attributes:JammingModeSequence - 32 bit integer HighDensityJam - boolean JammedObjectIDs - object ID listNotes 32 and 33 added to explain limitation on the object IDs contained in TrackObjectIDs and JammedObjectIDsAction: Wood will make sure these rules make it into GRIM.CR54 - #11MilitaryPlatformEntity becomes MilitaryPlatform MunitionEntity becomes MunitionCR47 - #2 & #8Remove AggregateClass and associated structuresNot being abandoned, just removed from 1.0CR43 - #18ArticulatedParametersStruct now contains ParameterValueStruct, with three fields as follows:ParameterType - 8-bit enum, cardinality 1ArticulatedParts - structure, cardinality 0-1AttachedParts - structure, cardinality 0-1ArticulatedPartsStruct contains:Class - 32-bit enumTypeMetric - 32 bit enumValue - 32 bit floatAttachedPartsStruct contains:Station - 32-bit enumStoreType - EntityTypeStructParameter type is part of structure. Looking at DIS class it is broken down into type metric..DIS can not fit in bit boundaries. But most practice is just adding together and not using bit boundaries.  The comment has been checked to make sure it follows convention.Action: Shanks will make sure the GRIM is consistent regarding CR43-#18.CR 56 - #20Added explanation of update conditionsRules on update of TSPI dataBasic rules the same as DIS dead reckoning (i.e. Only update attribute is position or orientation thresholds are exceeded)Difference - only update attributes if they have changedAction: GRIM needs to address TSPI update condition rules.Future DraftsVersion 0.8 out next weekBaseline is 98-1 EBVVersion 2.0 Draft 1 out next weekChanges to version 0.8 will be incorporated into the v2.0 draftsThere will not be a version 1.12.0 daftAggregate classEnvironment process and gridded data2.0 will be a rapid drafting process initially.Double maintenance will not be carried out. All changes after 1.0 will be made to 2.0.ISSUESComment #12 Tiger TeamLittle progressInitial task is to identify which elements of the RPR FOM come from the EBVThen make proposal on how a split would workSplit plan would require both RPR FOM version and Enumeration version to be established for interoperability.  The progress on how to split it has been slow.This will be discussed at the planned teleconference.Several suggestions were made as follows:Separate document or reference to existing document.Break RPR FOM into two separate FOMs that independently are not whole but this may not address entity type issues.entity type will cross reference out from the FOM. Types will be integers and not enumerations. Once IEEE HLA standard gives variant records, propose putting entity type as a variant recordKeith: Results of this tiger team will be in 1.0 for comment resolution or can it be ignored until 2.0.These changes seem too complicated to be included in the 1.0 version which will be posted for balloting but the editor would like to submit the changes if a sufficient solution is developed.Briggs made a Motion to target change for 2.0. Scope of this change is massive and requires major and significant delay to 1.0 document. Sean seconds. The statement was made that making this decision does not take away right to make comment.  A vote was taken there were 8 for and 7 against.  The motion must be made in the reflector.  Some members of the group would like to  “Establish policy that enumerations would not be split until version 2.0”.  It was noted that whatever policy is decided on can not restrict comments.Radio IssueDIS had sufficient information in the Radio Transmitter PDU to allow simulated radios to just “subscribe” to radio PDUsCurrent implementation requires simulated radios to subscribe to the transmitter’s hostDIS had sufficient information in radio transmitter PDU to allow simulated radios to just subscribe to radio PDUs.  Current implementation requires simulated radios to subscribe to the transmitter and host.This is closer to DIS implementation. Allows stand alone radio simulation without entity simulation. Proposal to ballot this will wait until community ballot.IsPartOfProposal has been posted to reflector (HTML)Needs checking against DIS PDUsAll entities that can be loaded onto another platform will include an optional pointer to the parent entityPosition of “embarked system” is relative to host “Embarked” objects can stop updating attributes OR  delete “embarked” objects Larry and Sean did work on this issue.Use cases and proposed interactions have been drafted.  How Gateway application can handle the proposed solution is one item left to develop.  Two general applications: Want to put vehicles on other vehicles. IsGroupOf is same type of thing but with Aggregate it is redundant (i.e., soldier joining a vehicle as opposed to battalion does not make a difference in RPR FOM). Entities would stop making updates. Would need to add attributes to base entity. And would require interactions for handshaking.  There is a concern that 2.0 will go beyond 1998 PDU representation.  The intent of the drafting group is to represent 1998 functionality in spirit.2.0It was proposed that Minefield and Acoustics need to be added.There will not be a vote on these items or version tonight. Issue on HLA SDGAll of issues brought to HLA have been resolved in one way or another.Except for atomic delivery across objects.No activity on this issue. Request that people join reflector and try to come up with solution.The statement was made that concerning IEEE Spec there will be radical changes to OMT Format. Some time this summer there will be a feel for when tools will be updated. RPR FOM will not change to new format until tool support is available.RPR FOM SDG 18 March, 1999Meeting MinutesPAGE  1PAGE  5