Minutes T&E Forum:	The T&E forum conducted another successful session at the Spring 99 SIW.  We had the opportunity to hear 8 top-notch presentations.  The papers showed that the test community has moved from talking about the potential of using HLA and ADS for T&E to using these technologies to solve real T&E problems.	The salient points noted from each presentation were:99S-SIW-173, Using the SEAM-LSS Environment to Realistically Emulate CommunicationsMust have realistic communications simulation for realistic training.The DARPA-funded SEAM_LSS can be used for:	Training with realistic communications	MITL validation of communications protocols	Realistic communications degradation in SE99S-SIW-163, Bradley Fighting Vehicle(BVF) A3 Synthetic Environment LIVE Fire (SELF) Results for Limited User Test (LUT) 1 and LUT 2Using a simulator for pretest training was highly beneficial.For simulated target acquisition, the right visual fidelity was important.T&E data was important for simulation validation.99S-SIW-082, Lessons Learned Migrating Legacy Engineering Models to the HLA (CVES a Case Study)Less cost and effort to wrap legacy code with C++.Shared memory RTI would add value.Migration should be a systems engineering process.99S-SIW-173, Test and Evaluation Federation Experience and Lessons Learned Using the Federation Development and Execution ProcessFEDEP is a systems engineering process that has to work with other processes.FEDEP is not necessarily a serial process.Not all tools/products are equally useful for this application.	ICD and FEPW were critical.	With comprehensive ICD, FOM was only used for compliance test.99S-SIW-022, Data Collection in an HLA FederationData must be collected at each node to not load down a T&E network.Implementation of the interface logger showed no degradation in latency..99S-SIW-091, Closed Loop Testing Of Avionics Systems Using Distributed Interactive Simulation TechnologyLegacy tools can still do the job.99S-SIW-002, Verification And Validation Of Distributed Air-To-Air Missile TestsRange “truth” data needs to be validated before it is used as a baseline.The available recommended practices guides (RPG) are useful sources of V&V methods.Allow time for multi-step incremental V&V methodology.Invited Paper:  Bert Schneider  -  AIM-9X Modeling and Simulation VV&A Program For complex simulation systems, an incremental VV&A approach is the recommended path to success.A VV&A master plan is important for the distributed test team.M&S V&V should be an integral part of T&E.	The T&E forum’s nomination for the SIW Recommended Reading List is 99S-SIW-173, Test and Evaluation Federation Experience and Lessons Learned Using the Federation Development and Execution Process by Maj Darrell Wright and Phil Zimmerman.	Our thanks to all the presenters for an excellent job.	For the Fall 99 SIW, we seek papers in the following four areas:1. Success stories and lessons learned in the actual use of ADS in T&E of systems currently being procured. 2. Data collection during applications in a distributed simulation environment with emphasis on T&E applications.3. Linking legacy facilities with simulations or live assets and modifications of facilities to attain a distributed simulation capability, including assessments both of where this is advantageous and where it is not.4. The use of testing to collect data to support the validation of models and distributed simulation environments.	The T&E Outbriefing follows. EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8   EMBED PowerPoint.Slide.8  