ENTROPY BASED WARFARETM IN SUPPORT OF JOINT EXPERIMENTATIONDouglas D.  MartinBooz•Allen and Hamilton816 Greenbrier CircleSuite 208Chesapeake, VA  23320757-523-4324Mark HermanBooz•Allen and Hamilton8283 Greensboro DriveMcLean, VA  22102703-902-5986Keywords:Training, Exercise, Wargaming, Experimentation, Simulation, EBWABSTRACT:  Entropy Based Warfare TM (EBW) is a new method of modeling warfare, based on the entropy metric, that demonstrates the commonality of different styles of warfare across the conflict spectrum.  Essentially, future warfare cannot be adequately modeled using attrition as the primary measure of effectiveness.  In the context of this paradigm, the goal of forces is to disorder the enemy while maintaining their own cohesion.  Certainly the destruction of an enemy force can accomplish this, but there are other dimensions that can now produce the same impact.  The physics metric, entropy, is used to describe the state of disorder imposed on a military system at a given moment.  Broadly, this metric is based on the fact that military forces are trained - and required - to act in a cohesive and organized manner.  In conflict, a military force is subject to various pressures that create disorganization.  In this paradigm, a military unit whose entropy has risen to the maximum level is no more than a mob.  The mechanism by which enemy disorganization and ineffectiveness are measured is entropy.  The organized application of the entropy metric is the foundation of EBW1.  Traditional models handle information by taking an attrition based model and incorporating information effects.  EBW is an information based model that includes attrition effects.EBW was selected as the M&S tool of choice to support the US Joint Forces Command (JFCOM) Joint Experimentation event Rapid Decisive Operations (RDO), analytic wargame.Rapid Decisive Operations (RDO) is defined as the combination of capabilities that can be applied on short notice that, once applied, creates a near instantaneous operational "show stopper" for the adversary.  The RDO concept describes how a joint force commander (JFC) can determine and rapidly employ the right balance of air, land, sea, space , and information capabilities in an intense, focused, non-linear campaign to defeat an adversary's strategic and operational centers of gravity without a protracted campaign.  It also addresses many of Joint Vision 2010's 21st Century Challenges and incorporates a number of JV 2010's Desired Operational Capabilities2. 1.  IntroductionIn the world environment of today, precision weapons, new sensors, and information architectures have altered the way we engage in warfare and operations other than war, and how the outcomes of those engagements are decided.  A brief look at recent events such as Desert Storm and Operation Allied Force provides validation of  the Joint Vision 2010 concepts – where Information Superiority and Information Operations are key components3.No longer do we base our strategies on campaigns where massive attrition of enemy forces must take place in order to win, in fact it's now the opposite.  The Air Force is interested in using precision munitions that provide cascading effects from an attack on a key infrastructure node, such as a communications hub or electrical power grid distribution point.  Additionally, a precept of Information Operations is to deter conflict by influencing potential adversaries through manipulation of information.2.  Evolving Modeling and Simulation RequirementsJoint Experimentation requires the capability to explore new organizational concepts, tactics, and technologies in an iterative process.  The results obtained from this exploration process will be used in the recommendations for changes in force structure, doctrine, personnel, etc. In turn, to better analyze, train, and experiment with these new types of operations, the models and simulations (M&S) that we use must also evolve accordingly.  Virtually, all of the simulations in use today that support analysis, training, and experimentation are attrition based.  This was one reason that analyses of Iraq just prior to Desert Storm indicated the likely outcome of significant US casualties in defeating Iraq militarily.  However, as we now know, things turned out considerably different.  M&S tools that give value to factors other than attrition, such as cohesion of enemy forces, would probably have predicted events differently.  Essentially, future warfare can't be adequately modeled using attrition as the primary measure of effectiveness.3.  Discussion of EntropyThe physics metric of entropy can be used to describe the state of disorder imposed on a military system at a given moment.  Military forces are trained, and required, to act in a cohesive and organized manner.  In conflict, a military force is subject to various pressures that create disorganization.  In this paradigm, a military unit whose entropy has risen to the maximum level is no more than a mob.  The application of the entropy metric is the foundation of entropy-based warfare4.The effects of friction, disruption, and lethality are key factors that produce entropy within a unit.  Friction comprises those activities the unit performs that increases its entropy level (includes training, fatigue, morale).  Disruption includes those activities that the enemy conducts to increase a unit's entropy level.  Lethality is the firepower a unit has to directly reduce the enemy forces through physical contact5.  See Fig 1. below.    Fig 1. Relationship of Friction, Disruption, and Lethality4.  Modeling Entropy Based WarfareEntropy Based Warfare TM (EBW) is a new method of modeling operations, based on the entropy metric, that demonstrates the commonality of different styles of warfare across the conflict spectrum. Traditional models handle information by taking an attrition based model and incorporating information effects.  EBW is an information based model that includes attrition effects.The design objective of EBW was to take extant understanding of the Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA) and build a model that allows players to manipulate high-sensitivity variables, such as space and time, to explore RMA organizational and operational concepts.5.  Background and Evolution of EBWInitially developed in support of the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD)/Net Assessment and its Director, Andrew Marshall, the model has been co-developed with the departments of the Army, Navy, and the Air Force, the US Joint Forces Command (JFCOM), and DARPA.  The model conducts integrated campaign analysis and wargame assessments covering all facets of warfare and employing new measures of effectiveness.  EBW has been used to support:•Service Title 10 wargames and assessment:∙∙Army After Next (operational and IO wargames since 1997 and overall campaign modeling and decision support for ('00) Army Transformation Wargame)∙∙Air Force Global Engagement 1997-1999 Wargames∙∙Navy Global Wargame 1998•Futures wargames and assessment:∙∙OSD/Net Assessment: Power Projection Net Assessment Asia and SWA Wargames∙∙JFCOM J9 Rapid Decisive Operations Wargame ('00)∙∙Navy, Fleet Information Warfare Center: Perception Management Wargame ('00)•Analytic support:∙∙OSD/Net Assessment: Information Warfare Net AssessmentEBW was originally developed as a "manual" simulation (i.e, a boardgame).  Automation followed to provide better displays, rapid excursion runs ("what-if" analysis), and improved record keeping.  Additional automation optimized rapid integrated assessments in support of wargames and exercises.  The computerized version of the model allows the analysts to rapidly create scenarios, including various unit, weapon, and sensor types, and explore a variety of concepts.  Furthermore, the model runs on a standard Pentium II PC, which allows for greater ease of use, as well as an enhanced ability to conduct excursions and integrate with databases and spreadsheets for model inputs and outputs.  EBW is an object-oriented model, written in C++, and is capable of handling thousands of entities.  EBW will be HLA compliant in the future.6.  What EBW Does and Doesn't DoEBW does require humans-in-the-loop to function.  It was not intended to be a self running simulation.  The real value here is in the exploration of new and different ways of conducting military operations, evaluating new doctrine and tactics, techniques, and procedures, as well as the manipulation of soft factors, such as leadership and experience, and the ability to run multiple excursions.EBW enables exploration of key variables and testing of operational and organizational concepts associated with military transformation, required in the Joint Experimentation environment.  These key areas include:- Impact of organization, on force effectiveness- Impact of leadership, on force effectiveness- Impact of human factors such as training, experience, fatigue, and morale, on force effectiveness- Command and control cycle advantage- Integrated impact of C4ISR and lethality on unit performance- Integrated Information Operations- Logistics and sustainment- Non-attrition based measures of effectiveness (MOEs)- Space warfare EBW represents land, air, sea, undersea, space, and cyberspace as specific environments where conflict takes place.  Through the use of integrated Geographic Information System (GIS) tools ("Map Objects" and "Arc View"), EBW employs standard National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) map products and Digital Terrain Elevation Data (DTED) Level 1 for terrain and line of sight.  EBW is capable of using any scale of map.  Additionally, mapping information can be viewed in layers which separate cultural features such as road networks, communication networks, logistics networks, and cities.  Natural features such as lakes and rivers can be separated into layers as well.  Specific vegetation can be represented at the same scale as the map products.Weather and the associated affects on sensors and operations is represented.EBW is designed to operate at Strategic, Operational, and Tactical levels, therefore the weapons systems and associated units can be represented at the aggregrate level or at the platform level depending on the type of scenario that is being run.  However, EBW isn't an engineering-level model.  This is because the primary purpose of EBW is to perform as an integrated campaign tool and not to measure specific weapon parametrics.  Speed of operation, rapid scenario and database builds, quick modifications for excursion analysis, and rapid assessment are additional reasons why EBW doesn't operate at the engineering-level, although, certain aspects are represented in great detail, such as information flows, sensor performance, sustainment levels, etc.7.  EBW ComponentsEBW operates with the following integrated support tools: - Campaign Planning Tool- Political Will Model- 3D Visualization Tool  The Campaign Planning Tool is designed to support the player/user.  It captures high-level information such as Commander's guidance, as well as a detailed enemy assessment, course of action and concept of operations.  In addition, the Planning Tool allows players to conduct unit tasking and captures their desired effects, and then feeds that information directly into the EBW model for adjudication.The Political Will Model represents the will of an individual or an organization to support a given course of action or policy.  This tool features a set of constituents (individuals and organizations relevant to the scenario), their relationships to one another, and their predetermined characteristics.  Events which take place during the scenario, such as the destruction of a munitions storage facility containing weapons of mass effects produce a proportional effect on the will of the constituents to continue with a course of action.  The preconditions describing the constituents will determine whether and how they respond to an event and to what degree.  Additionally, constituents will respond to or influence one another following an event based on the predetermined relationships of the constituents (i.e. a high level of influence to none).   This allows a realistic representation of the effects of leadership as it is influenced by the events and the other relevant individuals and organizations.  The Political Will Model is a key feature when performing Information Operations.  See Fig 2 Below. EMBED PowerPoint.Show.8  Fig 2. Impact of events on relationships and associated results.The 3D Visualization Tool enables a 3D replay of a recorded activity that took place during an EBW event.  These replays are extremely valuable for After Action Reviews (AAR) and incorporate a range of multimedia inputs as well.  The replays can be stored as QuickTime or MPEG movies on a CD containing voice-over narration.8.  Supporting Joint ExperimentationEBW was selected as the M&S tool of choice to support the JFCOM Joint Experimentation event Rapid Decisive Operations (RDO), analytic wargame.RDO is defined as the combination of capabilities that can be applied on short notice that, once applied, creates a near instantaneous operational "show stopper" for the adversary.  The RDO concept describes how a joint force commander (JFC) can determine and rapidly employ the right balance of air, land, sea, space, and information capabilities in an intense, focused, non-linear campaign to defeat an adversary's strategic and operational centers of gravity without a protracted campaign.  It also addresses many of Joint Vision 2010's 21st Century Challenges and incorporates a number of JV 2010's Desired Operational Capabilities. "Rapid Decisive Operations aims to strike at the heart of the adversary's operational forces to achieve rapid strategic success.  RDO is targeted largely at winning small-scale contingencies through application of Joint combat power.  The concept seeks to employ the full range of joint capabilities to rapidly control, deny, degrade, or destroy strategic and operational centers of gravity using methods and capabilities that enable a rapid operational strike without having to conduct an extensive buildup of forces and support in the theater of operation.  RDO will create a more credible conventional deterrence and bring quicker conflict resolution.  RDOtargets the global conditions and technology availability of the 2004-2016 time frame.  The essence of the RDO concept emphasizessituational understanding, immediate response capability, speed, and massing of effectsrather than forces -- qualities and capabilities intended for the Army's new, medium-weight brigades.  As a joint forces concept, RDO will promote the "right balance" and use of air, land, sea and space by the joint forces commander. Compared to "traditional operations," RDO will not center on seizing and occupying territory in the battlespace except for a limited purpose, such as to generate an otherwise unobtainable opportunity for precision engagement, tosecure a key decisive point, or to protect the civilian populace.  Rather, an RDO offensive will consist of immediate, continuous, and overwhelming operations to shock and paralyze the adversary, destroy their ability to coordinate offensive and defensive operations, fragment their capabilities, and foreclose their most dangerous options."6EBW was used to enable experimentation with three different concept alternatives for RDO in the JV2010 context.  EBW provided useful insights into sensor fusion and the Global Information Grid (GIG).  It was used to investigate the complexities of deep operational maneuver, and provided valuable insights into the effects of compression of  the Strategic, Operational and Tactical levels of war.  EBW also showed the effects of military operations and Information Operations on political will in a small scale contingency.ConclusionsEBW provided a significant capability in support of the Rapid Decisive Operations wargame and will benefit from lessons learned to be developed in the near term.  EBW will continue to evolve to support desired capabilities in experimentation, training, and analysis.References[1] Mark Herman, Entropy Based Warfare A Unified Theory For Modeling The Revolution in Military Affairs, 1977, pp. 3-4[2] Joint Vision 2010 Doctrine[3] Ibid[4] Mark Herman, Entropy Based Warfare A Unified Theory For Modeling The Revolution in Military Affairs, 1977, pp. 3-4[5] Mark Herman, Entropy Based Warfare A Unified Theory For Modeling The Revolution in Military Affairs, 1977, pp. 12[6] Erin Q. Winograd, "Inside The Army", January 31, 2000. Pg. 1Author BiographiesDouglas D. Martin is an Associate at Booz·Allen & Hamilton Inc., in Chesapeake VA, has more than 21 years experience in modeling and simulation support to training.  He spent the last six years focused on M&S in support of distributed Joint training and the associated requirements development.  Recently, he has focused on M&S solutions to support Joint Experimentation and the implementation of Joint Vision 2010.Mark Herman is a Vice President at Booz·Allen & Hamilton Inc., in McLean VA, has more than 23 years of professional experience designing and developing wargames for the Department of Defense (DoD). As a renowned wargame developer, he has designed, produced, and contributed to hundreds of wargames. He has also led seminars on DoD wargaming applications at national conferences. Mr. Herman is a leader in the development of wargame and simulation methodologies emphasizing strategic planning, development of measures of effectiveness, and economic development analysis.  Mr. Herman created a new paradigm for warfare titled, “Entropy Based Warfare(” which has created a unified theory for conflict resolution in simulations. 