Terms of Reference (TOR) For theSISO Study Group on:“The Economics of Simulation”Standing:Ratified by SISO EXCOM on 28 March 2000 Rationale: The Economics of Simulation Study Group is to be formed in order to conduct a preliminary investigation on the subject of the economics of modeling and simulation and to establish recommendations for pursuit of the topic within the scope of the SISO, if appropriate.Tasks:The Study Group shall execute the following tasking:1. Perform exploratory work into at least the following topics: Draft terminology and taxonomy of concepts, Make data call for readily available empirical evidence, with the intention of creating a provisional market model, and creating a set of best (most-effective) practices,Identify and evaluate prospective significance of the topic to the scope of the SISO and the interests of its members, addressing particularly the economic implications of standards to the practice of modeling and simulation, and Document a business case.2. Consolidate the findings of the topical committees and establish recommendations for persistent management of the topic within SISO.Products:Products resulting from the establishment and execution of the Study Group shall include:Topical committee reports (Drafts Due Fall 2000)Table of Contents for Final Report (Due Fall 2000)Final Report of Study Group (Due Spring 2001), including:Final reports of any study topical sub-groups formed (including terminology),Documented business case,Best and most effective practices and provisional market model (if possible) –OR-Recommendations on how to better collect data (if too little data returned), Recommendation to the SISO on the topic, and (if appropriate) an accompanying Program Plan (Due Spring 2001).Performance Period:The Study Group shall formally begin work at the Spring 2000 Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW).  The Study Group shall submit an interim report at the Fall 2000 SIW. The Study Group shall complete work and submit a final report to the EXCOM, SAC and CC by the Spring 2001 SIW.   The Study group requests a one year operational tenure, since this activity involves a data call to the community (including development of the data call format and needs).