Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) Approach to C4I System InteroperabilityFrederic (Rick) McKenzieSteve RisnerScience Applications International Corporation (SAIC)3045 Technology ParkwayOrlando, FL 32826Rick_McKenzie@jsims.comSteve_Risner@jsims.com(407) 384-2909Keywords:  C4I; HLA; JSIMS; simulation; interoperability; trainingForums:SIW-SLT, SIW-C4ISRABSTRACT: This paper describes how the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS) Integration and Development Contractor, in cooperation with its JSIMS partner programs, is designing and implementing the capability for Warfighters to interact with the simulation via operational C4I systems.JSIMS will provide a readily available, operationally valid synthetic environment for the Commanders in Chiefs (CINCs), their components, other Joint organizations and the Services. The system will be used to: jointly train, educate, develop doctrine and tactics; formulate and assess operational plans; assess warfighting situations; define operational requirements; and provide operational input to the acquisition process.Training exercises are developed to provide a training environment that approaches actual operational conditions for the participating battle staff(s).  Therefore, exercise participants should not be able to distinguish between real and simulated entities. Participants should perform those functional activities which prompt decision making (such as those of a CINC or JTF or component staff) and interact with both real and simulated entities provided by JSIMS using the same C4I systems, processes, and procedures they would use in actual operations. JSIMS design must provide the mechanism to interface with appropriate Joint and Service C4I systems, such as:  Global Command and Control System (GCCS), Army Tactical Command and Control System (ATCCS), Joint Maritime Command Information System (JMCIS), Theater Battle Management Command and Control System (TBMCS), etc. An overview of the JSIMS and its External Systems Interface (ESI) strategy, architecture, and design considerations are presented as they pertain to the support of the training audience using C4I Systems.Introduction & BackgroundJSIMS is a simulation system that supports thetwenty-first century warfighter’s preparation for real world contingencies. The system provides garrison and deployed exercise capability to meet current and emerging training and operational requirements in a timely and efficient manner. By interfacing to the warfighter’s real go to war systems, the view into the simulation world mirrors that of the real world ( REF _Ref407600028 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 1). Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1: JSIMS Operational VisionJSIMS is a single, distributed, seamlessly integrated simulation environment. It includes a core infrastructure and mission space objects, both maintained in a common repository.  These can be composed to create a simulation capability to support Joint or Service training, rehearsal, or education objectives.Training Audience SupportJSIMS is being developed to provide an operationally valid, synthetic environment for the Commanders in Chief (CINCs), their components, other Joint organizations, and the Services to ( REF _Ref407601035 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 2): Jointly train, educate, develop doctrine and tactics Formulate and assess operational plans Assess warfighting situationsDefine operational requirementsProvide operational input to the acquisition process.Training exercises are developed to provide a training environment that approaches actual operational conditions for the participating battle staff(s).  Therefore, exercise participants should not be able to distinguish between real and simulated entities. Participants should perform those functional activities which prompt decision making (such as those of a CINC or JTF or component staff) and interact with both real and simulated entities provided by JSIMS using the same C4I systems, processes, and procedures they would use in actual operations. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2: JSIMS Training AudienceInterfaces to C4I SystemsIn general, existing C4I Systems do not interface with simulations in a comprehensive fashion. In addition, current simulations require equipment and infrastructure different than those used by C4I Systems to process and display information. This dichotomy between C4I Systems and simulations has forced users to participate in simulation-supported events using unfamiliar equipment and interfaces. For JSIMS, training the warfighter using their live go-to-war C4I systems is an integral part of simulation analysis, design, and development. This paper illustrates much of these relationships between JSIMS and its training audience.JSIMS C4I RequirementsThe value of a warfare simulation is directly related to the credibility of its representation of real-world military operations, equipment and systems, and environmental factors. Simulation designers must have a clear  understanding of the domain to be simulated in order to produce a model or simulation that is valid and sufficient for the intended purpose or use. The domain description must be multi-dimensional and must include a depiction of the entities, actions, tasks, and interactions that must be represented. The primary purpose of a conceptual model of the mission space (CMMS) is to provide that understanding. In addition, the CMMS facilitates simulation interoperability, reuse of simulation components, and operational validity among Department of Defense (DoD) simulation developments through the sharing of common, authoritative information. REF _Ref425132419 \r \h [6]The Joint Conceptual Model of the Mission Space (JCMMS) provides authoritative descriptions of the Joint mission space for subsequent development and representation in JSIMS. The JCMMS identifies and describes the entities of the mission space, their attributes, relationships, methods and processes, and interactions. It must be aligned with, and bounded by, JSIMS requirements. Because JSIMS development is based on mission space knowledge captured in the JCMMS, a system requirement to represent a part of the mission space in JSIMS implies a corresponding requirement for the JCMMS to describe that part of the mission space. It follows that the JCMMS will describe all aspects of the mission space to be represented in JSIMS. For more detailed descriptions of the JCMMS, please see reference  REF _Ref425132419 \r \h [6].JSIMS design must provide the mechanism to interface with appropriate Joint and Service C4I systems as identified in the JCMMS and system requirements, such as:  Global Command and Control System (GCCS), Army Tactical Command and Control System (ATCCS), Joint Maritime Command Information System (JMCIS), Theater Battle Management Command and Control System (TBMCS), etc. Adherence to the DoD High Level Architecture (HLA) is required to ensure interoperability with legacy and future simulations that encompass the full spectrum of the joint and service mission space operations as well as automated connectivity to C4I systems. The HLA will provide a standardized foundation for consistent and reliable data exchange between live, virtual, and constructive simulations that is necessary to foster maximum reuse of simulation components. JSIMS must use standardized data elements to facilitate interchange of data between JSIMS, external simulations and real C4I systems. Data standardization will be consistent with DoD guidelines and data sets must be from certified DoD data sources. Tools and utilities must be provided to comply with standard formatted files (e.g., Time Phased Force and Deployment List (TPFDL) and Air Tasking Order (ATO)) in order to create efficient information exchange between simulation databases. C4I to simulation interface standards such as the proposed Interface Reference Model (IRM) REF _Ref425165395 \r \h [2] also provide valuable guidance. Last but not least, safeguards must be present in the system to avoid confusion with real-world events and permit orderly transition from exercise to real-world operations. Deriving JSIMS C4I RequirementsJSIMS baselined requirements indicate a number of C4I Systems, networks, and message formats that must be supported for initial operational capability (IOC) in 2001. These components provide the warfighter with significant go-to-war capabilities. The intent of JSIMS is to train the warfighter with the same go-to-war equipment by incorporating a level of interoperability that sustains the C4I systems and networks with needed information. Simulations are not able to interface with the entire C4I system, only portions. The portions or sets of capabilities that comprise C4I may be characterized as follows: Comprehensive capability – The sum total of functionality for the system or network. Simulation-interoperable – The set consisting of capabilities that are able to process and disseminate information from an external and simulated environment. Simulation-averse – Those C4I capabilities that provide valuable information and training but are unable to be directly or indirectly created, updated, or substantiated automatically by the simulation. These capabilities may be modified manually or not trained in a particular exercise. C4I unique – The set of capabilities that may or may not provide useful training or warfighting functionality and is not affected by or does not affect simulation information or activities especially for a particular exercise. These capabilities may easily interoperate with other live C4I components of an exercise and provide valuable training without affecting the simulation. In order to accurately determine how best to support a C4I System in an interface, one must first understand which functionality belongs in which set category. And Secondly, a subset of the simulation-interoperable capabilities have to be resolved that when used in conjunction with the simulation-averse and C4I-unique portions, a realistic training exercise may be achieved.Note that these characterizations are based on the assumption that C4I Systems are primarily go-to-war systems and although modifications may be accepted which facilitate interoperability with simulations, there will always be limitations to the type and number of modifications. As such, C4I Systems will always have some simulation-averse components.  REF _Ref407601220 \h Figure 3 shows the methodology used in determining the subset of simulation-interoperable capabilities for a C4I System that will be available to support IOC exercises. Essentially, JSIMS baselined system requirements are supplemented with detailed consistent descriptions of  the C4I Systems to be supported (C4I System Templates) and descriptions of the DoD mandated common operating environment for C4I Systems (DII COE Segment Descriptions). These documents are then evaluated and cross-checked to create more descriptive requirements that are scoped by an understanding of what the user currently has (JTC Functional Capabilities) and what the user would like to have (already included in the SSS IOC Requirements). Additionally, these more descriptive requirements must comply with the JSIMS System/Segment Design Description (SSDD).Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3: JSIMS C4I RequirementsThis set of new more descriptive requirements are then combined and evaluated for commonality and uniqueness from which the elements that drive the rest of JSIMS development process (Use Cases) are born. Technical Development and DAC CoordinationThe JSIMS Enterprise is an interdependent, collaborative effort of the JSIMS Partner Programs, including both government agencies and their development agent contractors (DACs), operating as a single unified team. The Core Infrastructure (CI) Integrated Product Team (IPT) of the JSIMS Enterprise is responsible for providing the JSIMS simulation infrastructure and related components. The CI IPT is divided into three Working IPTs (WIPTs). The External Systems Interface (ESI) WIPT is responsible for the development of the JSIMS interface to external systems including simulations and C4I systems. The ESI WIPT has representatives from each of the DACs in the JSIMS Enterprise that participate at a variety of levels.Technical development and DAC coordination within the ESI WIPT includes:C4I System commonality assessmentIdentification of Common ServicesAllocation of development responsibilities to Enterprise partnersSoftware developmentReuse of legacy and GOTS softwareBuild 1 is the 2nd of four builds for JSIMS which precedes IOC. Build 1 is also the 1st build in which C4I Systems participate. The strategy for Build 1 is to concentrate on the design and implementation of the core set of services provided in the JSIMS External Systems Interface. These services are described in later sections. The Build 1 strategy also includes the introduction of a Joint C4I system to investigate and evaluate design choices; and the introduction of a Service C4I system to further evaluate design choices and also to refine integration and test activities. Situational awareness capabilities will be provided on the Global Command and Control System (GCCS) and the components of the interface to support the Maneuver Control System (MCS) will be integrated.  REF _Ref407601132 \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 4 shows the technical approach for the JSIMS Build 1 ESI.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 4: JSIMS ESI Build 1 Notional DiagramThe Simulation Object shown in  REF _Ref407601132 \h Figure 4 is an object oriented class that is part of the JSIMS Object Services (JOS). This class provides a window into the infrastructure and a means to communicate to other components of JSIMS including Mission Space Objects (MSOs) via Federation Objects (FOs) REF _Ref424973721 \r \h [5]. The notation shown indicates that the JSIMS Information Manager (IM) inherits such simulation infrastructure capabilities from the Simulation Object. The IM uses the Object Translator to create FOs that contain computer friendly data structures similar to CCSIL. Those FOs are indicated in the figure as MSO Avatar Message FO and MSO Avatar HQ FO. These will be discussed later as Pass Through FOs.  REF _Ref407601132 \h Figure 4 also indicates the use of an external RTI for Build 1. Finally, the IM for C4I parses and formats C4I messages which are transferred to GCCS and MCS via the Communicator.JSIMS ESI strategies for Builds 2&3 include:Refinement of the interface and expansion of the translation services to support other message formats Expansion of the High Level Architecture (HLA) services to support virtual / constructive simulationsDevelopment of HLA Federation Object Model (FOM) for participating simulationsIntegration of the components of the interface to support the following systems: Joint Maritime Command and Information System (JMCIS)Theater Battle Management Core System (TBMCS)Maneuver Control System (MCS)All-Source Analysis System (ASAS)Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data System (AFATDS)Combat Service Support Control System (CSSCS)Forward Area Air Defense C2I (FAADC2I)Joint World-wide Intelligence Communications System (JWICS)TRAP Data Distribution System (TDDS)Joint Collection Management Tool (JCMT)ESI Architecture REF _Ref407601286 \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 5 shows the JSIMS Architecture. The JSIMS Architecture consists of a simulation engine embodied in the Object Management Framework (OMF), a Military Modelling Framework (MMF) that provides a common methodology for Mission Space Objects (MSOs) to participate, Life Cycle Applications (LCAs) that provides a set of tools to manage the usage of JSIMS to support exercises, a repository for models and data, and an External System Interface that provides the means to support interoperability with C4I Systems and other simulations via translation services and an HLA Gateway. Please see the JSIMS System/Segment Design Description (SSDD)  REF _Ref424973721 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT [5] for more detailed descriptions of the JSIMS Architecture.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 5: JSIMS Architecture REF _Ref424974079 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 6 shows the parts of JSIMS necessary for supporting an interface to Service-specific external systems.  This figure provides an elaborated representation of the translation services component in Figure 5. The Joint DAC has the primary responsibility for integrating the components of the interface that support the interoperability of those systems with the JSIMS system. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 6: JSIMS Architecture for Supporting External SystemsThe figure indicates that all data exchange within JSIMS takes place via the JSIMS Object Services (JOS). More specifically, the exchange of data is via Federation Objects (FOs) in the JOS. For external systems, this FO exchange occurs with a special Mission Space Object (MSO) called a MSO Avatar. An MSO Avatar provides JSIMS simulation behavior as a service to external systems that cannot support JSIMS model requirements. The MSO Avatar would augment the modelling capabilities of the external system. The JSIMS Core Interface for External Systems (JCIES) shown as ESI Services in  REF _Ref424974079 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 6 provides a set of common services necessary to support C4I, Simulations, Simulators, and Live Ranges. These services include translation, time and interest synchronization, and communication between the external systems and JSIMS internal representation. The Information Manager in the JCIES is responsible for ensuring that the services work together in a seamless and reusable manner. Translation consists of protocol, format, and object translation. Protocol translations ensure the transport of the data, format translations ensures information dissemination / accumulation via external system representations, and object translation provides the information obtained as Federation Objects (FOs). Time and interest synchronization is an important aspect of the interface since JSIMS is a parallel discrete-event simulation which is capable of optimistic and faster-than-real-time execution (for detailed descriptions of these concepts see  REF _Ref425318153 \r \h [7]). No C4I System is capable of predicting its behavior or the behavior of entities which it portrays and very few C4I Systems are capable of processing information faster than real time. Therefore, the JCIES will support conservative processing for C4I Systems instead of optimistic and real-time modes in general. It is possible that the JCIES would support a faster-than-real-time conservative mode for the few C4I Systems that may be able to operate faster than real time but what this means for the warfighter is yet to be defined. Normally, one would expect the C4I Systems to be unsubscribed from the simulation when the simulation changes to faster-than-real-time mode and subsequently update the C4I Systems when the simulation returns to real-time mode after warping ahead. This capability would be rendered by the JCIES, since the interface is responsible for synchronizing JSIMS interest expressions with interest expressed as publications and subscriptions on the external RTI via the HLA Gateway.Communication between external systems and simulations occur in a variety of ways including an HLA RTI gateway, messaging via commercial or tactical networks, interprocess communication, and database updates. The HLA RTI Gateway provides a well defined and DoD approved means of interfacing with simulations. FOs are the means by which JSIMS models communicate and as such are the simulation object model (SOM) equivalent in the HLA world. Therefore, the FOM used by the JSIMS HLA RTI Gateway will be derived directly from the collection of FOs that form the JSIMS internal SOM. Any External System that desires to federate with JSIMS must comply with the JSIMS external FOM in order to participate in a federation exercise. The Common C4I Interface Services component of the JCIES provides the conduit for System Specific C4I interfaces to extend the capabilities of the JCIES in order to accommodate very specific needs of a particular C4I system. As a result, the System Specific Configurations layer is necessarily thin. This layer may extend the JCIES with additional functions to the set of classes and methods provided in the JCIES or by deriving additional classes and methods on top of those provided (i.e. by composition or by inheritance). However, it is intended that the classes and methods provided by the JCIES be explicit enough as to not warrant the use of inheritance.  REF _Ref424974325 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 7 illustrates the relationship between an MSO Avatar and an External System. The figure specifically speaks to Live C4I Systems used by Training Audience participants or Role Players. What is significant is the C4I Avatar FOs which are indicated in the figure as Pass Through FOs. It is expected that the public battlespace FOs of a MSO Avatar would not be any different than the equivalent fully simulated MSO. However, when a MSO Avatar and its corresponding live equivalent communicate, this communication must be a private communication and not part of the battlespace. Thus the rationale for the nomenclature Pass Through FOs.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 7: External System and MSO Avatar RelationshipThe most common external systems interface configurations are intended to support: DII COE and migrating DII COE compliant C4I Systems, legacy non DII COE compliant C4I systems, legacy simulations which were developed prior to the HLA and represent the result of significant investments in capabilities outside the scope of JSIMS development, andsimulations that conform to the HLA, but because they are intended for other uses (analysis, engineering development) or belong to a different class of HLA federations, are not using the JSIMS FOM. It is expected that on-going HLA efforts such as the Bridge Federate, DIS FOM, and RPR FOM will provide the necessary solutions for Cases 3 and 4. Simulation Adaptor RelationshipsAs shown in  REF _Ref424974325 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 7, the simulation adaptor may be embedded in the C4I System itself or incorporated as part of the interface to JSIMS. A case for the simulation adaptor being embedded in the C4I System may be seen in the ongoing development headed by DISA to segment an RTI onto the DII COE and integrate C2 information from the RTI into GCCS. Normally, C4I Systems would not be comprised of such an adaptor and a non-intrusive method of communicating to the C4I System would be used to an adaptor existing on the simulation side of the interface.The complexity of the simulation adaptor and the configuration of the system and training exercise dictates the mode of participation for a C4I System. As described in Section  REF _Ref424974947 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT 5, the C4I System may participate within JSIMS via the use of the MSO Avatar. Note that in viewing the whole of JSIMS as a single federate, the C4I System would be part of that federate (see  REF _Ref424975622 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT Figure 8).Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 8: C4I System within JSIMS federateIf the communication mechanism used is the HLA RTI, a training exercise may have the following configuration. Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 9: Example Federation Configuration with JSIMS Federate REF _Ref425317221 \h Figure 9 shows a C4I System #1 that is actually part of the JSIMS federate. The C4I System provides C2 information to the MSO Avatar within the JSIMS federate. This communication occurs via the RTI, however, the interactions and object updates are provided only for JSIMS consumption as JSIMS model requirements (health, degradation, and other parameters) have not been applied. The MSO Avatar within JSIMS would apply the necessary model parameters and present the battlespace representation of this information as FOs in the JOS. If there is interest in this information, the FOs would be reflected in the external federation as interactions and object updates on the external HLA/RTI. At this point the information would be available for public consumption by other federates on the external federation. Approaches for implementing this methodology could include an avatar routing space for C4I Systems, the use of two different federation executions, or even the use of the HLA gateway for distinct federates and another communication mechanism for C4I Systems that are part of the JSIMS federate.With the use of the MSO Avatar, the burden of applying such simulation parameters as those mentioned previously is not relegated to the C4I System. Therefore, the simulation adaptor for such C4I Systems are less complex whereas simulation adaptors for C4I Systems operating as distinct federates are more complex and/or supplemented with other federates which would apply those simulation model parameters necessary for the exercise.Last but not least, the complexity of the exercise and the federation models themselves need to be considered. There are, of course, limitations imposed on simulations with C4I Systems and C4I federates. An obvious limitation is the constraint to run real time when C4I Systems are part of the exercise. Other limitations include the inability to transfer ownership of an object, no capability for checkpoint/restart, and other simulation specific capabilities. An exercise that requires complex simulation activities such as these would also require a complex method for including C4I Systems. These limitations may be mitigated by the various approaches mentioned for C4I Systems participating as part of a JSIMS federate. However, determinations as to the best approach for a particular configuration are topics for further evaluation and discussion. Conclusions and Recommendations A primary objective of JSIMS is to provide a superior degree of interoperability between its models of simulation and the training audience. This is being accomplished by incorporating significant upfront analysis and design of the external systems interface of the JSIMS architecture. DoD Standards such as HLA and DII COE are a necessary part of this interface. As shown, there are many configurations to consider and support. Technical, programmatic, and availability issues will temper these configurations. These issues are currently under consideration and concepts and configurations will mature as analysis continues.AcknowledgmentsThis work was performed under the DoD contract #F19628-97-C-0014.ReferencesLightner, Gary; Zeswitz, Steve; Cutts, Dannie; Graffagnini, Gean; Schandua, Judy: “The High Level Architecture Command and Control Experiment – Lessons Learned in Designing an Extended Federation.” In Proceedings of the Spring 1998 Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW).Carr, Francis; Hieb, Mike: “Issues and Requirements for Future C4ISR and CGF Interoperability.” In Proceedings of the 7th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation, May, 1998. Orlando, FL.Aegis Research Corporation: “HLA C2 Experiment Final Report.” September 1997. McKenzie, Frederic; Mall, Howard; Shumaker, Gregory; Hieb, Michael; Cosby, Mark: “An MRCI Prototype using CCTT and MCS/P.” In Proceedings of the Spring 1997 Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW), March 1997. Orlando, FL.JSIMS System Segment Design Description (SSDD) Version 1.9.Risner, S.; Poerter, K.; Lacy, L.; O’Brien, L.; Kollmorgen, G.: “Conceptual Modeling in the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS).” In Proceedings of the Fall 1998 Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW), September 1998. Orlando, FL.Steinman J. 1993. "Breathing Time Warp." In Proceedings of the 7'th Workshop on Parallel and Distributed Simulation (PADS93). Vol. 23, No. 1, July 1993, Pages 109-118.Howard Mall, Ken Thumim, Bruce Clay, Michael Hieb, Frederic McKenzie, Mark Cosby. MRCI Use of Modular Translation of Command and Control Messages between C4I Systems and Simulations. In Proceedings of the 1997 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop. March 1997. Orlando, FL.Author BiographiesDr. Frederic (Rick) McKenzie has held a senior scientist position at Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC) since April 1996, serving as P.I. for several R&D projects. He is currently the External Systems Interface (ESI) Team Lead on JSIMS. He has had several years of research and development in the software and artificial intelligence fields including object oriented design in C++, LISP, and knowledge-based systems.  He has also had two years teaching experience in artificial intelligence, software languages, and data structures. Both his Masters and Ph.D. work have been in AI, focusing on knowledge representation and model-based diagnostic reasoning.Steve Risner is a Senior Systems Analyst with SAIC and is currently leads the Joint Conceptual Model of the Mission Space (JCMMS) Integrated Product Team (IPT) as part of DoD’s Joint Simulation System (JSIMS). He has over 10 years experience in command and control of military operations and 10 years in the development and use of simulations to support battlestaff training at the Warrior Preparation Center (WPC), USAF Battlestaff Training School (BTS), and HQ USAF Modeling and Simulation Directorate. He was a command pilot with over 2,500 flying hours in the F-4, F-5 and F-111 including combat experience in Desert Storm.