The Verification, Validation, and Accreditation Report TemplatesJean M. GraffagniniAEgis Research Corporation6703 Odyssey Drive, Suite 200Huntsville, AL  35758256-922-0802 HYPERLINK mailto:jgraffagnini@aegisrc.com jgraffagnini@aegisrc.comSimone YoungbloodDefense Modeling and Simulation Office1901 North Beauregard, Suite 500Alexandria, VA 22311703-824-3436 HYPERLINK "smyoung@triton.dmso.mil" smyoung@triton.dmso.milKeywords:Verification, Validation, and Accreditation, VV&A Report Templates V&V Plans, V&V Reports, Modeling and Simulation, Accreditation Plans, Accreditation ReportsAbstract : The Verification, Validation, and Accreditation Report Templates were developed to assist and facilitate the ongoing Defense Modeling and Simulation Office initiative to standardize VV&A data / information within common repositories in order to form a basis for M&S use,  re-use, and accreditation decisions. They are intended to sufficiently satisfy the information requirements of the modeling and simulation (M&S) developer, accreditation authorities within the M&S domains, and subsequent VV&A agents, and to integrate the common VV&A information requirements within DoD and the following service components. Joint Chiefs of StaffUnited States ArmyUnited States Air ForceUnited States NavyBallistic Missile Defense OrganizationJoint Simulation OfficeThe VV&A information contained within these report templates encompasses the agencies’ Verification and Validation (V&V) Plans, V&V Reports, Accreditation Plans, Accreditation Reports, Acceptability Assessment Reports, and V&V Acceptability Criteria Reports.This paper presents the overall data capture methodology and report template design approach employed in the development of the VV&A Report Templates.  It details the analyses performed, the assumptions made during the analyses, and the constraints which affected the analyses.  It follows with a presentation of the products and by-products of the analyses, including the VV&A Requirements and Processes Commonality Matrix, the VV&A Report Templates, and the Data Repository Mapping.  It concludes with a discussion of future considerations and ongoing efforts in this area. IntroductionThe Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) is pursuing a series of initiatives to accomplish the Department of Defense (DoD) Model and Simulation (M&S) objectives identified in the DoD M&S Master Plan. The fifth objective is to provide an M&S infrastructure to meet developer and end-user needs, and specifically to develop methodologies, standards, and procedures for the Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) of models and the Verification, Validation, and Certification (VV&C) of data. [1]To ensure that prescribed DoD simulation needs were met, development and refinement of VV&A reporting formats and capture methods were conducted to address and solve remaining technical and management challenges and to satisfy diverse simulation community needs and user requirements.The VV&A Report Templates were developed to assist and facilitate this DMSO initiative. Their purpose was to standardize VV&A data / information within common repositories in order to form a basis for M&S use,  re-use, and accreditation decisions. The template definitions were based on the common VV&A requirements, processes, and activities within  DoD and its service components, as expounded in their policies and directives. Key data capture methodologies and template design strategies used during the development of the VV&A Report Templates included: Identification of key agencies and VV&A documentation resources.Identification of secondary VV&A information resources. Analysis of common VV&A requirements and processes within these information sources.Normalization of common information. VV&A Report Template design definition.Design definition review and revision.This paper presents the VV&A Report Templates Development process and the products and by-products of this process.VV&A Report Templates Development ProcessFor purposes of this VV&A Report Template research, it was assumed that current VV&A requirements, processes, and activities within each agency closely adhere to those expounded in its policies and directives. Further, it was assumed that the information found within each agency’s plans and reports is the set of information required to support and understand accreditation decisions.Agency and Resource IdentificationThe V&A Report Templates were developed to integrate the common VV&A information requirements within DoD and the following service components:Joint Chiefs of StaffUnited States ArmyUnited States Air ForceUnited States NavyBallistic Missile Defense OrganizationJoint Simulation System OfficeThe VV&A information contained within these report templates encompasses the agencies’ Verification and Validation  (V&V) Plans, V&V Reports, Accreditation Plans, Accreditation Reports, Acceptability Assessment Reports, and V&V Acceptability Criteria Reports.Secondary VV&A Resource  IdentificationTwo sources of related information were identified, the IDEF 0 model of the DMSO Recommended Practices Guides and the Accreditation Support Database.  These resources were later compared to the section definitions of the VV&A Report Templates.  Both identical definitions and related definitions were tagged for potential development of future repository links.Common VV&A Requirements and Processes AnalysisAfter all the resources were identified, each was reviewed and information within categorized in a VV&A Requirements and Processes Commonality Matrix.  This matrix consisted of all the processes and requirements found in these documents cross correlated to the agencies that employed them.  Additionally, the outlines of each agency’s VV&A related plans and reports were reviewed and correlated.  From this matrix, the subset of processes and requirements used across all the agencies was identified and this subset became the foundation for the VV&A Report Templates.Normalization of  Common VV&A InformationInitially, each agency’s interpretation of VV&A terminology was reflected in the VV&A Requirements and Processes Commonality Matrix.  However, in order to converge on a set of VV&A template definitions, these interpretations had to be reviewed and one ontology defined.  The VV&A Requirements and Processes Commonality Matrix was then refashioned to reflect this ontology.  Then pointers to the appropriate data sources were added to provide traceability to the origin of each agency’s terminology.VV&A Report Template Design DefinitionThe VV&A Report Templates were developed through a top-down decomposition of each agency’s VV&A plans and reports.  Each plan and report was broken into template blocks that were defined to contain information that is closely related.  These template block definitions were then broken down into sections.  Each section definition consisted of information contained in fields that functioned in unison as a single entity.  Therefore two or more template blocks definitions may partially comprise identical section definitions; however, a template block may not consist of fields that are unrelated to any section definitions.  Sections may have cardinality ranging from one to infinity, depending on the requirements of template block, which contains it.  The template blocks were designed to allow the different agencies to reconstruct plans and reports that closely reflect their own document outlines.Design Definition Review and Revision.The VV&A Report Templates definition was the initial attempt to provide a method of efficiently capturing the VV&A Requirements and Processes information that is common to the services and agencies involved in this project. These templates and the related commonality matrix have been presented and supplied to members of the VV&A Technical Working Group for review and revision.ProductsThe current results of this research and the draft VV&A Report Templates are presented  in the following sections. [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10]VV&A Requirements and Processes Commonality MatrixThe VV&A Requirements and Processes Commonality Matrix provides both the set of information common to the agencies involved in this project and the mappings of the selected ontology  to the terminology within each agency.Figure 1.0 below, is a sample of the VV&A Requirements and Processes Commonality Matrix.  In each cell contains the reference to the agency’s data source.  When terminology is contained in the cell instead of a reference, it reflects the marked difference in the terminology from the common ontology.DoD GuidanceVV&A Requirements / ProcessesAgency or ServiceAir ForceArmyNavyBMDOJoint StaffDMSODoD 5000.61, F. Procedures, 4.a.VerificationDA PAM 5-11, 3-2Directive 5002 F-2JSI 8104.01 App. C, EB, 2.DoD 5000.61, F. Procedures, 4.a.Logical MethodsAFI 16-1001 Section C, 1.1DA PAM 5-11, 3-2.b.1.JSI 8104.01 App. C, EB, 2.d.   Document ReviewAFI 16-1001 Section C, 1.1DA PAM 5-11, 3-2.b.1.a.Directive 5002 F-2JSI 8104.01 App. C, EB, 2.d.1.Informal   Design Walk-ThroughAFI 16-1001 Section C, 1.1DA PAM 5-11, 3-2.b.1.b.Directive 5002 F-2JSI 8104.01 App. C, EB, 2.d.2.Informal   Comparison of Specifications to Requirements and Comparison of Design to SpecificationsAFI 16-1001 Section C, 1.1DA PAM 5-11, 3-2.b.1.c.Directive 5002 F-2JSI 8104.01 App. C, EB, 2.d.3InformalDoD 5000.61, F. Procedures, 4.a.3.Code MethodsAFI 16-1001 Section C, 1.2DA PAM 5-11, 3-2.b.2.JSI 8104.01 App. C, EB, 2.   Sensitivity Analyses and Stress TestsAFI 16-1001 Section C, 1.2DA PAM 5-11, 3-2.b.2.a.Directive 5002 F-3JSI 8104.01 App. C, EB, 2.e.1.Static/DynamicFigure 1.0  Sample VV&A Requirements and Processes Commonality Matrix.VV&A Report TemplatesAfter the VV&A Requirements and Processes Commonality Matrix was finalized the following template blocks were identified as common to all agencies and services.  These templates were then distinguished as appropriate for a program manager, a practitioner, or for both.Document OverviewM&S OverviewM&S Problem StatementConfiguration ManagementInformation SourcesResponsible AgenciesVerification and Validation PlanRisk MitigationV&V Plan OverviewPlanned V&V ActivitiesAccreditation StatementAccreditation MethodologyAccreditation ScheduleAccreditation HistoryEach template block was defined in the following format, Figure 2.0.  The Template Name is the identifier of the template block; the Template Content Description contains a narrative of the information within the template block; and the Sections Contained Within Template lists the sections that comprise the particular block.  The sections within each template can be further decomposed to the contained fields.  The Template Content Description for each template, its designation as a program manager template, a practitioner template, or a template appropriate for both, and  a list of the sections contained are presented below.Template Name: Template Content Description:Sections Contained Within Template:Section Name					Field Name			CardinalityFigure 2.0  VV&A Report Template Generic DefinitionDocument Overview (Program Manager) - This template should contain information related to the identification of the document and a general statement that describes the purpose of the document.Sections :DocumentationM&S Overview (Program Manager) – This template should contain the identification of the M&S as well as general information concerning the characteristics, features and subject areas modeled as well identification of the original developers, previous developers, and current development activities. It should summarize the previous uses of the M&S.  It should identify the previous capabilities required, the outputs generated, and the limitations discovered through the use of this M&S. And answer the question, ”Is the existing M&S V&V sufficient to support, with the required degree of confidence, the MOE/MOP criteria?”Sections : M&S VersionM&S Description	M&S Previous Uses	Previous V&V	Current V&V sufficiencyM&S Problem Statement (Both) -  This template should contain the identification of the M&S requirements driving model use, problem description, study methodology, required model capabilities, functionality, and outputs.  It should include a description of the required model acceptance MOE/MOPs, degree of confidence and degree of criticality. Sections:M&S Intended UsesAcceptability Criteria Summary	Configuration Management (Both) – This template should contain the identification of the M&S version that is to undergo the V&V process and the version numbers and location of the hardware, software, data structures to be used in the V&V process.  It should identify the configuration manager and procedures used in the V&V process.Sections:M&S Version	Hardware	Software	Data Structures	Configuration ProceduresConfiguration Management	Information Sources (Practitioner) – This template should contain a short summary of the sources being used to form the basis of the VV&A process, including documentation, developers, SME, comparison data, and previous V&V activities.Sections:Documentation	Development	Comparison Data Set	Responsible Agencies (Practitioner) – This template should contain the identification the key agencies and personnel involved in the V&V activities.  This should include the Accreditation Proponent and Agent, V&V Agents and key personnel, model developers, maintainers, proponents and users, Configuration Manager, Data Sources, and Data Certifiers.Sections:Accreditation	V&V	M&S	Data	Configuration ManagementVerification and Validation Plan (Practitioner) – This template should contain a description of  the overall verification and validation effort and identify the functions and components to be evaluated.  It should discuss the methods of logic and code verification and/or the methods for structural and output validation that are planned to be used on each function/component It should define the scope of the problem, limitations, the depth of decomposition and investigation.  It should include specific agency tasking and responsibilities, resource requirements, and schedule completion of each task.  It should describe the planned verification and validation portions of the V&V report and other deliverables and discuss the related VV&C activities.Sections:Decomposition	Problem	Development ActivityRequirementsActivity	Subject Matter ExpertComparison Data SetPlanV&V		Risk Mitigation (Practitioner) – This template should contain accreditation authority constraints which preclude accomplishing sufficient V&V to meet required MOEs/MOPs,  and indicate what additional risk mitigation strategies (or acceptance of increased risk) will be accomplished to meet accreditation authority acceptance criteria. It should include specific agency tasking and responsibilities, resource requirements, and schedule completion of each task.  It should describe the planned reports and other deliverables and specifically address any special activities or tasks required to mitigate the risk.Sections:Mitigation Strategy	Acceptability Criteria SummaryPlan	V&V	V&V Plan Overview (Program Manager) - This template should briefly describe the decomposition and its level of depth, the logic and code verification methods used, the tests performed, and the results.  Also, it should briefly describe the structural and/or output validation methods used and results obtained from those tests.  It should include SMEs, their  credentials, and/or source of comparison data.  It should indicate the significance or impacts of deviations between predicted and actual results. It should identify differences between approved and implemented V&V plan; provide rationale for these differences.Sections:Decomposition		Requirements		ActivitySubject Matter Expert		Comparison Data Set		Plan Deviations		Result Deviations		V&V					V&V Results (Both) -This template should briefly describe the overall issues and findings of the verification and validation for the M&S.Sections:Issues	Findings		Accreditation Statement (Both) – This template should describe the acceptability criteria, how and why they were established, and how the degree of satisfaction of these criteria was assessed. It should describe the overall accreditation effort, emphasizing technical tasks to be performed, and the impact of any known limitations or constraints that may affect a complete evaluation of the M&S application. Also the steps or process of assessing whether the acceptability criteria have been adequately met should be included. It should include a statement that explicitly approves or rejects use of the M&S based on the Accreditation information provided. Also, it should include ramifications of proceeding with this application, in the case where all acceptability criteria were not used as a basis of judgment.Sections:Acceptability Criteria SummaryStrengths			Limitations			Recommendations		Ramifications	Accreditation Methodology (Practitioner) - This template should describe the acceptability criteria, how and why they were established, and how the degree of satisfaction of these criteria was assessed. It should describe the overall accreditation effort, emphasizing technical tasks to be performed, and the impact of any known limitations or constraints that may affect a complete evaluation of the M&S application. Also it should describe the steps or process of assessing whether the acceptability criteria have been adequately met should be included. Sections:Acceptability Criteria SummaryActivityProblemV&V Historical ContextAccreditation Schedule (Both) – This template should include specific agency tasking and responsibilities, resource requirements, and schedule completion of each task.  Also, it should describe planned reports and other deliverables.Sections:PlanAccreditation History (Both) - This template should briefly describe the overall issues and findings of the accreditation process for the M&S.Sections:IssuesFindingsConclusionsIn conclusion, the development of the VV&A Report Templates has introduced a method of efficiently capturing the VV&A requirements and processes information that is common to the services and agencies involved in this project.  Each template block definition contains sections of information, which combined with other sections, support some element of the verification, validation, and accreditation documentation. These template blocks can then be combined to produce the information contained in the agencies’ VV&A plans and reports.This standardized form of VV&A data capture will provide an historical record of M&S VV&A activities for future modeling efforts and form a basis for M&S use,  re-use, and accreditation decisions.Future PlansBased on the current status of the VV&A Report Template research and development, some future plans and development activities have been identified.  Below is a brief list of these activities.The review and revision of the current VV&A Report Templates.The further identification of related VV&A information sources that supplement the VV&A Report Templates.The review of these VV&A Report Templates in light of the Federation Development and Execution Process.The review of these VV&A Report Templates in light of the ongoing VV&C Template definition.Implement the VV&A Report Templates in an MSRR compatible data repository.The coordination of these Report Templates with the MSRR.References[1] Department of Defense Directive Number 5000.59-P, “DoD Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Master Plan”, Oct 17, 1995. [2] DoD Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) Recommended Practices Guide,  Nov 1996.[3] JSI 8104.01 - “Verification, Validation, and Accreditation of Joint Models and Simulations”, 12 Jan 1995.[4] DoD Directive 5000.61 - “Verification, Validation, Accreditation(VV&A) of DoD Modeling and Simulation.”[5] BMDO Directive No. 5011 - “Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO) Models and Simulations Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) Policy”, Feb 15, 1996.[6] Air Force Instruction 16-1001 - “Verification, Validation and Accreditation (VV&A)”, 1 Oct 95.[7] BMDO Directive No. 5002 - “Test and Evaluation Verification, Validation, and Accreditation Policy for Ballistic Missile Defense Organization”, March 1994.[8] Department of Defense Directive Number 5000.59, “DoD Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Management”, Jan 4, 1994.[9] Army Regulation 5-11, “Army Model and Simulation Management Program”, July 10, 1992.[10] Department of the Army Pamphlet 5-11, “Verification, Validation, and Accreditation of Army Models and Simulations”, Oct 15, 1993.