Interoperability Test and Evaluation Capability(InterTEC)Author: Mr. Marcus MakarehchiNAWCWD, Code 5C0000EPoint Mugu, Ca. 93042-5049e-mail: Makarehchims@navair.navy.milVoice - (805) 989-4269Fax - (805) 989-9008Co-Author: Mr. Ken ThomasATTN: JTBBJoint Interoperability Test CommandFort Huachuca, Az,85613-7020e-mail:Thomask@fhu.disa.milVoice - (520) 538-5170Fax -  (520) 538-0371Co-Author: Mr. Rob HeilmanNAWCWD, Code 5C0000EPoint Mugu, Ca. 93042-5049e-mail:Heilmanrg@navair.navy.milVoice - (805) 989-3276Fax - (805) 989-9008Abstract: The Interoperability Test & Evaluation Capability (InterTEC) project is a FY 01 New Start initiative under the Central Test & Evaluation Investment Program (CTEIP).  InterTEC entered the CTEIP process in FY 97 and represents the unification of multiple service and agency solutions to a validated OSD need for an interoperability test capability administered by the Director, Operational Test & Evaluation (DOT&E).  InterTEC provides the products and capability to perform scenario based, interactive Joint C4ISR Interoperability Testing and Experimentation in a Joint Synthetic Battlespace Environment.  This Environment is comprised of live, virtual and constructive components representing the sensor, information and engagement grids of the Battlespace.  InterTEC focuses on the live players and C4ISR elements of the Joint Synthetic Battlespace.  InterTEC additionally provides the products to standardize test methodologies, event planning, data extraction, analysis, and presentation and the distributed execution of Joint Interoperability Test and Experimentation Events.  1. 0 Interoperability Test and Evaluation Capability (InterTEC)The Office of Secretary of Defense (OSD) identified the need for a Joint C4ISR Test and Evaluation Capability to efficiently and effectively conduct Joint C4ISR Test and Evaluation (T&E).  As a result, the Interoperability Test and Evaluation Capability (InterTEC) project was initiated under the Central Test and Evaluation Investment Program (CTEIP) to meet the validated OSD need. InterTEC is designed to develop and deploy a T&E system which enables systems-of-systems and mission level testing of C4ISR systems, National Security Systems (NSS), information systems interoperability and operational effectiveness in the joint integrated/netted battlespace.  InterTEC is envisioned to support the C4ISR Interoperability test, training and experimentation of new and legacy systems and to identify battlespace interoperability problems before a new capability or Family-of-Systems is introduced to the Warfighter. Figure 1 – InterTEC ConceptRequirementChanges in the nature of warfare, with new emphasis on networking of systems operating and sharing information in complex environments requires improvements in current NSS (C4I) testing infrastructure.  Interoperability problems have proved to be persistent in existing systems, and new emphasis on network centric warfare leads to increased criticality of interoperability problems.    The preponderance of existing network infrastructure for testing NSS is limited in scope and purpose, and has been developed independently by various organizations, resulting in low levels of interoperability among the various organizations.  These limited scope capabilities are generally not sufficient for the complex end-to-end testing of today’s networks of systems.  Ground based laboratory Hardware-in-Loop testing networks are not generally integrated with M&S facilities, nor with the assets existing on open air ranges.  Furthermore, test results obtained from such laboratories are not generally compared with or correlated to results observed in live tests, experiments, exercises or training events.   The nature of acquisition has also changed through acquisition reform with emphasis on Simulation Based Acquisition.   Incremental or Evolutionary (SPIRAL) developments are currently the norm for NSS acquisitions.  Testing environments are needed to support repeated/periodic testing of  SPIRAL developments and to support system lifecycle developments.    A continuum of test environments making the most economical use of live and simulated capabilities is needed to support lifecycle developments.InterTEC is conceived be a multi-service and agency flexible capability.  It will address the integration and interoperability of existing and emerging test infrastructure by providing common interface mechanisms and standards, tools,  environments, procedures, and reconfigurable network components.  It is not principally a paper product however.  It will provide working capabilities via specific product lines.  1.2 Description INTERTEC consists of four integrated product lines which enable the construct of a complex live and Synthetic Battlespace Environment via a distributed testing network (Federation) consisting of various sites and Federates providing system simulation and live entities.  InterTEC is envisioned to link the country’s major ranges and T&E facilities with the major C4ISR facilities in a common environment. Figure 1 provides a graphical representation of the InterTEC concept and system components. Figure 2 depicts the various components used to create a Synthetic Battlespace Environment for testing, verification and certification of a system or Family-of-Systems.  Operational realism, fidelity, and in many cases cost increases as the ratio of live to simulation entities increases. The level of control, observation, and repeatability generally increases as the ratio of live to simulation decreases.  InterTEC will be designed to offer a flexible blend of these components as required to satisfy specific test, training or experimentation requirements.Figure 2 – Continuum of Test EnvironmentsInterTEC will support C4ISR Interoperability testing for new or legacy systems and Families-of-Systems from concept development through Development Testing, Operational Testing, Interoperability Testing, Interoperability Certification, Training and Experimentation.  At each of these test phases, different and sometimes complex objectives are being met. InterTEC is designed to offer a flexible and re-configurable System-of-Systems test environment. InterTEC can be employed to validate system level performance at the early life cycle phases, as well as provide for an operationally representative battlespace for assessments at the doctrinal level, including assessments in the cognitive domain (i.e. the human component of the integrated battlespace).  The continued practice of spiral development dictates that program managers seek retest and re-certification to ensure compliance with the system requirements and interoperability with related systems.  InterTEC will therefore be designed as an efficient solution to facilitate the retest and re-certification process.1.3  Project StructureThe InterTEC Project Structure is designed for Joint Navy, Air Force, Army and Joint Interoperability Test Command participation and management.  InterTEC is comprised of the following integrated product lines:Joint Test Federation - Interfaced M&S facilities and federates with distributed NSS (C4ISR)T&E networks facilities and ranges, in an interoperable, reconfigurable software environment compliant with the Test & Training Enabling Architecture (TENA), utilizing the TENA Object Model, which provides compliancy with the High Level Architecture.  C4ISR Distributed Test Network Suite Distributed test organizations, laboratories, development facilities, network and system specific live/sim interfaces along with distributed C4ISR test software and hardware and data collection instrumentation resources that enable the transport, collection and analysis of tactical C4ISR data within complex federated environments employing TENA.C4ISR Application Tools Suite – Plug-in extensions and additions to the FI 2010 Tool Sets (as required) providing integrated applications for the planning, execution, data analysis and performance reporting of Joint C4ISR Test, Training and Experimentation events. C4ISR Mobile/Integrated Instrumentation System - Transportable C4ISR Test Control Center and integrated-modularized instrumentation suite designed to capture C4ISR data from a mobile portal that has connectivity between the C4ISR Test Federation, C4ISR Distributed Test Suite and the Test or Experimentation Site.  Will include a core set of C4ISR link capability and reconfigurable instrumentation based upon specific test objectives. 1.4 BenefitsInterTEC provides the capability to create a Joint Synthetic Battlespace Environment consisting of live and virtual elements, (including the Joint Tactical C4ISR Networks). InterTEC will further develop and employ universally applied methodologies, criteria and applications for the planning, execution, analysis and reporting of Interoperability Tests.  The guiding goal of the InterTEC project is to reduce the cost, time and resources required to plan and execute C4ISR Interoperability Testing, Training and Experimentation. With InterTEC technical deficiencies may be identified early in system development by inserting analytical models and simulations in a realistic battlespace environment.  Likewise, InterTEC may expose technical and operational problems prior to deployment by including live systems, networks, operators and decision-makers in a controlled battlespace environment.   In the more operationally representative test environment, virtual prototypes embedded in realistic synthetic environments with live participants can aid in developing a shared vision of the proposed system’s utility.  This additionally provides a means for understanding the complex interactions among the various battlespace (system-of-systems) components and refining the associated techniques, tactics and procedures.2.0 Progress and CompletionInterTEC as a FY01 new start, will have incremental capability releases and is currently scheduled for full operating capability in 2007.3.0 Author BiographiesMarcus Makarehchi has over 15 years of experience with the US Navy, NAWCWD Point Mugu California.  He received his Bachelor of Science in Electronics Engineering from Cal State University of Long Beach and his Master of Science in Systems Management from the University of Southern California.KENNETH THOMAS received his Bachelor of Science in Engineering Mathematics from the University of Arizona and graduate certificate in Information Systems Engineering from George Mason University.  He is currently the project leader and principal architect for the JITC Joint OT&E Simulation Environment Facility, as well as the system architect for the INTERTEC project.  He has over 25 years of professional experience and  is a member of IEEE Computer Society and ITEA.Rob Heilman has over 15 years of experience in the fields of Systems Integration, Test & Evaluation, and Program Management.  He received his Bachelor of Science in Aeronautical Engineering from the California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo and has obtained professional certification in both Systems Engineering and Project Management.  He is currently employed in the Joint Warfare Capabilities Office, T&E Directorate of the Naval Air Warfare Center.  He is also currently the Project Director of the InterTEC Project. PAGE 1Continuum of Battlespace Test EnvironmentsLive/Open AirDistributedLabHILM&SConstructiveSimulationAnalyticalModelIncreasing Control, Repeatability & ObservationIncreasing Operational Realism, Fidelity & Cost