A Review of JSIMS Environmental Tailoring Services (JETS)with Focus on Sensor Impacts Peter S. Dailey, Ph.D.Todd A. HutchinsonSteve O. OuztsTASC, Inc.55 Walkers Brook DriveReading, MA 01867-3297781-942-2000, Fax 781-942-7100 HYPERLINK mailto:psdailey@tasc.com psdailey@tasc.com,  HYPERLINK mailto:tahutchinson@tasc.com tahutchinson@tasc.com, HYPERLINK mailto:soouzts@tasc.com soouzts@tasc.comKeywords:JSIMS, Synthetic Natural Environments, User-controlled Weather, Environmental Tailoring, Sensor ImpactsABSTRACT:  One primary objective of JSIMS Environmental Tailoring Services (JETS) has been to provide an algorithm which addresses the anticipated need for pre-exercise and run-time tailoring of the Synthetic Natural Environment.  Previous papers have discussed the technical aspects of the PFM (Pressure Field Modification) algorithm.  This tool, designed to manipulate gridded atmospheric fields, is the highest fidelity algorithm developed by JETS.  It is a physics-based algorithm that uses both statistical techniques as well as atmospheric state equations to perform edits to gridded environmental fields.  The algorithm uses a constraint technique to provide guidance on an appropriate range of variable edits and modifies the SNE by blending in five dimensions: 3-D space, time, and correlated variables.  One of the most important reasons for developing such an algorithm is to provide an appropriate level of realism when changes are made to the SNE.  To illustrate the importance of maintaining inter-domain fidelity, we have conducted a series of experiments using TAWS (Tactical Acquisition Weather Software).  TAWS computes target lock-on range given the characteristics of the aircraft and target as well as the atmospheric conditions.  An SNE is created and provided to TAWS in a control case.  Lock-on range is calculated for a 12 hour period.  We then edit the SNE with existing uncorrelated methods, rerun TAWS and compare the results to the control run.  The edit results in a significant change to target range.  Next, the edit is made to the SNE using the JETS PFM algorithm.  Now, TAWS is run again using the edited and correlated weather data.  Again, target acquisition range is affected.  Importantly, the sensor’s view of the target is quite different from both the control run and the run without application of JETS demonstrating the importance of performing sound edits.1. IntroductionOn-demand tailoring of the Synthetic Natural Environment (SNE) is an important objective of the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS). Tailoring tools are required to make detailed adjustments to a scenario prior to an exercise.  In addition, such tools can allow the scenario to be steered at run-time to assure the training experience meets specific goals. The objective of the JSIMS Environmental Tailoring Services (JETS) project is to develop techniques and guidance for this on-demand tailoring. SNE tailoring is already seen as a critical element of scenario construction in the next century [1,2].  Tools that allow for scientifically valid adjustments to the Synthetic Natural Environment (SNE) will assist the Modeling and Simulation (M&S) community in allowing for editing of the SNE during the construction of the scenario (pre-exercise) as well as during the exercise itself (run-time).  Prior papers have focused on the development of JETS tailoring algorithms [3] as well as the complexity of incorporating JETS tools into a JSIMS framework [4].To illustrate the importance of consistent tailoring of the SNE, a sensor model has been employed to study the potential impacts of inconsistent changes to the SNE.  Section 2 discusses the sensor model and the formulation of experiments for testing the JETS algorithms.  Section 3 provides a discussion of the results.Sensor Model ExperimentsTASC has developed Target Acquisition Weather Software (TAWS) to predict the performance of air-to-ground weapons systems and direct view optics.  The TAWS software includes internal models for the visible, infrared, and laser frequency bands.  The program predicts variables such as lock-on range, which are tactically significant to aircraft.  We have used TAWS as an example of the kind of sensor model that could be impacted by changes to the SNE in a training exercise.  Our goal is to demonstrate that changes to the SNE made prior to an exercise or during run-time may impact the sensor’s “view of the world”.  Moreover, if the editing process is incomplete or implemented with and insufficient degree of fidelity, the result may be a negative training experience.We have begun the study by creating gridded environmental data using the NCAR/PSU MM5 (National Center for Atmospheric Research / Pennsylvania State University Mesoscale Model Version 5) [5].  MM5 is a numerical weather prediction model that has been used previously by JETS to create SNEs for testing purposes [3,4].  Three-dimensional fields that are important for the range detection calculation provided by TAWS are included in the output.  These include winds, temperatures, humidity, and precipitation.The scenario created for this study takes place over China on January 2, 1999.  Figure 1 shows the coverage of the MM5 domain.The MM5 model is initialized using NOGAPS (Navy Operational Global Atmospheric Prediction System) data starting at 12Z.  Output is saved every hour for a 24 hour simulation period.  The TAWS model is run with MM5 data serving as the atmospheric data source.  TAWS is used to calculate target detection range.  The TAWS model is set up to consider a Scud Missile Launcher as target detected by an IR sensor located 2500 feet above the target.  The time over target is 03Z on January 3, which corresponds to the time of the edit to the SNE.  The TAWS background is set to vegetative.Three experiments are run by ingesting SNE data created by MM5 into the TAWS sensor model.  Figure 2 is a schematic of the experiments. EMBED Word.Picture.8  Run #1 is the control run.  Here, the SNE is ingested into the TAWS software to produce a range detection analysis.  Run #2 is the Edited SNE Run in which data from the SNE is edited, but no further action is taken to ensure the data is correlated with other SNE variables in time or space.  Run #3 is the Correlated SNE Run in which the same edit is applied as in Run #2 followed by the application of the JETS PFM algorithm to correlate the edit with the remainder of the SNE.  Technical aspects of the PFM algorithm have been documented in previous papers (e.g., [3,4]).The difference between Run #1 and Run #2 demonstrates the impact of editing the SNE on the sensor’s “view of the world”.  The difference between Run #2 and Run #3 demonstrates the impact of properly correlating the edit with other variables contained in the SNE.  If there is a significant difference between Run #2 and Run #3, then a lack of JETS-type correlation could results in a negative training experience.3.  ResultsBefore discussing the results of the sensor model runs, it is instructive to examine the important environmental fields before and after editing.  Figure 3 shows the surface temperature field across the same domain in Figure 1.  Panel (a) is the unedited surface field.  Panel (b) shows the same field after the inclusion of a five degree Celsius temperature edit centered in the circular region highlighted by a dotted line.  Figure 4 shows the surface relative humidity (RH) field for the same domain.  Note in the region where the temperature edit was placed, there is a significant impact to the RH field.  This reflects the result of the PFM algorithm altering the RH field to account for an increase in temperature and a resulting decrease in moisture.Run #1 (Control Run) uses the unedited temperature [Fig. 3(a)] and RH [Fig. 4(a)] fields as well as other fields needed for the IR sensor calculation (e.g., wind, precipitation).  Run #2 (Edited SNE Run) uses the edited temperature field [Fig. 3(b)] without any manipulation to the RH field [Fig. 4(a)] or other fields.  Finally, Run #3 uses the edited temperature field [Fig. 3(a)] with RH [Fig. 4(b)] and other SNE fields properly correlated by the JETS PFM algorithm.Figure 5 shows a graph of the difference between the background and target temperatures for all runs.  This temperature difference is critical to the calculation of target detection range because IR sensors depend on the recognition of temperature gradients to detect a target.  The control case, in which no edit was made to the SNE, reflects the unmodified temperature difference.  Note that when the edit is made (“Edit” curve), there is a distinct modification to the temperature difference profile reflecting the increased temperature in the atmosphere over the target.  The difference between the “Control” and “Edit” curves reflects the sensor impact of the edited temperature field.  The “JETS” curve represents the profile based on the edited temperature as well as application of the JETS PFM algorithm to the other correlated variables in the SNE including moisture (see Fig. 4), winds, and precipitation.  Note the “JETS” curve is quite different than the “Edit” curve.  The difference between the “Edit” and “JETS” curves reflects the importance of properly correlating the entire SNE upon editing any variable.The sensor impact of physically correct edits is made even clearer by the information in Figure 6.  In this figure, the temperature difference in Fig. 5 is used to model the sensor detection range for the TAWS IR sensor.  The “Control” run shows a detection range, which tapers off about an hour after the time of edit.  The “Edit” curve shows that the result of increasing the temperature of the atmosphere surrounding the target is to decrease detection range after the time of the edit.   However, when the JETS PFM algorithm is applied, the net effect of all modified variables in the SNE is to increase detection range from the control case at all times after the edit.  The reason for this discrepancy is that moisture plays a critical role in the IR sensor and moisture is significantly modified by PFM to appropriately account for the temperature increase.  This provides a clear indication that without proper physical correlation and blending with the edited SNE, the result may be a negative training experience.  Application of an algorithm like JETS PFM assures that the sensor models used in a distributed training exercise are properly accounting for a realistic natural environment.4.  ConclusionIn this paper we have presented a series of experiments meant to illustrate the importance of assuring proper physical consistency within an SNE.  The MM5 model is used to create an SNE over China during January 1999.  All variables that are necessary for an IR sensor model are saved every hour of simulation time.  These variables include temperature, moisture, and winds.  The TAWS software, developed at TASC, is used to simulate the impact of modification to the SNE on an IR sensor.  TAWS is employed to compute the temperature difference between background and target and the sensor detection range for an IR sensor.In the first run, the control experiment, the temperature difference serves as a background field from which to compare.  The edit run, in which a five degree Celsius increase in temperature is made demonstrates the impact of such an edit on these plots.  The increased temperature results in a modification to the temperature difference profile and an overall decrease in detection range after the time of the edit.In the final run, the JETS PFM algorithm is used to correlate and blend the temperature edit with other relevant variables in the SNE.  As a result, the temperature profile is again modified and the overall sensor detection range actually increases.  It is noted that the reason for this impact on the sensor is that moisture plays a critical role in IR detection and moisture is only modified in the JETS run.  The detection range diagram illustrates the importance of physically consistent editing of an SNE to guarantee a positive training experience.5.   References[1]	Whitney, D. A., et al.: “TAOS: Providing and Managing Realistic Natural Environments for Virtual Worlds”, Proceedings of the Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, September 1997.[2] Whitney, D. A., et al. “Virtual Natural Environments for the 21st Century”, Proceedings of the I/ITSEC Conference, 1998.[3]	Dailey, P. S., et al., “Algorithms for Consistent Tailoring of the Synthetic Natural Environment”, Proceedings of the Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW), September, 1998.[4]  Dailey, P. S., et al., “Status Report: JSIMS Environmental Tailoring Services (JETS) Tailoring Algorithms and Framework Assessment”, Proceedings of the Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop (SIW), March, 1999.[5]   Grell, G. A., J. Dudhia, and D. R. Stauffer, 1995: A description of the fifth generation Penn State/NCAR mesoscale model (MM5).  NCAR Technical Note TN-398+STR, 122 pp.AcknowledgmentsThis work is sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Administration (DARPA). Author BiographiesPeter S. Dailey is an atmospheric scientist and the technical lead for atmospheric data integration on the TAOS project. Dr. Dailey received a B.A. and B.A.S. from the University of Pennsylvania, and a M.S. and Ph. D. from the University of California at Los Angeles.Todd A. Hutchinson is an atmospheric scientist with an M. S. in Meteorology from the University of Oklahoma.  Todd has worked on various Modeling and Simulation efforts.Steve O. Ouzts, a retired US Air Force Colonel, has over 25 years experience in meteorology, space operations, modeling and simulation, and remote sensing. He has a B.S. from Auburn University, a M.S. in Atmospheric Dynamics from the Naval Postgraduate School, and an M.B.A. from the University of Nebraska.Figure 6 – Output from the TAWS model showing detection range.EDITJETS EDITCONTROLFigure 5 – Output from the TAWS software showing the difference between the target and background temperatures for each of the runs.EDITJETS EDITCONTROLFigure 4– (a) Unedited and (b) Edited surface relative humidity (RH) field corresponding to the domain in Fig. 3.  The dotted circle is the are over which the temperature edit is blended.  Note the edited RH field reflects the impact of increased temperature.03Z03ZFigure 3– (a) Unedited and (b) Edited surface temperature field used for the experiments.  The dotted circle is the are over which the 5 degree Celsius edit is blended.  The time of the edit is 03Z, which corresponds to the TAWS time over target.baba03Z03ZFigure 1– Map showing the coverage of the MM5 model domain used for generation of SNE gridded data.Figure 2– Schematic showing the three proof-of-concept experiments.  Run #1 is the control run.  Run #2 uses SNE data which has been edited but without the application of JETS.  Run #3 used SNE data that has been both edited and correlated using the JETS PFM algorithm.