John C. Deal, Vice PresidentSystems Engineering Electronics and Integrated Solutions Operating Group BAE SystemsJohn C. Deal serves as the Vice President for Systems Engineering for the 19,000 employee Electronic and Integrated Solutions Operating Group within BAE Systems, Inc responsible for 2100 systems engineers, supporting 30 business units within 5 lines of business and 2 technology organizations. Responsible for the planning and execution of the operating group's strategic initiatives. Prior to his current position he served as both Director for C4ISR Systems Engineering and Program Director for WIN-T, AMF JTRS and other systems programs within the Communications and Information Systems Business Area of the Communications, Navigation, Identification and Reconnaissance Division, BAE Systems, Inc. John also served in the US Army for over 29 years retiring as a Colonel. His active duty assignments include Commander, U.S. Army Information Systems Engineering Command, Executive Officer, Office of the Director of Information Systems for Command, Control, Communications, and Computers, Army CIO, Headquarters, Department of the Army and Deputy Director for Standards and Interoperability, Architecture Directorate, Office of the Director of Information Systems for Command, Control, Communications, and Computers. He was selected and served in two senior level fellowships; as a member of the Secretary of Defense Strategic Studies Group II and as a member of the Ridgeway Center for International Security Studies, University of Pittsburgh, PA. John also served on the Staff and Faculty, USMA, West Point, NY, as an Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering. John holds a Bachelor of Arts degree in Physics from the University of Alaska, a Master of Science degree in Electrical Engineering from the Naval Postgraduate School, a Master of Arts degree in National Security and Strategic Studies from the Naval War College, and a Master of Arts degree in International Relations from Salve Regina University.John is married to Gerrie A. Deal and has 5 children and 4 grandchildren. Gerrie served as a Lieutenant Colonel in the U.S. Army Acquisition Corps and was assigned to the USA Information Systems Engineering Command as Deputy Director, Technology Integration Center.  John's children are Mrs. Karen A. Garnes (age 31), Mr Glen K. Deal (28), Mr Sean A. Deal (25), Ms Helen E. Deal (14) and Ms Carolyn M.  Deal (2!) John and his family enjoy climbing, hiking and trekking, hunting and fishing, biking, horses and both cowboy music and poetry and bluegrass music. A down home sort with a systems engineering predisposition, John and his family are committed to helping others and contributing to the betterment of all human kind. (And that includes soldiers, kids, dogs and horses.)