Equipment Characteristics and Performance Data Interchange for Simulations using XMLLee W. LacyDany KingDynamics Research Corporation3505 Lake Lynda Drive, Suite 100Orlando, Florida  32817407-380-1200 x104LLacy@DRC.comKay BurnettNational Ground Intelligence Center220 Seventh St., NEATTN:  IANG-TSCCharlottesville, VA 22902-5396skburne@ngic.osis.govABSTRACT: Data providers such as the National Ground Intelligence Center (NGIC) supply authoritative data for modeling and simulation applications.  NGIC provides threat data through the Defense Intelligence Modeling and Simulation Resource Repository (DIMSRR).  Information from NGIC’s SPIRIT database is available through the DIMSRR web-based user interface.  Simulation data interoperability standards are being developed to support the interchange of equipment Characteristics and Performance (C&P) data.  These standards will provide a neutral data interchange format (DIF) using eXtensible Markup Language (XML) technology.  The use of DIFs promotes simulation data interoperability and reuse.As part of this standards development effort, NGIC is performing a proof of concept demonstration.  A set of information associated with a threat air defense system is being provided to a JMASS simulation in this demonstration.  The gun portion of the JMASS  Air Defense Artillery (ADA) Gun System is being supplied with NGIC data that conforms to the XML DIF standard.The development of the equipment C&P DIF involved specifying the requirements of the consuming simulation application, determining the available data from the DIMSRR, and developing XML grammars for the format.  A demonstration was performed to show the transfer of data from the DIMSRR to the JMASS model using the XML DIF.  This effort produced lessons learned that will benefit research being conducted by the Army Modeling and Simulation Office (AMSO) into equipment C&P data interchange standards.1. IntroductionData providers such as the National Ground Intelligence Center (NGIC) supply authoritative data for modeling and simulation applications.  NGIC provides threat data through the Defense Intelligence Modeling and Simulation Resource Repository (DIMSRR).  Information from NGIC’s SPIRIT database is available through the DIMSRR web-based user interface.  Simulation data interoperability standards are being developed to support the interchange of equipment Characteristics and Performance (C&P) data between the DIMSRR and consuming applications.  These standards will provide a neutral data interchange format (DIF) using eXtensible Markup Language (XML) technology.  The use of DIFs promotes simulation data interoperability and reuse of simulation data.	As part of this standards development effort, NGIC is performing a proof of concept demonstration.  A set of information associated with a threat air defense system is being provided to a JMASS simulation component in this demonstration.  The gun portion of the JMASS Air Defense Artillery (ADA) Gun System is being supplied with NGIC data that conforms to the XML DIF standard for C&P data (see Figure 1).	The development of the equipment C&P DIF involved specifying the requirements of the consuming simulation application, determining the available data from the DIMSRR, and developing XML grammars for the format.  This paper describes the development of the NGIC demonstration equipment C&P DIF including specifying requirements, analysis of the SPIRIT database’s capability to provide JMASS required data, the design of the DIF, and demonstrations of the DIF’s use.Figure 1. Demonstration System Overview2. Requirements Analysis A requirements analysis was performed to identify DIF requirements for the demonstration.2.1 ApproachThe approach for developing the DIF requirements involved scoping the problem, reviewing JMASS documentation, and specifying DIF requirements.2.1.1. Scoping the ProblemThe DIF must support the simulation applications that import the data.  Decisions and assumptions must be made to scope the DIF.  The target model for this demonstration effort is a JMASS ADA player (JMASS, 2000a).  This model supports representation of the Air Defense Artillery (ADA) Gun System.This demonstration effort focused on satisfying the data input requirements of the gun submodel of the JMASS ADA model.  Only data elements required to support the gun model were supported by the DIF.  Other ADA subsystems (e.g., RADAR) were not addressed by this initial DIF.2.1.2. JMASS Documentation ReviewNGIC identified applicable JMASS source files for analysis.  The “Gun.mcc” file is the primary data input file for the JMASS model.  It contains default data values for the “ADAPlayer” software class.  The accompanying files are header files (.h) and component definition files (.cdf) that are used to configure the ADAPlayer.  These files also contain default values for the applicable data elements along with other meta-data.  The elements identified in the “Gun.mcc” file were cross-referenced against the accompanying sources.  Elements identified in the “Gun.mcc” file each had a corresponding data element in one of the other source files.   Analysts documented assumptions made in determining the set of data elements to include in the requirements.2.1.3. Requirements SpecificationThe names of all required data elements were entered into a table.  The header files (.h) provided some meta-data: the data type, the unit, and the element description.  Each table entry contained meta-data in addition to the name of the JMASS file that identified the data element.  The filenames represented a family of files in which the data elements are used.  File extensions/suffixes include: “.h” (header file), “.cdf” (component definition file), “_func.cpp” (C++ file), and “_io.cxx” (generated C++ file).2.2 Resulting RequirementsThe DIF requirements were separated into Meta-data, Gun Data, and Syntax/Format/Semantics categories.  The meta-data category included requirements associated with describing the data.  The Gun Data requirements identified specific data elements that must be supported by the DIF.   The data element table described above provided the detail for the gun data requirements.  The Syntax/Format/Semantics category provided requirements associated with how the data is represented.3. Gap Analysis A gap analysis was performed to identify the current NGIC SPIRIT database’s ability to support the JMASS data requirements for the demonstration.3.1 ApproachPerforming the gap analysis involved inventorying NGIC SPIRIT C&P data elements and then cross-referencing the DIF requirements with the inventoried SPIRIT C&P data.Data schema information was not available on the unclassified version of the DIMSRR.  Therefore, the available data values were used as an indication of the data elements available.  The DIMSRR data values were obtained from the SPIRIT C&P data section of the NGIC DIMSRR website: http://diamsrr.dmso.mil.The DIF data elements required by the JMASS model were compared to the names associated with the C&P Data values.  The differences between the DIF Requirements and the C&P Data were varied.  Each had areas not covered by the other.  Also, the overlapping areas had differences in detail.Some gaps are due in part to the structural differences between the DIF and the DIMSRR.  The DIMSRR data is divided into categories for the gun and for the ammunition.  The ammunition category is further subdivided by type.  This results in overlapping parameters for ammunition and in some cases for the gun.In the DIF, there is no distinction between gun elements and ammunitions elements.  In addition, there is no ammunition type.  Each element occurs once and only once.  Hence, overlapping areas in the DIMSRR result in ambiguous matches with the DIF requirements.The structural differences influence the commonalities between the JMASS required data and the DIMSRR, and will also significantly impact the resolution of their gaps.  The criteria used to identify commonalities were the element names, element default values and the element descriptions.  The differences in detail and coverage areas resulted in three types of gaps that the SPIRIT C&P Data have with the JMASS-driven DIF requirements:  non-specific matches, multiple matches, and unmatched.  Non-specific matches involve DIF requirements that are more specific than SPIRIT C&P Data parameters.  This results in multiple DIF data elements matching with individual SPIRIT C&P Data parameters.Multiple matches involve DIF requirements that are more general than their SPIRIT C&P data parameter counterparts.  This results in individual DIF data elements matching with multiple SPIRIT C&P data parameters.Unmatched items are DIF data elements that have no matching SPIRIT C&P data parameters.3.2 Gap Analysis ResultsThe differences between the JMASS-driven DIF requirements and the SPIRIT Database were varied.  The DIF is more specific in some areas and more general in others.  The resulting gaps were identified and documented.The data values provided by the DIMSRR for the ADA Gun System were enumerated.  Out of 34 DIF data elements, 11 matched with SPIRIT C&P data parameters.  A common element conversion table was developed that identifies each type of match.  There were 3 DIF data elements that had unique matches.  There were 5 DIF data elements that matched with a single SPIRIT C&P data parameter.  There were 3 DIF data elements that matched with multiple SPIRIT C&P data parameters.  The majority of the DIF data elements (23) had no matches to SPIRIT C&P Data parameters because the data was not currently provided by NGIC through their SPIRIT database.  3.3 Gap ResolutionSpecific recommendations for resolving data element differences were documented as a result of the gap analysis. Some DIF data elements matched with one DIMSRR item.  This one data element was used as the source for all 5 data elements required by the DIFMultiple required DIF data elements matched with multiple source SPIRIT C&P data parameters.  This occurred because the DIMSRR structure separates ammunition by type.  For the purposes of this demonstration, one ammunition type (i.e, HEI-T, HEI, or API-T) was assumed.Many required DIF data elements were not currently supported by the DIMSRR.  In the long term, these should be added to the SPIRIT database.  However, for the demonstration, a surrogate data file was developed to store the needed DIF data elements.4. DTD/Schema Design The C&P DIF is formally specified using XML grammars.  XML is “extensible” because it does not have a fixed format like the Hypertext Markup Language (HTML).  Hence, XML is not a single, predefined markup language.   In fact, XML is a meta-language (a language which describes other languages).  XML supports the development of unique data formats for specific applications.  XML has been specifically recommended for representing simulation data (Lacy, 1999).  XML is an excellent format for the transfer of structured data.The XML grammar for the DIF was designed by developing an XML Document Type Definition (DTD) and an XML Schema.4.1 Design ApproachThe method employed in designing the DTD and Schema involved researching interchange approaches, developing data structures, developing the DTD, and developing the schema.A variety of approaches could have been used to define the C&P DIF.  Various approaches were considered to select a method for representing the C&P data in the XML DIF and to define an associated DTD or XML Schema.   The approach took into consideration the requirements of the current demonstration task and the long term operation and maintenance of the DIF in day-to-day use.A data model was needed to represent the information to be described in the DIF.  The data model documented the underlying representation of the formats.  The data model supported the requirements of the DIF and provided support for all data.A DTD was needed to provide a formal grammar describing the DIF.  Developing the DTD involved defining the DIF by specifying the order, structure, and cardinality of the data elements.  A new mechanism has been proposed for specifying the format of XML files.  The standardization specification for XML schemas is in the final state of approval by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C).  The development of an XML schema involves the information needed for DTDs as well as specific data types.4.2 Design ResultsThe following sections describe the results of developing a DTD and XML Schema for the Equipment C&P DIF.The demonstration interchange approach for this demonstration task is shown in Figure 2.  The existing NGIC DIMSRR SPIRIT database is shown on the left with an ASCII download file that is generated in response to a query for data for the specific JMASS ADA model.   During this demonstration, downloaded data was reformatted into a C&P data file that conformed to the DIF DTD and XML Schema.  Another file contains surrogate data (also represented using XML) was developed using values from the JMASS data input file.  A small set of “glue” code was developed using the extensible Style Language Transformations (XSLT) to merge the files and then create the JMASS input files in the format needed for input.Figure 2.  Demonstration Data FlowMultiple approaches were considered in defining the data structures to be supported by the DIF.  The use on an explicit-model is one common approach in defining data structures for XML files. The explicit-model takes the content of the information being represented and directly maps it into a tree structure using the contents of the file as the branches and leaf nodes of the tree.  Another approach is to abstract the content into a metamodel that describes the content to be represented.  The metamodel approach is much easier to maintain and manage in the long term.  Although explicit description of the contents is lost, all information is retained in the resulting DIF.The XML DTD was generated to support the DIF data structure defined above.  The XML DTD was developed using off-the-shelf tools including XML Spy and Near and Far Designer.  The XML DTD is presented in graphical form in Figure 3. An XML schema was also generated to represent the DIF.  The schema conforms to the 24 October 2000 W3C candidate recommendation that is currently being finalized.  XML schemas provide additional features over DTDs such as stronger typing.  The XML schema is shown in graphical form in Figure 4. 4.3  DTD/Schema RecommendationsThe following sections present recommendations regarding the development of XML DTDs or XML Schemas for equipment characteristics and performance DIFs.These recommendations are applicable to related data interchange standards development efforts such as the effort currently being led by TRAC-Monterey for the Army Modeling and Simulation Office (AMSO).4.3.1 Continue Resolution of Data IssuesThe differences between the data required by the JMASS ADA Gun System and the SPIRIT database were documented in a report.  There are outstanding data semantics issues that must be resolved with NGIC and JMASS.  It is very important that all issues be resolved in order to define a stable useable DIF.4.3.2 Metamodel ApproachThe use of a metamodel approach results in a maintainable DTD or XML Schema.  Changes to the variables required by JMASS models will not require changes to the XML DTD since variables are represented in data rather than through explicit XML tags.4.3.3 Define Associated Business RulesBusiness rules are needed in association with the XML DTD to provide a useable DIF that is used consistently.  For example, issues such as whether to provide an explicit text string containing “n/a” should be used or whether the XML element may be empty should be resolved and documented.5. SummaryA proof of concept demonstration was performed by NGIC to show how data from their SPIRIT database can be provided to a JMASS model.A requirements analysis was performed that resulted in requirements being specified for the DIF.  It is critically important to bound the DIF problem space prior to developing requirements.  The scope of data supported by the DIF must support data required by the JMASS gun model.XML grammars were developed to formally specify the DIF.  Both an XML DTD and an XML Schema were developed.  A demonstration was performed to show the transfer of data from the DIMSRR to the JMASS model using the XML DIF6. ReferencesJMASS (2000a) JMASS ADA Player User’s Manual, Version 1.1, January 2000JMASS (2000b) JMASS 98 1.3.0 User’s Manual, June 2000.Lacy, L., Stone, G.; Dugone, T. (1999) “XML Data Interchange Format Standards for HLA-Related Data Interoperability”. Proceedings of the Southeastern Simulation Conference ’99Author BiographiesLEE LACY is the Director of Orlando Operations for Dynamics Research Corporation.  He has worked on major simulation programs including WARSIM 2000 and the Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT).  He serves on the Board of Directors of the National Center for Simulation.  He is currently the Principal Investigator on the described effort.  His research areas include XML and Computer Generated Forces.  He received an M.S. and B.S in Computer Science from the University of Central Florida.Dany King is a research assistant for Dynamics Research Corporation.  He provides XML expertise to various projects.  Dany is currently pursuing a B.S. in Computer Science at the University of Central Florida.KAY BURNETT is a Senior Physical Scientist at the National Ground Intelligence Center (NGIC).  Ms. Burnett joined NGIC (then the U.S. Army Foreign Science and Technology Center) as a foreign computer technology analyst in 1985.  In 1995, she moved to NGIC’s Modeling and Simulation Office where she coordinates support to Army and DoD M&S programs.  Ms. Burnett has a Bachelor of Arts in Mathematics Education from Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, a Master of Arts in Teaching-Mathematics from James Madison University, and a Masters of Engineering in Systems Engineering from the University of Virginia.