US Air Force’s Logistics Simulation (LOGSIM)Major Scott C. JohnstonAF Agency for Modeling and Simulation (AFAMS)12350 Research ParkwayOrlando, FL 32826-3276(407) 208-5736;  DSN: 970 HYPERLINK mailto:scott.johnston@afams.af.mil scott.johnston@afams.af.milKeywords:LOGSIM; AWSIM; JFACC; M&S; CAX; Distributed SimulationABSTRACT: The United States Air Forces Europe (USAFE) Logistics Directorate identified a long-standing requirement to train Air Force decision makers and logistics professionals in the sustainment of contingency and combat operations using computer-assisted exercises (CAX) as a training medium.  Sustaining a combat or contingency operation logistically can be every bit as challenging as supporting it operationally.  Accordingly, USAFE logistics leaders conceived a practical training tool, Logistics Simulation (LOGSIM), for exercising command logistics capabilities.  Initial successes in four USAFE CAXs (Exercises UNION FLASH 96/97/98 and TRAILBLAZER 97) led to wider Air Force interest in LOGSIM, resulting in support for continued development and use outside of USAFE in Exercises ULCHI FOCUS LENS 98/99 and Joint Expeditionary Forces Experiment 99.LOGSIM is an attempt to challenge logistics capabilities in a CAX environment.  It models the key processes of flight-line maintenance and places constraints upon the availability of combat aircraft in the Air Warfare Simulation (AWSIM), the United States Air Force’s official air combat simulation model.  It also models the failure and repair of support equipment, directly affecting availability of aircraft in AWSIM.In AWSIM aircraft break or incur damage and, using LOGSIM, require maintenance and spare parts as in actual flying operations.  Mission planners take into account losses and delays due to maintenance.  Logistics personnel monitor aircraft and equipment status, including spare parts stocks, while providing status reports to their leadership.  LOGSIM was designed using actual Air Force historical data and responds to maintenance requirements during exercises, much like operational Air Force wings, repairing aircraft as critical resources allow.LOGSIM continually updates a comprehensive set of reports, which details the current maintenance status of AWSIM aircraft and equipment in LOGSIM.  LOGSIM tracks and reports munitions expenditures and fuel consumption as they occur in AWSIM.  Consumption of base supplies by subclass is tracked independently of AWSIM.  Reports that track LOGSIM’s operating parameters are also available.1.  US Air Force Logistics Training PhilosophyHistorically, logistics play in US Air Force Computer Assisted Exercises (CAXs) has been characterized by scripted scenarios with little or no impact on the operational tempo of the exercise.  These scripted events, dissociated from operational realm, strain the credibility of exercises already judged lacking in realism.  Lack of realistic training is universally recognized as detrimental to force readiness.  Commanders and staffs need to train as they plan to fight.  Today, the need for realistic training becomes even more acute as the Air Force moves to an Expeditionary Air Force doctrine and at the same time,  contingency commitments increase while manning and training resources spiral downward. Unrealistic logistics play is of limited training value in CAXs and is misleading to participants in at least two respects.  First, the operational community practices without realistic insight into logistics capability/constraints.  This results in, AF commanders, operators, and their battlestaff's training in a static, artificial environment disconnected and apart from the resource dynamics of warfighting.  Participants leave the exercise only nominally prepared for real-world contingencies.  Second, the functional Agile Combat Support (ACS) community, representing one of the Air Force’s strategic vision core competencies does not have the opportunity to train realistically (integrated as an Ops-ACS team) and consequently improve skills, doctrine, procedures, evaluate infrastructure requirements, and supporting systems [1].Four broad objectives were used to target potential solutions for logistical training.  First, trained logisticians are a requirement in the US Air Force with its continuous string of contingencies.  Second, operators need to be trained, as well as logisticians, to conduct operations with less than perfect resources.  Third, logistics personnel must train to work within an organization comprised of other services and nations.  Lastly, a forum is needed to test logistics business practices.  This point is especially important in-light of AF logistics doctrine. The Air Force is currently addressing the need for enhancing CAX realism through development of the Logistic Simulation (LOGSIM).  Fulfilling the requirement for increased “Logistics Realism” will help ensure Joint Forces Air Component Commander (JFACC), Air Force Forces (AFFOR), and Wing Operations Center (WOC) training objectives can be met by LOGSIM [2].2.  LOGSIM Overview [3]LOGSIM is a computerized logistics model designed to place realistic constraints on the operations tempo of the Air Warfare Simulation (AWSIM), the United States Air Force’s official air combat simulation model during computer-assisted exercises.  LOGSIM was originally conceived by the United States Air Forces Europe (USAFE) Logistics Directorate for use in the JFACC and the Joint Task Force (JTF) training exercises at the Warrior Preparation Center (WPC) in Einsiedlerhof, Germany.  Recently, LOGSIM has garnered interest and support for use in exercises outside of USAFE.LOGSIM is an attempt to challenge logistics capabilities in a CAX environment.  It models the key processes of flight-line maintenance and places constraints upon the availability of combat aircraft in AWSIM.  It also models the failure and repair of support equipment, directly affecting availability of aircraft in AWSIM.  LOGSIM tracks and reports munitions expenditures and fuel consumption as they occur in AWSIM.  Consumption of base supplies by subclass is tracked independently of AWSIM.LOGSIM was developed and designed to run on a desktop personal computer (PC) or workstation under the Windows Network (NT) operating system.  Internally, it is defined by its databases, simulation software, menus, and view screens; externally, it is defined by its links to AWSIM and the LOGSIM user, and by its output of reports through a Local Area Network (LAN) to various using agencies.2.1  LOGSIM to AWSIM linkLOGSIM shares a direct automated link with AWSIM during exercises.  Via a point-to-point interface, AWSIM sends LOGSIM data regarding the condition of aircraft as they return from missions.  Those aircraft not experiencing any damage or breakage in AWSIM bypass LOGSIM and return to the aircraft regeneration queue.  Those aircraft that are damaged or broken in AWSIM, through risk points amassed in combat or through statistical determination of mechanical failure, are passed to LOGSIM for assessment of cause, assignment of repair action, and determination of parts requirements and availability.  Aircraft exit LOGSIM through a Mean-Time-To-Repair block that simulates actual maintenance times.  They then return to AWSIM for sortie generation.2.2  LOGSIM databasesLOGSIM’s value as a training aid is derived largely from the completeness and accuracy of its databases, which are the responsibility of both the exercise players and the LOGSIM controller.  During an exercise, LOGSIM relies on the following databases:possible aircraft problems and probability of occurrence, grouped by aircraft type within five broad maintenance categories:in-flight emergencies,ground aborts,routine breaks,battle damage, andairfield attack damage;spare part needed to repair each possible aircraft problem;types and quantities of equipment items;potential causes of routine mechanical failure for each equipment type;probability of failure (breakage) for each equipment type;spare part needed to repair each possible equipment failure;mean-times-to-repair and resupply for each aircraft and equipment type;types of munitions;supply subclass quantities with per person per day (PPPD) consumption rates; andbase fixed facilities.LOGSIM has pre-populated databases to support flying operations for most American aircraft, both combat and non-combat, and some North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and Republic of Korea Air Force’s (ROKAF) aircraft.Prior to a CAX, players and exercise planners are tasked to provide inputs for the following database items of interest to the logistics training audience in the exercise scenario:air bases and aircraft types eligible for LOGSIM processing;quantity of each spare aircraft and equipment part located at each base;quantity of each equipment type located at each base;list of fixed facilities located at each base;quantity of each supply subclass located at each base;quantity of personnel assigned to each base; andtypes of munitions to be tracked and reported by LOGSIM.Players may initiate change requests via appropriate configuration management channels for the maintenance and supply databases, if they feel in some cases that the databases are inaccurate or unrealistic.  LOGSIM technical support personnel verify these requests with functional area experts and make appropriate corrections to the databases.  Suggestions for improvement are welcome, as it is through this kind of feedback that the simulation is continually improved.Understanding how LOGSIM processes exercise assets makes clear the need for thorough database inputs.  Figure 2.1, LOGSIM Aircraft Maintenance Cycle, graphically illustrates the processes that comprise the heart of this simulation.Figure 2.1:  LOGSIM Aircraft Maintenance Cycle2.3  AircraftAircraft accumulate risk points based on their proximity to enemy air and ground threats during combat.  When these point accumulations get high enough for any one aircraft, AWSIM labels that aircraft as battle damaged.  For aircraft not experiencing any damage in combat, AWSIM assesses the risk of a routine break, an in-flight emergency, and a ground abort based on historical rates of occurrence for each aircraft type.  Finally, each aircraft is assessed a risk of damage during an airfield attack any time their home base comes under direct attack.  All aircraft damaged or broken during one of these five AWSIM risk assessments are then passed to LOGSIM for repair.Prior to entering LOGSIM, however, aircraft pass through the In-Commission Rate Checker to determine if enough assets remain operational to meet training requirements.  The In-Commission Rate Checker is an adjustable sieve built into AWSIM to give the exercise staff control over the percentage of aircraft from each type that can be out of commission at any one time.  Normally, this Rate Checker is left at default settings equal to historical in-commission rates for each aircraft type, but it can be adjusted up or down to stimulate or inhibit play.  Once this check is passed, aircraft enter LOGSIM and are routed to the Maintenance Cause Generator, where they are assigned specific damage or failure based on known rates of occurrence for each aircraft type within its broader problem category.2.4  Spare parts and repairOnce an aircraft has a specific problem assigned to it, LOGSIM checks to see if a part is required for repair.  If no part is needed, LOGSIM sends the aircraft directly to the Mean-Time-To-Repair block, where it waits for a period simulating maintenance to elapse before re-entering AWSIM at the Aircraft Regeneration block.  For a broken or damaged aircraft in need of a part for repair, LOGSIM looks to the database which simulates the aircraft’s home station base supply to determine if the part is available for issue.  This database is loaded by the players prior to exercise start and contains supply levels dependent on planned conflict duration and aircraft type.  If the part is available, it is issued and the appropriate database is decremented.  The aircraft then proceeds to the repair block.  In cases where no part is available, the aircraft must stand by in an Awaiting Parts (AWP) status until a resupply time expires, simulating a delivery from the continental United States (CONUS).  Resupply times are based on those encountered in the real world.  Once the resupply time expires, the spare part is issued to the AWP aircraft, which then proceeds to the Mean-Time-To-Repair block for assessment of a realistic maintenance delay.  This process completed, the aircraft flows back into AWSIM at the Aircraft Regeneration block.2.5  EquipmentEquipment items are subject to similar scrutiny and maintenance processing in LOGSIM, with the main difference being that LOGSIM must maintain its own databases of these assets because they do not exist in AWSIM.  According to the scheme shown in Figure 2.2, LOGSIM equipment assets are subject to a daily inspection in which each item is vulnerable to a probability of routine failure based on historical breakage rates (by default) or on variable settings dialed in by the LOGSIM controller.  Once failed items have been tagged by LOGSIM, they are routed into the LOGSIM maintenance process.  The percentage of broken equipment items at each air base affects aircraft availability by extending turn times in AWSIM and repair times in LOGSIM.  The value of this portion of LOGSIM to the training audience lies in tracking assets as they flow through this process and in ensuring current statuses are reported to exercise leadership.  Here the quality of LOGSIM output relies on thorough equipment databases and on realistic figures for the Mean-Time-to-Repair, Mean-Time-to-Resupply, and Probability of Failure for each type of asset.  And, as in the aircraft process, it is important that initial spare parts levels are appropriate for the planned exercise duration.Figure 2.2:  LOGSIM Equipment Maintenance Cycle2.6  Munitions and fuelMunitions and aviation fuel quantities are tracked and reported as they are used in AWSIM.  For each air base, the current available levels, amounts loaded on aircraft, and amounts expended or consumed since the start of the CAX are continuously updated and reported.  Fuel consumption history is also maintained and reported to permit trend analysis.2.7  Supply subclassesConsumption of supply items (other than munitions, aviation fuel, and spare parts described previously) is tracked for each air base by subclass.  Quantities are automatically expended according to consumption rates individually set for each supply subclass.  Consumption rates are in PPPD units and therefore, expenditures depend on the number of personnel assigned to each base.  Subclass consumption does not impact aircraft or equipment maintenance processes.2.8  Report generationExercise players interact with LOGSIM through logistics status reports and through the databases that they forward for input into the simulation prior to the CAX.  Logistics support cell members and exercise controllers interact with LOGSIM through the simulation’s menu-driven data screens.The LOGSIM controller and members of the logistics support cell can generate up to 34 different reports covering logistics entities (aircraft, equipment, munitions, fuel, spare parts, supply subclasses, and fixed facilities) at varying levels of detail.  The controller or support cell normally generates status reports once every 12 or 24 hours of simulated time, but can respond to out-of-cycle requests for reports on any entity.  Simulation parameters are also available in report format.  All reports are printable or exportable to a text file for editing prior to distribution to players.  The majority of the reports are in Microsoft( (MS) Access format, while some of the reports resemble standard message text format.2.9  Stand-alone modeStand-alone mode permits LOGSIM to be used when an automated interface with AWSIM or any other air model (such as the Joint Theater Level Simulation [JTLS]) is not available.  Obviously, the constraining effect on air operations in the air model is absent due to the lack of an automated interface in this situation.  However, those functions within LOGSIM that are self-contained (e.g., aircraft problem identification, equipment maintenance process, supply expenditures, etc.) and the full range of LOGSIM reporting can still be used to support logistics training objectives.  The lack of an automated interface is overcome by manually entering data into LOGSIM that normally would have been received from the air model.  This data includes the quantities and types of aircraft assigned to squadrons, maintenance eligible aircraft, and consumption data for fuel and munitions.  Additionally, game time updates must be manually fed to the LOGSIM simulation program whenever an advance of game time is desired.  These manual inputs can be accomplished periodically to coincide with scheduled reporting cycles according to exercise requirements.2.10  System requirementsThe initial LOGSIM prototype Version 1.0, and the follow-on Version 2.0, were developed under MS Windows NT 3.51 on a 120 Megahertz (MHz) Pentium PC with 32 Megabytes (MB) of Random Access Memory (RAM) and a 1.0 Gigabyte (GB) hard drive.  The simulation software was written in MS Visual C++ 4.0.  The database and user interface was created using MS Access 7.0.LOGSIM Versions 2.1 - 2.3 were developed on a 166 MHz Pentium under Windows NT 4.0 using MS Access 97 and Visual C++ 4.2.CAX operations generally require a minimum 166 MHz Pentium with 40 MB RAM and 2.0 GB hard drive.This standard suite of hardware and software was selected in lieu of other, more costly workstation environments to minimize development time and maximize flexibility to changing requirements without sacrificing significant computing power.  An added bonus is the ease of transportability due to the proliferation of PCs among potential LOGSIM users.  A standard MS Windows 95 or Windows NT-equipped PC with MS Office Professional 97 is adequate to view the LOGSIM user interface and database alone, without running the simulation software.  To run the complete LOGSIM system with an active interface to AWSIM, Ethernet connectivity is also required.  Multiple LOGSIM terminals can be used to access the LOGSIM controller terminal in a client-server configuration, giving logistics support cell members near real-time access to LOGSIM screen displays and reports.3.  LOGSIM ControlPrior to an exercise, controllers set LOGSIM’s operating parameters and verify that players have provided valid database information.  During an exercise, controllers monitor the flow of aircraft and equipment through the system and watch for program errors and delays.  They can pulse the system by forcing items out of maintenance early, adjusting current maintenance times, or by replenishing spare parts databases.  When directed to do so, they can also inhibit exercise play by reducing parts levels, which could cause items to await parts for repair in maintenance.  Controllers must also respond to frequent requests for information from logistics support cell members or the Directing Staff (DISTAFF).Exercise planners and participants must be aware of available LOGSIM controller actions that can be utilized when needed to meet CAX objectives.  A LOGSIM Operator via the controller actions switchboard in the LOGSIM MS Access application accomplishes LOGSIM controller actions.  These actions fall under the category of model control/magic and usually require DISTAFF approval to execute.3.1  Automated controlThe simulation program (LOGSIM.exe) underlying the MS Access front end is started and stopped from the control LOGSIM switchboard.  During a CAX, the simulation program must be running in order to process maintenance eligible aircraft and receive fuel and munitions expenditure information from the air model.  It is not necessary to start the simulation program to use the MS Access front-end display screens and report generators.  However, the LOGSIM database will remain static because no communication with the air model is possible.3.2  Simulation parametersFor each aircraft and equipment type, the mean time to repair and mean time to resupply are alterable.  These numbers (duration in hours) determine how long an item remains in repair status or how long it waits for parts via a CONUS resupply.  The actual time is randomly calculated within a range bounded by 1/3 the magnitude of the mean.  For example, a mean time to resupply of 36 hours will result in an actual resupply time somewhere between 24 and 48 hours.For equipment types (not aircraft), the probability of failure is alterable.  This value (0.0 to 1.0) represents the chance that a specific equipment item fails inspection due to malfunction.  Smaller values result in fewer broken items.These parameters can be changed before, during, or after starting the simulation program.  However, any aircraft or equipment item already in a maintenance status will not be effected.For each supply subclass, the PPPD consumption rate is alterable.  These values (in gallons or pounds) and the number of people assigned at a particular base, determine the expenditure amount each day.3.3  Increase/Decrease consumable inventories at basesThe quantity of spare parts on hand for any base can be increased or decreased at any time.  This capability can be exploited as a magic resupply or as a magic consumption of spare parts.  Any aircraft or equipment item awaiting a specific part type can be expedited to repair status by increasing the on hand quantity of that spare part.  If the on hand quantity is decreased or reduced to zero, items newly entering maintenance will be more likely to enter AWP status.The amount of supply subclass on hand, the PPPD consumption rate, the number of people assigned, and the subclass consumption modifier for each base can be increased or decreased at any time.  However, subclass consumption is tracked for reporting purposes only.  Subclass amounts on hand have no effect on aircraft or equipment maintenance processes and have no relationship to the air model.3.4  Designate CAN aircraftAnother technique (besides adding spare parts) for expediting AWP aircraft to repair status is cannibalization.  An AWP status aircraft can be designated (by tail #) as cannibalized.  Aircraft in CAN (cannibalized) status are processed as AWP aircraft, but have lengthened maintenance times.  Spare parts donated by the CAN aircraft are added to the base parts inventory where the aircraft is supported.  Other AWP aircraft of the same type can immediately access these new parts from the inventory and enter in repair (RPR) status.  When fetching spare parts, AWP aircraft with later estimated time in commission (ETICs) have higher priority over AWP aircraft with earlier ETICs.  CAN status aircraft will eventually return to fully mission capable status.  Designating a CAN aircraft might be useful when a lot of aircraft of the same type from the same base are in AWP status.3.5  Curtail/Prolong maintenance timesAny individual aircraft or equipment item, regardless of its current maintenance status, can be returned to fully mission capable status at any time.  The specific item is selected by tail # (if aircraft) or ID # (if equipment).  Exercising this capability overrides any assigned Parts estimated time of arrival (ETAs) or ETICs and immediately (within one or two AWSIM game cycles) forces the item out of maintenance.  Items can only re-enter maintenance through the normal course of simulation events.Any current aircraft or equipment ETIC can be adjusted forward or backward in time (but not earlier than the current simulation time).  The selected item’s ETIC is adjusted by adding or subtracting a number of hours entered by the controller.  The corresponding Parts ETA (if any) is automatically adjusted by the same amount.  Any status changes that might result are automatically processed.3.6  Reallocate equipment by baseSelected equipment items (not aircraft) can be moved from one base to another at any time.  Only fully mission capable (FMC) equipment items are eligible for relocation.  This magic move capability is useful for redistributing FMC equipment among bases with too many equipment items in not mission capable (NMC) status.  Once the new base is selected, the move takes effect immediately.4.  AWSIM Overview [4]AWSIM is the United States Air Force’s official air combat simulation model.  AWSIM is used to train senior commanders and their battle staffs in the execution of joint and combined operations.  AWSIM’s computer simulation supports air component commander-level battle staff training for Air Force conducted exercises and the air portion of joint exercises.AWSIM is a real-time interactive simulation that supports a two-sided scenario.  Friendly and opposing sides define, structure, and control their forces.  Neutral air forces can also be portrayed.  Mission packages can be developed consisting of single aircraft or multiple-aircraft missions.  Tail number tracks the aircraft.  This level of fidelity supports training requirements of the JFACC, his staff, and the Air Operations Center (AOC) that develop Air Tasking Orders (ATOs), Rules of Engagements (ROEs), and target nomination lists.AWSIM is a latitude and longitude based theater-level model.  It simulates day and night operations.  Modeled features include: aircraft, air bases, surface-to-air missiles (SAMs), Short Range Air Defense Systems (SHORAD) radar sites, surface-to-surface missile (SSM) sites, and cruise missiles.  AWSIM also contains All Range Air Defense Systems (ALLRAD) or those systems whose fire control can be transferred between AWSIM and the Army’s Core Battle Simulation (CBS) model.AWSIM’s scope is limited to conventional warfare, but can conduct nearly all Air Force defined missions and includes virtually all-conventional air-to-air, air-to-surface, and surface-to-air weapons.  AWSIM missions consume munitions and fuel on an “as used” basis.  AWSIM uses Monte Carlo for probability of kill attrition.  AWSIM supported missions and functionality’s are listed in Table 4-1.AWSIM Missions/Functionality’sAir-to-AirReconnaissanceAirborne Early WarningAerial RefuelingAir InterdictionHelicoptersBattlefield Air InterdictionCruise MissileClose Air SupportSurface-to-SurfaceElectronic Combat/Electronic WarfareSurface-to-AirAirliftWeatherTable 4-1: AWSIM Mission/FunctionalityAWSIM graphics display or Graphic Interface Aggregate Control (GIAC) contains menu options for controlling aircraft, air defenses as well as filters for information viewed, map scales, and the ability to add text and lines (such as the Forward Line of Own Troops (FLOT) or transit routes).AWSIM has Air Status Boards (ASTABs) to portray information.  These boards contain data on air base status, history of missions, history of destroyed aircraft, radar, and active flights.  ASTABs also have filtering ability. AWSIM database requirements for an exercise are the unique force structure and targets.  This includes items such as air bases, assigned squadron names, squadron aircraft type and number, early warning radars, and air defense sites.  5.  LOGSIM GoalsThe long-term goal of LOGSIM is to tie the most important aspects of Air Force logistics into the production of combat sorties.  The first version of LOGSIM focused primarily on aircraft and equipment maintenance, spare parts usage, and associated reports with a direct interface to the WPC AWSIM Version 1.7.  LOGSIM Version 2.0 incorporated new features including expanded aircraft and equipment databases, aircraft cannibalization, tracking of munitions and fuel consumption, reporting of imprecise maintenance repair times, and additional controller functions.  Version 2.1 incorporated stand-alone functions and supply consumption by subclass.  Version 2.2 added base fixed facilities; Petroleum, Oil, and Lubricants (POL) reporting; additional aircraft types; and a new interface to the re-engineered AWSIM Version 2.0.  Version 2.3 added more aircraft types, actual National Stock Numbers (NSN) for spare parts, and several reporting enhancements.LOGSIM was never envisioned solely for use in Headquarters USAFE sponsored CAXs at the WPC.  Eventually, LOGSIM will become an approved member of the Air Force Suite of Models (AFSOM).  LOGSIM will then be available for use in any CAX where air logistics training is an exercise objective.  LOGSIM may form the basis for logistics training requirements in AWSIM’s successor, the National Air Space Model (NASM), as well.6.  References[1]  AF/LRP Brief. “Global Engagement: A Vision for       the 21st Century Air Force”, 12 Nov 1996[2]  AFAMS White Paper. “USAF Logistics      Requirements for the National Air and Space      Model (NASM)/ Joint Simulation System        (JSIMS)”, May 1999 [3]  LOGSIM User’s Manual, 9 April 1999[4]  Captain Douglas Rausch and Major Scott Johnston:      “The Coordinated Spiral: Concurrent Modeling and       Simulation Development with C4ISR Systems”,      1999 Fall SIW Paper #99F-SIW-076DisclaimerThe views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and while every attempt was made to report the events factually the results are not to be construed to represent official positions.Author BiographyMAJOR SCOTT C. JOHNSTON is assigned to the Air Force Agency for Modeling and Simulation (AFAMS) in Orlando, Florida.  Major Johnston holds a B.S. in Computer Sciences and a M.S. in Artificial Intelligence from the University of Florida.  He has held numerous positions during a period of more than 13 years; developing, implementing, and using M&S tools in support of major Air Force and Joint theater-level battlestaff training exercises. He currently is the Chief of the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS)/ National Air and Space Model (NASM) Branch, managing the development of the next generation Air Force battlestaff training Modeling and Simulation (M&S) tool.  EMBED Word.Picture.8  