Overcoming Latency on a Budget in a Distributed HLA EnvironmentTom AllmanMonte Porter Roger VanCleaveMonte Porter Gary GutshallLewis Harmon RRalph WeberComputer Sciences Corporation4090 S. Memorial Parkway, MS 4-2-6Huntsville, AL 35802-1502.Tel: 256-885-7056Fax: 256-xxx-xxxx880-7880Email:  HYPERLINK mailto:tallman2@csc.com tallman2@csc.com,  HYPERLINK mailto:mporter@csc.com mporter@csc.comKeywords: HLA, Modeling and Simulation, DSSF, RTIABSTRACT: Latency in distributed exercises can be a major source of concern when it comes to issues of level playing field, interoperability, and implementation architecture. In many cases, the cost of long-haul communications can be prohibitive. The bandwidth required to allow high speed updates between federates may not be within the reach of potential distributed simulation users. This paper will present a description of a low-cost ATM federation solution developed and demonstrated by CSC and lessons learned along the way.IntroductionThe genesis of A new era of training in which individual warfighters and operators will “mission train” in a virtual battlespace while geographically dispersed around the globe is upon us. and The technical ramifications of providing this integrated capability will affect the a major portion of the defense industry over the next 15 years. A flawed technical solution, a faulty technical implementation, or failure to develop progressive and appropriate technical system standards, will clearly lessen the training advantages that our military forces enjoy today. As a result, the challenge to the M&S community is clear: Develop an approach to distributed training that will provide a realistic, “fair fight” capability to geographically dispersed federates by reducing the impact of latency to negligible levels. The In response to this challenge, CSC Team offersdeveloped a technical solution approach that is expandable, upgradeable, and financially astutefiscally viable, and to a great extent, obviates the impact of latency on distributed training. It is HLA-compliant from the outset and has been developed and “wrung-out” in an Operational Testbed (OTB), thereby substantially reducing program the risk to future distributed simulation programs. Our approach achieves these objectives by establishing a Distributed Simulation Services Federate (DSSF)(a dedicated simulation environment for each Federation that will host and operate selected models on behalf of participating federates. The finalDuring development, our OTB configuration hosted over 200 FederationFederation flight hours with realistic scenarios and confirmed that our solution supports a “fair fight”—a level playing field—regardless of the geographic locations of the any federate Federate Systems involved. In addition, our this solution markedly reduces both the total network data traffic and the latency sensitivity of that traffic. This allows us to provide, thereby allowing more realistic training at lower cost, using less expensive network circuits. Our solution achieves all this by establishing a Distributed Simulation Services Federate (DSSF), a dedicated simulation environment for each Federation that will centrally host and operate selected object models on behalf of the participating Federates. This section paper provides an overview of the process by through which we developed and confirmed the DSSF concept and offers a first look at its performance and cost implications. The balance of this section presents discussions ofIt also discusses our proposed 1) a process for achieving interoperable FederationFederation design; , our proposed2) relevant system standards, (including a more detailed treatment of the DSSF concept, including and the alternatives we considered),; and 3) our proposed recommendations for network design and operations.The DSSF Concept. In the first phase, the CSC Team initiated an operational requirements assessment and selected a realistic training mission to be supported by the federationfederation. Operational subject matter experts (SMEs), provided by CSC teammate SDS International,  selected Offensive/ Defensive Counterair (OCA/DCA) exercises in support of a Suppression of Enemy Air Defense (SEAD) scenario, under the control of the Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS) control. Specific sensors, weapons, and environments that mustrequired to interoperate in the federationfederation were identified and analyzed. Interface data was compiled and specifications were developed. This operationally relevant information, in conjunction with extensive technical interface data, provided the test environment for various interoperability and correlation concepts. All inter-operability and interface data and criteria from this exercise were collected and documented for later use in developing system standards. Over the pasta two yearsyear period, the CSC Team has garnered lessons learned while supporting large-scale distributed simulations, like the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Rapid Force Projection Initiative (RFPI) and Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) exercises. Insights from these experiences, among others, led us to specifically analyze four three interrelated yet unique approaches to meeting the requisite interoperability and performance requirements:1.	We First, westarted with analyzed a straight HLA approach, noting and noted its weaknesses in providing behavioral correlation.2.	We then considered the an HLA approach coupled with rigorous behavior model standards and configuration management to improve behavioral correlation. We noted this approach’s weaknesses in terms of configuration management complexity and expensive model code Configuration Management and monitoring and controlling adherence to system standards.3.	The next logical option we studied was an HLA approach including distributed or centralized weapons servers.  designed to overcome the disadvantages of the other approaches. Accordingly, we developed an HLA approach that included the DSSF concept, referenced above.We found that the use of weapons servers provides a positive enhancement to behavioral correlation. Unfortunately, it degrades temporal and spatial correlation because of its use as a server by non-collocated Federate Systems.Given the relative strength of The advantages of a weapons server led us to consider a “super server” design that overcomes the disadvantages of the other approaches. Accordingly, we developed an HLA approach that included the concept of CSC’s DSSF.During this Federation taskapproach 3, we decided to the DSSF was to prototyped and validate d the DSSF concept. The DSSF is a unique Federatefederate developed by the CSC Team to provide the correlated synthetic environment and performance enhancements necessary to meet the potential users’ distirbuted training requirements of the .system users. CSC teammate Ternion Corporation authored the The DSSF employs a commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) software product, FLAMESTM which serves as the developmental simulation architecture and the DSSF simulation executive.From a high-level perspective, the DSSF provides a central server for the Federation,provides a local server at each federation site which containscontaining a a publicly accessible subset of the Federationfederation’s complete synthetic environment comprising single representations (i.e., models) of objects that meet one or both of two criteria:1.	If an object is engagement-significant, is used by more than one federate in the federation, and is the best representation of that object, we centralize itmove it to the DSSF for common access and useThey are engagement-significant like-objects used by more than one Federate System in the Federation and have the best representations available to all Federates in the Federation.2.	They are objects thatIf an object requires require high-density interactions with other objects in order to behave realistically in the synthetic environment, we move it to the DSSF centralize it for common use. (Typical examples of these objects include weapons and sensors.)In addition to these single representations, referred to as “shared objects” and “shared models,” each Federate Systemfederate is represented by one or more “agent” models in the DSSF’s environment, depending on the composition of the Federate Systemfederate. For example, assume a Federationfederation’s DSSF contains an F-15 agent with an associated APG-63 radar behavior model and associated instantiations of the shared AIM-9AIM-120 (AMRAAM) model. It also contains an F-16 agent with associated APG-68 radar behavior model and its own instantiations of the same shared AIMAIM-120-9 missile model. The behaviors of the agents in the DSSF precisely mimic the behaviors of their respective simulators locatedlocated at the each Federatefederate Systems location. In the case of a missile interaction, the missile and other appropriate agent’s activities are initiated at the local or target site’s DSSF. Any interactions among the agents, their sensors, or the AIM-9s 120s will be initiated by their respective simulators but will also occur entirely within the target site’s DSSF. Since both agents use the shared AIM-9 120 model, it provides high behavioral correlation leading to consistent, equitable engagements. This facilitates a “fair fight.” Because the high-density interactions between the radar sensors and the agents occur within a single simulation environment (the DSSF), temporal and spatial correlation is higher. Because these high-density interactions take place within the an associated DSSF and not across the network, total network traffic and networking costs are significantly reduced, so that scalability is significantly enhanced.The DSSF does not, however, centralize low-density interactions such as a Federatefederate’s System own-ship visualization, behavior, or human-computer interface (HCI) models. For example, an F-15 Federatefederate System’s APG-63 radar model may be considered to have two segments of code: the radar behavior segment and the HCI segment that supports the pilot’s radar controls and presentation. CSC willOur appraoch encapsulates and centralizes the radar behavior segment but makes no attempt to centralize the HCI segment. Any Models that are intensively visual are kept local at the owning simulator, and; any information from these models that must be exchanged among Federatefederate Systems is handled directly through the HLA Run-Time Infrastructure (RTI).The DSSF gets its shared objects from Federate System Providers (FP) or from other sources, as necessary. Early in the Federate System stand-up or activation process, the CSC Teamwe identifies identify models in the Federatefederate System’s Simulation Object Model (SOM) which meet the criteria for hosting in the DSSF. If the a Federatefederate System Provider concurs with our selection and allows CSC access to the model’s code, we will would accomplish the rehosting process. If the Federate System ProviderFP does not concur or does not permit CSC to have access to the model’s code, CSC willwe would source the model elsewhere. In either case, the CSC Team willour approach selects and provides shared objects for the DSSF, along with the agent models. In every case, the shared object used in an event will be the best-of-breed model that is available for use by all Federatefederates in in a giventhat event..3.  Why use the DSSF? An event that employs the DSSF has the highest probability of fair fight and highest overall system performance possible with today’s simulation technology. Specifically, the DSSF affords the following advantages:Common behavior of like objects in the synthetic environment, resulting in high behavioral correlationExecution of all critical interactions in a central common synthetic environment, resulting in optimum spatial and temporal correlationReduced likelihood of RTI saturation in large federations due to reduced network trafficIncreased overall system responsiveness due to shortened entity-to-entity path and DSSF’s point-to-point messaging process.To demonstrate the DSSF’s advantages, of the CSC Team’s DSSF, we will can contrast and compare four three possible approaches for integrating heterogeneous simulations under HLA guidelines. Assume we are dealing with a federation consisting of an F-15 Sim with an APG-63 radar and F-16 BLK 50 Sim with an APG-68 radar. The F-15 Sim has an old AIM-7 model (which requires a constant radar illumination of the target by the shooter in order for the missile to track to the target). The F-16 has the AIM-120.  Each Sim and its included models are built by different FSPs. Additionally, the federation has a controlling RTI and, where indicated, a DSSF, both of which may be located at a third site. The scenario is the following: The F-15 acquires the hapless F-16 on its APG-63, flies to an in-range solution, and launches an AIM-7. Keeping the F-16 locked-on on its APG-63 radar, the F-15 guides the AIM-7 to detonate as near as possible to the F-16.  . The four three technical approaches result, respectively, in the following four three event brokering schemes.(a) Straight HLA. By designating HLA standards only, behavioral models (the APG-63, AIM-7 and AIM-120, for example) remain exclusively under purview of the owning Federatefederate systems. In this case, we’ll stipulate the F-15 flies the missile because the F-16 does not have an AIM-7 model. Accord-ingly, the F-15 determines the outcome of the engagement. For each engagement parameter update, the target’s updated position must be passed through the RTI to the shooter’s radar and the missile’s guidance system, and, in the same way, each update of the missile’s flyout information passed to the F-16 must pass through the RTI. This means that each exchange of this information is subject to the “round trip” or total latency of the system. In complex, multi-shooter engagements, this can cause acute network performance degradation if the transaction load saturates the message management component of the RTI. Additionally, the F-16 has no assurance that the engagement was fairly adjudicated, because there is no validated behavior for the F-15’s AIM-7 model or for the F-15’s missile flight environment. Because we allowed the F-15 to determine the outcome of the engagement, the F-16 victim could challenge the F-15’s AIM-7 behavior, or the F-15’s APG-63 model itself. In practice, the models may be individually sound, but they do not assure a fair fight. We categorize this approach as having suboptimal network performance and minimally correlated syn-thetic environments.(b) HLA with rigorously managed behavior models among Federate systemsfederate systems. By designating HLA interoperability standards for interfaces, and by adding explicit like-object behavior standards for each federate system provider to implement, we can improve on the support for the events. In other words, there may be as many different models of an AIM-7 as there are federate systems in the federation, but standards can require their respective performances to be baselined, validated, documented, and managed. In this approach, federate systems continue to use their own V&V’ed models of like objects, but their configurations are collaboratively managed by the contractor and involved stakeholders. For our sample engagement, the schematic looks identical to that in (a) above, except that we will require the F-16 to host an AIM-7 model in addition to its organic AIM-120.  . We also require that the AIM-7 models be V&V’ed before use.  . Accordingly, the AIM-7 now behaves the same in both the F-15 and the F-16 Sims, although they may be different models and have different owners. (Although outside the scope of this example, we could similarly specify that the F-15 must support the AIM-120, as well.)  The quantity and pathways of the engagement transactions in this example are also the same as above. What is different is that the behavior of the F-15’s APG-63 radar and AIM-7 missile are validated, and the F-16 can assume that the outcome of the engagement is acceptably realistic. This is closer to the objective of fair fight, but it still falls short because of the total system latency and its limiting effect on the frequency of the target-missile interactions. An overwhelming problem with this approach is one of management; we consider it unrealistic for the contractor to specify the behavior for each combat-significant model in all the FSPs’ architecture. Moreover, the centralized configuration management of those hundreds—and eventually thousands—of remotely main-tained individual models is inefficient and expensive. For these reasons, we would categorize this approach as having suboptimal network performance, adequately correlated synthetic environments, and as being unaffordable. (c)  Weapons server. Advances in specialized server (e.g., weapons and environments) technology warrant a close look at a third option, specifying a weapons server.  If implementing this approach, we would again specify HLA interoperability standards but add the requirement for a weapons server at each federate system.  Since several weapons servers are self-contained COTS products, it is reasonable to plan that the CSC Team could gain consensus from all FSPs on a common product for all federate systems.  Employing a weapons server like Boeing’s BigTAC to broker actual weapons-target engagements in an HLA-compliant federation partially addresses several of the concerns raised in the previous approaches.  To ensure an acceptable degree of correlation, we would specify in the FOM that the weapons server configuration at each federate system must include representations of all weapons employed in a federation. In our sample engagement, let’s assume the F-15’s AIM-7 shot is brokered in a weapons server collocated with the F-16 Sim.  The high density interactions (i.e., final guidance and detonation) between the target F-16 and the AIM-7 itself are accomplished locally at the F-16 Sim, without any significant network-imposed latency.  However, high density interactions between the F-15’s guiding radar, the remote AIM-7 model, and the target are still managed through the RTI and are subject to total network latency.  In fact, in this scenario, as network latency increases due to geographical separation, the likelihood of fair fight decreases because of the increasing loss of spatial and temporal correlation.  Specifically, guidance corrections from the controlling F-15 are subject to twice the total network latency – the transmission time of the F-16 TSPI update to the F-15, plus transmission time of the F-15 adjusted missile guidance commands to the F-16’s weapons server AIM-7.  Of course, it is equally possible to have the AIM-7 shot brokered at the F-15 Sim since both Sims would have identical weapons servers.  The same engagement performance as described in the first approach (a) above could be expected, resulting in the expected improved behavioral correlation, but no gain in spatial or temporal correlation and no gain in performance for the investment in weapons server infrastructure.  The third variant of this approach is to have the weapons server centrally located.  However, this is the least efficient configuration because it negates the advantage of local event brokering all together.An alternative operating option for most weapons servers is the fire-and-forget mode, whereby the release parameters of the weapon are evaluated in the weapons server against the target-state data at a selected time of impact/detonation (computed either at release using a dead reckoning solution, or derived during the expected time-of-flight for the weapon and using continuously updated target-state information).  Once the weapon is released, no further communication with the shooter or target is required until the engagement results are published.  Clearly, this virtually eliminates any impact of network latency by abandoning any attempt at behavioral, spatial or temporal engagement realities.  This largely stochastic approach is a wrong step in producing the deterministic, “fair fight” environment. In general, therefore, we determined that a weapons server approach simply improves one aspect of synthetic battlespace correlation at the expense of another.  For this reason, we assess the weapons server approach as being affordable, and typically delivering adequately correlated behaviors with minimally correlated spatial/temporal environments, and suboptimal network performance. EMBED Word.Picture.8  (d)  HLA with DSSF.  . We evolved the HLA with the DSSF to address the weaknesses of all the previous approaches. The DSSF expands on the concept of a weapons server by providing a subset of the complete synthetic environment where the weapon, its controlling sensor, the shooter agent, and the target agent are resident.  EMBED Word.Picture.8  As before, we designate a base set of HLA inter-operability standards. However, we ensure the common behavior of like objects by choosing the best-of-breed behavior representation of the object from among the participating federates, and installing that object on the DSSF. To this collection, we add those objects that demand high-density interactions to represent realistic behaviors. Finally, we instantiate agents for each federate in the DSSF, along with essential environment models. In our example, assume that the F-16 Sim offered the best AIM-7 model. The DSSF would accordingly hold an agent model for the F-15, an agent model for the F-16, the AIM-7 model (best of breed), and the APG-63 model for the F-15. (In practice, the F-16’s APG-68 radar would also qualify as a DSSF model, but we do not require it for this example.) The F-15’s AIM-7 and the F-16 target interact in the DSSF exclusively. There are no high-density data exchanges between entities outside the local environment. Since the F-15 and F-16 Sims (when acting as shooters) represent themselves in the target site’s synthetic battlespace through their agents in the DSSF, the latency is shifted to where is has the least adverse effect. Furthermore, because their high-density interactions are removed from the network altogether and are hosted within the DSSF, the total network traffic is reduced as well. All interactions between the Sims and their agents/associated models within the DSSF employ point-to-point communi-cations and do not require the message management services of the RTI. Note, however, that Time, State, and Position Information (TSPI) data is still managed via the RTI so that all federates (including the DSSF) can access the most current information.Since the AIM-7 is a shared object, the F-16 has confidence that the AIM-7’s performance is predictable and fair. Someday, the F-16 pilot may get good enough to shoot an instantiation of its AIM-120, and the victim F-15 pilot will have the same confidence that the performance of the missile is realistic. We describe this approach as providing optimized network performance, with optimally correlated synthetic environments. This delivers the fair fight. Since this approach also conserves bandwidth and presents reasonable configuration management requirements, as discussed in the next paragraph, we assert that the DSSF approach is also most affordable.As in approach (b) above, this approach imposes behavior model configuration management requirements on the user. It is clear that configuration management of behavior models in some manner is an essential ingredient to providing a correlated synthetic environment in which to operate, and to facilitating the fair fight. However, the reduced number of models to be managed, together with the centralized use of these models, allows us to assess the configuration management challenge for the DSSF as reasonable, especially when compared to the approach described in (b) above. CSC adopted the solution that makes this configuration management practical and affordable.As before, we designate a base set of HLA interoperability standards. However, we ensure the common behavior of like objects by choosing the best-of-breed behavior representation of the object from among the participating federate systems, and installing that object on the DSSF. To this collection, we add those objects that demand high-density interactions to represent realistic behaviors. Finally, we instantiate agents for each federate system in the DSSF, along with essential environment models. In our example, assume that the F-16 Sim offered the best AIM-7 model. The DSSF would accordingly hold an agent model for the F-15, an agent model for the F-16, the AIM-7 model (best of breed), and the APG-63 model for the F-15. (In practice, the F-16’s APG-68 radar would also qualify as a DSSF model, but we do not require it for this example.) The F-15’s AIM-7 and the F-16 target interact in the DSSF exclusively. There are no high-density data exchanges between entities outside the DSSF. Since the F-15 and F-16 Sims represent themselves in the central synthetic battlespace through their agents in the DSSF, they are said to impose only ½ total system latency on their interactions; that is, the datapath between the owning sim and its DSSF agent is nominally ½ the datapath required for similar transactions conducted on the sim-RTI-sim datapath. Furthermore, because their high-density interactions are removed from the network altogether and are hosted within the DSSF, the total network traffic is reduced as well. All interactions between the Sims and their agents/associated models within the  DSSF employ point-to-point communications and do not require the message management services of the RTI.  Note, however, that Time, State and Position Information (TSPI) data is still managed via the RTI so that all federates (including the DSSF) can access the most current information.Since the AIM-7 is a shared object, the F-16 has confidence that the AIM-7’s performance is predictable and fair. Someday, the F-16 pilot may get good enough to shoot an instantiation of that its AIM-120, and the victim F-15 pilot will have the same confidence that the performance of the missile is realistic. We describe this approach as providing optimized network performance, with optimally correlated synthetic environments. This delivers the fair fight. Since this approach also conserves bandwidth and presents reasonable configuration management requirements, as discussed in the next paragraph, we assert that the DSSF approach is also most affordable.As in approach (b) above, this approach imposes behavior model configuration management requirements on the CSC Team. It is clear that configuration management of behavior models in some manner is an essential ingredient to providing a correlated synthetic environment in which to operate, and to facilitating the fair fight. However, the reduced number of models to be managed, together with the centralized use of these models, allows us to assess the configuration management challenge for the DSSF as reasonable, especially when compared to the approach described in (b) above.  The CSC Team has adopted the solution that makes this configuration management practical and affordable.Can We Prove It?4.  Can We Prove It? Yes! We modeled major components of the Federationfederation (see Figure 2.2.2-1 below) in our Operational Testbed (OTB). In testing the DSSF, we realized a strongly indicative reduction in total network traffic compared to the straight HLA implementation of the same test federation. The tests involved a federation of our AWACS, F-15, and F-16 simulators interoperating with a FLAMESCOTS-based SAF. Additionally, we added two channels of H.323 video operating at 15 frames per second to the network so that, all told, we simultaneously represented one event in the briefing phase, one event in the execution phase, and one event in the debriefing phase. We ran 18 cycles of data capture in the straight HLA configuration, and additional cycles in varying HLA+DSSF configurations. In the DSSF, we hosted a common AIM-9 and the respective radar systems from both fighter simulators, and the AWACS radar from the AWACS simulator. Figure 2.2.2-2 below summarizes our test results.1st FederationComponentObjective System FederateInterfaces RequiredCSC Team’sCSC’s OTB Representation4 x F-16C Block 50s (“Shaw”)(Base X)Admin voiceTactical voiceFOMRTILSSFDSSFNetworkVideo Telecon & WhiteboardSingle F-16C simulator with 3 channel, 30 Hz video Admin voice circuitFOM & RTI DSSF Shared Objects4 x F-15C (“Eglin”)(Base Y)Admin voiceTactical voiceFOMRTILSSFDSSFNetworkVideo Telecon & WhiteboardSingle F-15C simulator with 3 channel, 30 Hz video Admin voice circuitFOM & RTIDSSF Shared Objects4 x F-15C  (“Langley”(Base Z)) and 3 x 4 Virtual Threat  StationsAdmin voiceTactical voiceFOMRTILSSFDSSFNetworkVideo Telecon & WhiteboardObject Generator FOM & RTI(used to model F-15 federate system and threat station network loading)14 x AWACS Consoles (“Tinker”)Admin voiceTactical voiceFORTIMLSSFDSSFNetworkVideo Telecon & WhiteboardSingle AWACS radar simulatorAdmin voice circuitFOM & RTIDSSF Shared Objects Operations Center (DOC) Event Control Station (ECS) FederateAdmin voiceTactical voiceFOMRTINetworkVideo Telecon & WhiteboardFull DOC Event Control Station functionalityFOM & RTIAdmin voice circuitDSSF control DMT Distributed Simulation Services Federate (DSSF)FOMRTIDSSFFull DSSF functionalityFOM & RTIDSSF Shared ObjectsFigure 2.2.2-1. Test configuration of OTB for Federationfederation prototyping. The CSC’s Team’s OTB development and testing has both refined and confirmed the efficacy of our DSSF approach.We ran 18 cycles of data capture in the straight HLA configuration, and additional cycles in varying HLA+DSSF configurations. In the DSSF, we hosted a common AIM-120 and the respective radar systems from both fighter simulators, and the AWACS radar from the AWACS simulator. Figure 2 below summarizes our test results.At first glance, an improvement of 10 to 15 percent does not sound like much to brag about. A closer analysis, however, presents the information in an interesting light. HostingAlthough the numbers indicate that we can reliably conduct three events in various phases across the ATM network at the proposed level of service (5/15 Mbps SCR/PCR), the more significant indication is that Centralizing only four behavior models (along with the agents and environment) in the DSSF produced a 15 percent reduction in network loading under normal federation activity. As the federation activity peaked, the non-DSSF model activity dominated the network loading, reducing the influence of the DSSF. It is accurate to infer that if you import more high-density objects into the DSSF, you will realize continued system performance improvement, up to the limit of the DSSF’s processing capacity. We will continue to push in this direction with the OTB work and target an increase in the efficiency of 30 percent. Based on our analysis and our experience from the OTB, we are convinced that a system design without a DSSF cannot not deliver both the correlation to enable a “fair fight” and the performance and scalability to support realistic training for increasingly large and complex federations. As indicated above, the DSSF allows high density interactions, such as missile-aircraft engagements, to be processed in the backplane of each local simulation site. In doing so, the DSSF approach offers significant advantages in interoperability and performance with only modest increases in management requirements. The advantages of this approach, in terms of battlespace correlation, management, and performance are summarized in Figure 3, as follows:Total DMT Network Load Measured at the Switch (in Mbps)With 2 Video ChannelsWith No Video Channels1OTB ConfigurationSustained (Mean)BurstSustained (Mean)Burst1st Federation operating in a straight HLA mode1.4834.699.9834.191st Federation operating with the DSSF 1.3354.229.8353.72DSSF Advantage %9.9%10.0%15.1%11.2%Note 1: H.323 video data loading averaged 0.25 Mbps per channel at 15 fps. These numbers reflect subtraction of the 0.5 bps average video load for two channels.)Figure 2.2.2-2. Network Performance Enhancements Provided by the DSSF. The network load economies afforded by the DSSF translate directly into more affordable events.Based on our analysis and our experience from the OTB, we are convinced that a system design without a DSSF cannot not deliver both the correlation to enable a “fair fight” and the performance and scalability to support realistic training for increasingly large and complex Federations.As indicated above, the DSSF allows the high density interactions, such as missile-aircraft engagements, to be processed in the backplane of a central processing computer. In doing so, the DSSF and is the only approach that approach offers significant advantages in interoperability and performance with only modest increases in management requirements. The advantages of this approach, in terms of battlespace correlation, management, and performance are summarized in Figure 3, as follows:Integration MethodSpatial CorrelationTemporal CorrelationBehavioral CorrelationConfiguration Management ComplexityQuality of InteroperabilityQuality of Performance Straight HLAFair: Target-to-shooter relative position updates are subject to total network latency Fair: All time-dependent interactions are subject to total network latencyPoor: No assurance of common behavior of like objectsLow : Each federate owns and V&Vs its own modelsLow : No assurance of fair fightLow:Risk of RTI saturation increases with size of FEDNot possible to define FED performance a prioriStraight HLA with Strict Behavioral Model CM at each FederatefederateFair: Target-to-shooter relative position updates are subject to total network latency Fair:  All time-dependent interactions are subject to total network latencyGood: Models of like objects behave predictably, although not necessarily the sameHigh: O&I contractor must V&V/ configuration-manage all models of like objects in each federate Good: Fair fight is assured up to the limitations of the least capable model Medium:Risk of RTI saturation increases with size of FEDPerformance of FED predictable but not necessarily optimumThe DSSF ApproachExcellent: Target-to- shooter relative position updates subject to only ½ total network latencyExcellent: Time dependent interactions inside the DSSF occur every tick; outside the DSSF they are subject to ½ total network latencyExcellent: All federates use the same models for like objectsMedium: The implementer must collaboratively select, rehost, V&V, and configuration-manage the best model for each common object in the FEDExcellent: Fair fight is assured up to the limitations of the most capable modelHigh:Risk of RTI saturation is minimized because high intensity interactions occur off the network (in the DSSF)Performance of federation predictable and optimizedCritical interactions occur in as near real time as possibleFigure 3. DSSF Advantages. The DSSF offers an approach capable of providing both fair-fight and complete interoperability between and among federates.IInteroperable Federation Design. Successful interoperable federation implementation involves the close interaction of three tightly interrelated program components(standards, communications, and processes. Standards provide the commonalties to ensure that all participating Federatefederates are engaging on a level playing field. The networks provide the communications necessary to support federate interactivity. Processes provide the methodologies needed to design, develop, and maintain the interoperable federations required to support all training events.  These components provide two essential capabilities between federates:The ability to provide and accept services to and from other federates and use those services to enable effective inter- and intrateam operationsThe ability of heterogeneous federates to interact in a “fair fight,” while achieving sufficient spatial, temporal, and behavioral correlation among synthetic environments and forces to allow each federate to meet its training objectives.The implementation of Interoperable Federation Design requires the close interaction and management of three interrelated program components: processes, standards, and stakeholder communications. Each of these components is directly influenced by the DSSF approach. CSC’s Therefore, Federationfederation Mmanagement must involves a rigorous process that is developed and refined during our Federation Taskat a program’s outset; it can be confidently used to develop and implement Federations. For example, as a part of the DSSF prototyping, the CSC Team accomplished, and documented procedures for, the extraction extractingof specific shared-object-related code from a Federatefederate’s System’s native code as well as the process for rehosting the extracted code into the DSSF. Our experience shows that rehosting models from other object-oriented environments can be accomplished quickly, while models that are available only in structured code require more work.As indicated above, successful federation development and management requires extensive user interaction, collaboration, iterative reviews, coordination with FPs, and formal testing and certification. We cannot overemphasize the significance of the necessity for consensus building. This process is by its nature collaborative-dependent, dynamically iterative, and must be designed to fully support the continuous stream of changes, additions, updates, and refinements that can be anticipated throughout the life of thea complex distributed simulation program. In view of their importance, the concepts of “interdependency” and “consensus building” should given serious consideration from a program'’s inception. Elements of the consensus building process should include:Common requirements and goalsIterative processEarly involvement of participantsUse of current standards where possibleTechnical interchanges.S6.  System Standards. The Developing System Standards are must be based upon operational relevance and consider consider the concerns of current and future Federate System Providers. The . Standards ahould be developed for the following areas:Federate Standards DSSF-resident Model Standards Network Interface Standards DMT Security Standards.CSC’s These standards are should be consistent with relevant Joint Technical Architecture (JTA)/HLA documents (current as of December 1999). As mentioned above, iThe CSCt is essential that program management  Team will maintain formal, collaborative alliances at every technical and management level and emphasize adherence to our well-defined processes, supported by CSC’s collaboration tools and processes, to maximize the opportunity for consensus among stakeholders. Collaboration and consensus-building, hallmarks of CSC’s corporate reputation, will be asked of all stakeholders. However, it should be noted that in the absence of consensus on any specific system standard, CSC, as the master architect, program management should, will unilaterally establish the that standard. We willIn fact, program management should maintain all system standards; , monitor the adherence of the Federatefederate System Providers to those standards; , assess the impacts of nonadherence, and notify the governmentall stakeholders of any cases of nonadherence we identifyidentified; and (if separately tasked) assess the impacts of nonadherence. Adherence Stakeholder adherence to CSC’s standards will ensure that Federatefederate System spatial, temporal, and behavioral correlation within a Federationfederation’s synthetic battlespace will meet requirements. System Standards in combination with the CSC Team’s proposed architecture provide a long-term, first-quality operating medium.N7.  Network Design. Our In our OTB, we were also able to has verified verify that the optimum category of network service required to implement our approach is was Variable Bit Rate - non-real time (VBR - nrt). This quality of service will initially provide a sustained cell rate of 5 Mbps, a peak cell rate of 15 Mbps, and a guaranteed in-CONUS maximum latency of 60 ms. Flexibility of service, such as VBR - nrt, is a leading-edge approach within the telecommunications industry. For global network services, we have teamed with the industry’s leader: MCI WorldCom Corporation. MCI WorldCom offers unparalleled networking technology and bandwidth and will provide service that is scaleable to our data transmission requirements upon receipt of a phone call. Using our technical design solution, as tested in our OTB, the Constant Bit Rate (CBR) or VBR - real time (VBR - rt) network service performance advantage (a few ms lower latency) is unnecessary, much more expensive, and of no measurable value in the cockpit. To minimize the network requirements and to buy only what is needed for the time that it is needed is the progressive approach and is consistent with the technical detail presented within this section. provides the most effective and least expensive approach. In essence, we concluded that VBR-nrt provides a dial-up, “bandwidth-on-demand” (i.e., useusing only what youis needed need at any given moment), cost effective alternative the the “just give me a bigger pipe” approach.8.  SummaryToday’s military is lean, decisive, and technologically sophisticated. The CSC Team has designed its this technical solution archi-tecture and standards to reap the benefits of anticipated advances in the telecommunications industry. The CSC Team’s Consistent and controlled upgrades to the System Standards, the network, and the battlespace correlation will incre-mentally prepare the military for yet another generation of virtual warfare training.  . As demonstrated, an architecture that does not use a DSSF or other centralized simulation executive can only marginally benefit from most anticipated technological advances in the telecommunications industry. The CSC Team’sA technical solution to effective distriubted simulation cannot merely be “excellent,” as measured by an academic drill conducted within the confines of a laboratory setting., Itbut must be “EXCELLENT” as mmeasured by warfighters and operators demanding a “fair fight” as they train to put their lives on the line in the real battlespace. The CSC Team will settle for nothing less in terms of user satisfaction simply because our military deserves nothing less. The CSC Team is well represented with former operational combat pilots. These warfighters have shared the concerns, system nuances, insights, and spirit that only operational pilots who have stood Mission Ready to fly and fight can provide to this technical undertaking..  EMBED Word.Picture.8  A Weapons Server provides only a first step toward comprehensive synthetic environment correlation. EMBED Word.Picture.8   EMBED Word.Picture.8  Comparison of the Four Approaches in Their Support of the Fair FightOptimumTemporalCorrelationOptimumPoorApproach DSSFHLA  w/  HLA  and  Rigorous CMApproach Straight HLAApproachBehavioralCorrelation