Collaborative Mission Planning, Rehearsal and VisualizationJohn M. WoodyardAFRL/IFSC2241 Avionics CircleWright-Patterson AFB, OH 45433-7334(937) 255-4827 ex 3338 HYPERLINK "mailto:john.woodyard@wpafb.af.mil" john.woodyard@wpafb.af.milCapt Kenneth W. StaufferAFRL/IFSC2241 Avionics CircleWright-Patterson AFB, OH 45433-7334(937) 255-4827 ex 3341 HYPERLINK "mailto:kenneth.stauffer@wpafb.af.mil" kenneth.stauffer@wpafb.af.milJerry F. ShawSCS Engineering, Inc.23430 Hawthorn Blvd., #240Torrance, CA 90505(310) 373-4243 ex 10 HYPERLINK "mailto:shaw@scsenginc.com" shaw@scsenginc.comKeywords:HLA, RPR FOM, Real-Time, Crew-In-The-Loop, visualizationABSTRACT:  This paper discusses the implementation of a distributed mission planning and visualization system using High Level Architecture (HLA) as the communication media over the public Internet.  The Realtime Integrated Planner/Player (RIPP) is a Small Business Innovative Research program sponsored by the Air Force Research Laboratory.  RIPP will support distributed planners with a tool suite that will allow them to collaborate on common mission plans and to rehearse those plans in real-time, fast-time and non-real-time.   RIPP allows the manipulation and filtering of Air Tasking Order (ATO) data based on their application needs. RIPP supports a Virtual Air Operation Center (AOC) concept: Planners will be capable of interacting with all planning sites/nodes. RIPP supports a Synthetic Battle Space Simulation: All participants will be provided with a common theater/engagement environment.  The Synthetic Battle Space supports distributed Real-Time Crew-In-The-Loop (CITL) vehicle simulation systems as well as real-time computer generated vehicles and threats.  RIPP has demonstrated the concept of collaborative mission planning over the public Internet through a distributed plan, replan and fly out of a mission.  RIPP has demonstrated the distribution of control and entity attributes.   The paper will discuss the RIPP tool set and Federation Object Model (FOM).1. IntroductionReal-time Integrated Planner/Player (RIPP) SBIR will develop a full spectrum monolithic sensor to decision maker to shooter tradeoff tool that supports a broad range of mission planning and mission rehearsal options for Time Critical Target issues. RIPP will support distributed planners who require a tool suite that will allow them to collaborate on common mission plans and to rehearse those plans in real-time, fast-time and non-real-time. In addition, analyses of “Sensor-Decision Maker-Shooter” scenarios require coherent tools to allow mission rehearsal, rollback, dynamic mission control and dynamic mission review.  Central to this program is a core of technology developments that will enable a rapid, proactive, interleaved planning and execution monitoring capability with an emphasis to reduce the time to provide dynamic, distributed, continuous, planning, assessment and re-planning capabilities linking Campaign, Force, Mission and Engagement echelons C4ISR operations.  RIPP will develop a tool suite that will rapidly support the development of realistic and representative mission plans. The tool suite will allow the manipulation and filtering of Air Tasking Order (ATO) data based on their application needs. RIPP will develop a unique flexible Virtual Air Operations Center (AOC) capability: Planners, each potentially displaced by thousands of miles, will be capable of interacting with all planning sites/nodes as well as receive real-time reconnaissance data from RIPP vehicles.  This allows real-time collaborative mission/war planning notwithstanding the geographical locations of the strategists.  RIPP will also support a Synthetic Battle Space Simulation: All participants will be provided with a common theater/engagement environment.  The Synthetic Battle Space will support distributed Real-time Crew-In-The-Loop (CITL) vehicle simulation systems as well as real-time computer generated vehicles and threats.  High Level Architecture (HLA) technologies will be used to provide connectivity to other facilities, as required, for selected high fidelity simulations.2.  RIPP ArchitectureThe RIPP concept will be based on an open interface definition that will allow it to interface to legacy systems as well as support dissimilar hardware architectures.  HLA will be used to communicate between nodes of the RIPP architecture.    There are five applications that make up the RIPP architecture.  The applications are HLA Server, Planner, Player and Observer and Wall.2.1 HLA ServerProvides local host connection to the RIPP Backbone for communication between RIPP applications through a shared memory interface. The server distributes all global data to local and remote applications.  There must be one server application running on each platform.  There may be multiple other RIPP applications on the platform.    The server is designed with a “middleware” concept.  The RIPP applications maintain a consistent interface to the server.   The server can be changed to provide the appropriate interfaces.  The currently planned interfaces include RTI 1.3V6, RTI 1.3NG, DIS.2.2 Planner NodesPlanner will be capable of developing mission plans for an entire theater as well as for a single vehicle for isolated tests. Planners will also be capable of monitoring the status of the entire theater or focus on an individual entity within the theater. The Planner tool allows remote collaboration allowing geographically separated planners to develop or modify an existing plan. Planner   accepts time dependant mission plans from the Portable Flight Planning System (PFPS).  PFPS is a widely used by the US Air Force.2.3 Player NodesPlayer will be responsible for executing mission plans assigned to them via Planner nodes. A Player may be responsible for simulating a single entity or up to 64K entities via its 6-degree of freedom (6DOF) model set. The player node also has the capability to set the speed of the simulation by running fast time, real-time or slow time.  Player nodes support interaction with crew-in-the-loop, hardware-in-the-loop or software only simulations.2.4 Observer NodesObserver will be responsible for displaying real-time 3D theater and individual entity graphics and allows a commander to immerse himself in the simulated natural environment through virtual-reality goggles, head locator and joystick. An Observer will be capable of displaying a “God’s Eye View” of a theater with tools that will allow the zooming in on portions of the theater and providing detailed information on any selected entity. An Observer is capable of examining any entities’ crew displays or out-the-window views to allow the commander to “ride in the back seat” of any simulated entity or to place himself in the designated target to watch the prosecution of the target. The commander is represented as a virtual avatar in the simulated natural environment and may interact with other commanders to “get their viewpoint” or to discuss mission plans. 2.5 Wall NodeThe Wall provides a real-time distributed 3D multi-aspect theater level visualization tool.  The Wall is made up of 7 windows, one main window and 6 smaller secondary windows.  The Wall can provide mission data by supporting electronic charts, mission routes, and vehicle status.  A text window function supports data such as ATO and ACO data.  An Out-The-Window function allows viewing a pilots view or a god’s eye view on a specific entity.  The Wall supports JFIF/JPEG files for displaying weather and intelligence data.3.0 RIPP FOMThe RIPP Federation Object Model (FOM) was developed to support the RIPP project.  RIPP is self-contained in that the FOM has been created to interface to the RIPP modules.  Two other FOMs were examined during the development of the RIPP FOM.  The C4I FOM [1] was examined since RIPP is targeted to simulate and support a C4I environment.  The RPR FOM [2] was examined since it is the most fully developed general purpose FOM available and that the sponsoring origination has a DIS history.  Since RIPP is a research project it was decided to create a FOM based upon the RIPP specific requirements starting with parts of the RPR FOM.  Figure 1 illustrates the base classes in the RIPP FOM.4.0 FirewallRIPP was designed for use in a long haul environment using the public Internet.  The use of the public Internet adds security requirements.   The LAN at AFRL/IFSC has two firewalls to pass through to the public Internet.  The RIPP project is currently using RTI 1.3V6.  To get through the firewall all the IP addresses in the test were listed in the firewall to allow access to each other.  In addition to identifying the IP addresses the RTI was configured for reliable transmission.  This eliminated the need for multicast.  Multicast has been identified as a security risk so the RTI was configured not to need it.  NG is being examined and the ramifications of using NG will be known prior to the presentation of the paper.5.0 DemonstrationA preliminary demonstration was developed to test the RIPP system The mission demonstrated the RIPP Planner, Player, Observer, Wall, HLA Server and CITL Bridge modules in a distributed environment across the public Internet between SCS Engineering in Torrance CA. and AFRL/IFSC at Wright-Patterson AFB OH (Figure 2). The demonstration involved:  reviewing an online ATO produced by Theater Battle Management Core System (TBMCS), developing plans using PFPS, importing the PFPS plans into the RIPP planner system, and flying out a current day ATO via manned and electronic stations. The missions include interdiction, command and control, reconnaissance and air refueling.  A time critical target tasking was simulated.  Two planners, geographically separated, looking at the available resources plan a strike mission against a time-critical-target using the available resources.  The electronic player flew out the re-planed mission in fast time to verify the soundness of the new plan.  After viewing the fast-time rehearsal of the mission, the distributed planners authorize the re-tasking of the selected weapon system. The manned player was then given control of the simulated air vehicle and was observed executing the re-planed mission in real-time.6.0 ConclusionsRIPP has successfully demonstrated the concept of real-time distributed planning and visualization using the public Internet.  RIPP used the concept of an HLA Server to interface various applications to the HLA.7. References[1]  C4ISR FOM,  U.S. Army Communications Electronics Command (CECOM), 2000[2]  RPR FOM Version 2, SISO, 2000.8 Author BiographiesJOHN M. WOODYARD is an Electronics Engineer with AFRL.  He has been involved with various system integration projects in the AFRL/IFSC Integrated Test Bed (ITB).  He is responsible for the distributed simulation integration and demonstrations in the ITB.CAPT. KENNETH W. STAUFFER is a Software Engineer with AFRL. His previous assignments include tours at the Information Warfare Center as a computer security engineer and the 20th Intelligence Squadron as a program manager. He completed his masters in Computer Engineering at AFIT in 1996.JERRY F. SHAW is a Chief Engineer at SCS Engineering Inc. He has over 25 years experience in the development of real-time system software for commercial and military computers. His experience includes dynamically reconfigurable distributed systems, and other advanced designs that support local and long haul distributed architectures.Class 1Class 2Client (PS)Entity (PS)EntityAttribute (PS)Mission (PS)PlayerScope (PS)ReconnaissanceImage (PS)Terrain (PS)Audio (PS)Weather (PS) EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1