The US Navy DEPClifton A. Byrum.Naval Surface Warfare Center17320 Dahlgren Rd.Dahlgren, VA   22448(540) 653-7145byrumca@nswc.navy.milGrayden T. Figart.Gray Hawk Systems, Inc.17010 Dahlgren RoadDahlgren, VA   22448(540) 663-3695figart.grayden@grayhawksystems.comKeywords:DIS, Distributed Test Bed, Sensor Sim, Simulated Comms, DEPABSTRACT: The US Navy has established a Distributed Engineering Plant (DEP) to support various efforts within the US Navy.  This federation is strictly based on DIS protocols.  The primary conduit for all communications is ATM.  The initial capability within the DEP was the Distributed Test Bed that was used to perform John F. Kennedy Battlegroup Interoperability Testing.  The DEP has also been used to perform both Aegis Testing and CEC Testing.  Other efforts within the DEP include supporting System Requirements Engineering/BG Interoperability Requirements Determination, establishing a BGIT System Engineering Data Repository, providing BGIT Support to Individual Systems Development, developing a Collaborative Engineering Environment Across the Navy Engineering Community, expanding DEP to Industry and Joint HWIL, conducting Battle Force Level Interoperability T&E, and expanding CEE to Industry and to Joint Engineering Sites.1. IntroductionA major objective of the US Navy has been to establish the means to perform interoperability testing and training without tying up fleet assets.  Time expended by the fleet for dedicated testing and training activities should be focused primarily on events that serve the need to train the sailor, not on system and sub-system testing and integration.  Battlegroup interoperability testing, which till now has been done using at-sea tests, must be performed using existing network land-based sites before the combatants are sent into harm’s way.  The US Navy has established the Distributed Engineering Plant (DEP) to meet this requirement.2. BackgroundSystem development, testing, and training focuses on element- and platform-level capabilities.  To support this, the Navy established Land-Based Hardware-in-the-Loop Sites to provide the required ship testing and training capabilities.  New battlegroup, battleforce, and theater level interoperability requirements have expanded this focus to include additional issues.The DEP was constructed by connecting the existing Land-Based Sites into a cohesive test bed.  Basic site-to-site connectivity was established over existing US Navy network Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) lines as shown in Figure 1.  This allows the scenario to be transmitted from a central site using Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) Protocol Data Units (PDUs) message protocols, and Tactical Data Link (TADIL) communications to be established using existing Navy simulated TADIL communications networks.  Inter-site Voice communications were provided via ATM compatible Sphere Phone Service.Each Navy facility is running the actual deploying hardware and software and the DEP is allowing common stimulation and TADIL communications.  This allows the Battle Group configuration to be tested prior to actual training exercises.  This allows the early identification of issues to facilitate resolution and training work-arounds.3. JFK Battlegroup ConfigurationFor the John F. Kennedy (JFK) Battlegroup, the DEP was configured as shown in Figure 2.  It consisted of twelve Combat Systems: one aircraft carrier, one helo carrier, one Aegis cruiser, three Aegis destroyers, two Advanced Combat Direction System (ACDS) destroyers, two frigates, one E-2C aircraft, and one F-14D aircraft.  Tactical Data Link-11 communications were transmitted via Plain Old Telephone Service (POTS) over the Aegis Broadcast Network (ABN). Tactical Data Link-16 communications were transmitted over a combination of POTS based ABN-16 and ATM-based Gateway Terminal Emulator (GTE) -16.  The F-14D aircraft at Point Magu was connected to SPAWAR Systems Center, San Diego (SSC-SD) via Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) lines.4. IKE Battlegroup ConfigurationThe Eisenhower (IKE) Battlegroup Interoperability Test (BGIT) configuration required the addition of Cooperative Engagement Capability (CEC) and Global Command and Control System – Maritime (GCCS-M) into the DEP as shown in Figure 3.  This was accomplished while retaining all other existing DEP features: ABN-11, ABN-16, GTE-16, ATM, and DIS.  The CEC Program Office had already developed the Cooperative Engagement Processor (CEP) Wrap-Around Simulation Program (WASP) that included a CEC Data Distribution System (DDS) and CEC network simulation, but to fit into the DEP, the CEP WASP was modified to run in the DEP spread across multiple sites.  This “Distributed-WASP” design uses two ATM Virtual Local Area Networks (VLANs); one for simulated DDS CEP-to-CEP tactical data message passing and the other for CEP WASP control .5. GW Battlegroup ConfigurationFor the George Washington (GW) Battlegroup, the DEP was configured as shown in Figure 4.  It consisted of eleven Combat Systems: one aircraft carrier, one helo carrier, three Aegis destroyers, one Advanced Combat Direction System (ACDS) destroyer, two frigates, two E-2C aircraft (one at SSC-SD and one at NAWC-AD), and one F-14D aircraft.  This reconfiguration of the same laboratory facilities has become a standard practice for the various users of the DEP.  The GW BGIT configuration was not able to make use of the S-TADIL-J capability because of the lack of available Satellite time.6. ConclusionThe DEP is a US Navy capability that has been used successfully to address battlegroup interoperability, CEC IV&V Testing, and Aegis Testing.  Its capabilities are continuing to be expanded.  As a tool, it can be used to support many life-cycle activities. As a part of this future plan, more testing and training sites will be added as well as several development sites.Author BiographyCLIFTON BYRUM is an Aerospace Engineer at the Naval Surface Warfare Center, Dahlgren Division (NSWCDD), Dahlgren, VA. He is currently the Simulation Manager for the US Navy’s Distributed Engineering Plant (DEP) project.  Mr. Byrum holds  Bachelor of Science degrees in Mechanical Engineering and Computer Science from the University of Mississippi, MS.  Mr. Byrum has worked for NSWCDD for 14 years where he has been involved in the family of systems analysis of Strategic Defense Initiative (SDIO) and Theater Ballistic Missile Defense (TBMD) architectures and in the construction and use of large scale force-on-force simulation systems.  Mr. Byrum has also served as the Modeling and Simulation Manager for the Navy Area and Theater Wide TBMD program offices.GRAYDEN FIGART is a Sr. Data Management Specialist at Chugach Development Corporation working under contract to the Department of the Navy at the Naval Surface Warfare Center Dahlgren Division (NSWCDD), Dahlgren, VA in the Battle Force Systems Branch, Maritime Defense Division, Theater Warfare Department, Code T23.  Mr. Figart is currently providing systems engineering support to the Cooperative Engagement Capability (CEC) project and the Distributed Engineering Plant (DEP) project.  He is supporting the CEC Hardware-in-the-Loop (HWIL) project including its integration into the DEP.  Mr. Figart holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Mathematics from University of Richmond, VA.  Mr. Figart has worked for NSWCDD for over 31 years where he has been involved in the TALOS, MK-92, TARTAR, and AEGIS Tactical Systems and the Wrap-Around Simulation Programs (WASPs) for nearly every surface combatant. PAGE  2		2000 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop		Orlando, Florida, March 1999 