Logistics Plan Development, Representation, and AssessmentJohn P. GunshenanBBN10 Moulton St.Cambridge MA 02138USA617-873-2760jpg@bbn.com Keywords: logistics, model, assessment, plan representation, ABSTRACT:  The US Military uses models to analyze requirements for War Reserve Materials, and to analyze the ability of the Logistics communities to provide the materiel required to sustain an operation.  This work includes a detailed plan representation; distributed collaborative tools that allow planners to develop, analyze, and revise these plans; and models that perform Logistics Sustainability Assessments of the plans.  This paper describes the conceptual framework underlying several of these modeling efforts, and the plan representation they use.Table of Contents TOC \o "1-2" \n \h \z  HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491836" 1.	Overview HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491837" 1.1	The Warfighter and the Logistician HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491838" 1.2	Developing The Integrated Plan HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491839" 1.3	Collaboration HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491840" 1.4	Timely and Accurate Data HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491841" 1.5	The Process HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491842" 1.6	Compare Alternative Courses of Action HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491843" 1.7	Human or Machine? HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491844" 1.8	About this Document HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491845" 2.	The Mathematics HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491846" 3.	The Results HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491847" 4.	Planning quickly HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491848" 5.	Plan Representation HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491849" 5.1	Representing Time HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491850" 5.2	Command Guidance HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491851" 5.3	Course of Action HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491852" 5.4	Forces HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491853" 5.5	Assignments HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491854" 5.6	Units HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491855" 5.7	Tasks HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491856" 5.8	Capability HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491857" 5.9	OPTEMPO HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491858" 5.10	Location HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491859" 5.11	Consumers HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491860" 5.12	Facilities HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491861" 5.13	Consumable Items HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491862" 5.14	Failure and Consumption Rates HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491863" 5.15	Repairable Items HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491864" 5.16	Repair Depots HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491865" 5.17	Producers HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491866" 5.18	Contracts HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491867" 5.19	Supply Web HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491868" 5.20	Lift HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491869" 5.21	Transportation Network HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491870" 6.	Conclusion HYPERLINK \l "_Toc519491871" 7.	References TOC \o "1-2" \h \z  TOC \o "1-2" \n OverviewLogistics constrains tactics.  Tactics drive logistics requirements. Effective planning requires close continuous collaboration between logisticians and Warfighters throughout the planning and execution process, from deliberate planning to crisis action planning to replanning during execution.  Such collaboration requires advanced collaboration tools that can effectively bridge the gap between the Warfighter and Logistician perspectives.  Effective interdisciplinary collaboration requires plan representations and Logistics Sustainability Assessment models to support this planning, plan assessment, and replanning process.This paper describes some ongoing research and development BBN is doing for the US Military in developing models, tools, and technologies to support this planning process.  This work includes the representation of logistics systems at the national, strategic, operational, and tactical military levels.The Warfighter and the LogisticianIn the past, the US Military Logistics and Warfighting communities have not worked closely together in developing their plans.  These two communities approach planning from very different perspectives, at very different levels of detail.  The Warfighter worries about things like forces, threat, objectives, and capabilities.  The logistician worries about things like inventory, acquisition, transportation, distribution, and commodities.From the data modeling perspective, the warfighter worries about relatively small numbers of large things, like the major units and the phases of the plan.  The logistician worries about relatively large numbers of small things, like the millions of items required by a force in the field, such as the meals and bullets and socks and shoelaces and spark plugs and sun block etc.These fundamental differences in perspective contribute to the historical distance between the Logistician and the Warfighter.  The typical Warfighter does not want to cope with the Logistician's penchant for masses of details.  The typical Logistician struggles to cope with the vagueness of the Warfighter's high level plans.Developing The Integrated PlanAs technology has advanced, we have reached the point where we can use computers to develop integrated plans that include the Warfighter's high-level perspective and the Logistician's masses of detail.With an integrated plan, the Warfighter and Logistician can effectively collaborate in real time, as they jointly develop their respective parts of the integrated plan.  The Warfighter can quickly see where Logistics will constrain his options.  He can adjust his plans accordingly, or he can work with the Logistician to minimize or eliminate the constraints.  The Logistician can quickly see what materiel will be required by the plan.  He can tell the Warfighter about projected Logistics Sustainability problems, and work to eliminate or mitigate them.Timeliness is crucial here.  It can take many months to make changes to the capacities of the Logistics Pipeline.  It takes time to identify and qualify new materiel providers, negotiate contracts, etc.  If planners identify problems months in advance, the logistics community will have enough time to make these strategic logistics adjustments.  If problems arise during plan execution, some logistics lead times are so long that the logistics community may not be able to resolve those problems.  The planning processes described in this paper help identify logistics problems early enough that the logistics community has time to solve them.By bringing the Logisticians into the planning process, and collaboratively developing the plan, the operational plan development loop becomes much tighter and more efficient.  This is especially important when there is an operational time constraint such as a crisis action plan or replanning during execution.  The Logistics Plan becomes an integral part of the ongoing operational planning process, rather than a troublesome afterthought.Collaboration To develop an integrated plan, many planners must collaborate over the detailed plan data.  Cutting-edge web-based collaboration technology developed under the JTL ACTD allows planners at multiple locations to simultaneously and securely edit and refine shared plan data, with each planner using visualizations appropriate to their area of responsibility and expertise.  For example, an armor planner might focus on laying out his tanks on the map.  At another location, an air planner might focus on laying out beddown areas.  At yet another location, a fuel planner might focus on projected fuel demand from those tanks, helicopters, and other fuel burners, and where to best locate fuel supply points.  In assessing potential fuel supply points, the fuel planner will want to collaborate with operations and intel to make sure he has adequately considered the threat.  To do their jobs, these planners would each view very different data, but they would each be editing different aspects of a single shared plan.This type of collaboration goes much deeper than video teleconferencing and a shared “whiteboard.”  Each planner has full access to the detailed, shared planning data.  They each view those portions of the plan relevant to their responsibilities and expertise.  Each planner depends on many other planners.  For example, the fuel planner needs to know where the fuel consumers will be and their planned tempo of operations.  The tank and helicopter planners need to know where their fuel supply points will be.  These planners all need to work together collaboratively to develop the integrated plan necessary to achieve mission success.The integrated plan works like a single musical score.  The various planners each play their part.  They each see different notes when they look at the music before them, and what the drummer does is very different than the violinist, but they are all looking at different parts of the same piece of music.  The difference here is that each musician is also collaboratively refining and editing his part of the shared score.  Edits made in one area can dramatically impact other areas, so all players need to be able to see the plan as it evolves.Timely and Accurate DataOne of the most difficult challenges in developing integrated plans is in acquiring the detailed data.  What force structures will the plan employ?  What equipment will those force structures use?  At what tempo will the forces operate?  What items will be consumed, at what rate?These questions are easily asked, but hard to answer.  It takes a substantial, coordinated and sustained effort to collect and maintain timely and accurate data on forces, their equipment, what they consume and at what rate.  This effort is absolutely required in order to plan effectively.The ProcessIn this document, “the Process” refers to the process of assessing the logistical sustainability of a plan.Sustainability Assessment of a plan includes the following steps:Acquire Timely and Accurate Data.  This is often the hardest step.  It requires substantial and sustained effort to maintain data detailed and accurate enough to sustain this Process.Acquire and/or develop the Operation Plan.  This is the Warfighter’s plan.  It focuses on combat forces, threat, objectives, etc.  The US Military refers to these combat forces as “above the line”.Develop the Logistics Plan.  The Operation Plan drives logistical requirements.  Logistical capabilities constrain the Operational Plan.  The US Military refers to logistics and support forces as “below the line”.  Planners working on each side of the line need to effectively coordinate and cooperate with each other.  This Process provides powerful tools to support that coordination and cooperation.Project Demand. Accurate Demand Projection requires detailed data on what forces will be employed, what equipment they will take, how and when they will use that equipment, what that equipment consumes in terms of fuel, ammunition, spare parts, etc.Model Sourcing That Demand. To accurately model sourcing requires detailed data on inventories, existing contracts, accessible production capacity, lead times, etc.Model Transporting and Distributing that Demand. To accurately model transportation and distribution requires detailed data on movement requirements, available lift, and infrastructure port, road, rail and pipeline networks capacities, etc.Identify Shortfalls, Late Arrivals, and Other Sustainment ProblemsProject Impact of those Shortfalls, Late Arrivals, and Other Problems on Operational Availability.  This amounts to feeding Logistics Sustainability Analyses (LSA) results to Service Operational Availability models.Revise the Plan and re-assess.   After reviewing the results of this Process, planners can go back and revise their plans to address projected problems.  The Logistics communities can also revise their strategies and policies on managing problem items.Compare Alternative Courses of ActionPlanners will typically apply this Process to multiple alternative Courses of Action (COAs).  The resulting analysis will present the decision-makers with the pros and cons of the various alternatives under consideration.  In discussing these alternatives, they will often develop new COAs for analysis.In a typical command center, this process can happen daily.  The commander will arrive for the morning brief.  The planners will present their plans, complete with alternative COAs and Logistics Sustainability Assessments.  The commander will give feedback and direction, and the planners will go to work revising the plans for tomorrow’s brief.In a crisis, the operational planning tempo increases and this Process can happen several times a day.Human or Machine?The Operations Research Group of the US Army War College credits Prussia and Germany with developing wargaming as we know it today.  The early wargames evolved around realistic moves, a relief model, and individual game pieces that represented units and troops. Many of these games depended heavily upon the judgment of human umpires.  [1] During World War Two (WWII), computer technology permitted the development of Operations Research, which revolutionized wargaming.  Wargame technology moved away from human umpires and more toward simulations and models.The tools described in this document take a hybrid approach, with extensive computer modeling combined with expert human judgment.  In the final analysis, the planning data available within the US Military is not sufficient to support completely automated wargaming at the level of detail described in this document.  Each scenario has its own unique constraints and circumstances.  We need human experts to appropriately adjust the data.  Also, we do not have models for some aspects of warfare.  In these areas, we rely on the judgment of experts, and we provide tools to support the expression of those judgments.  As those tools evolve, they can help define future automated models.  Collaboration technology allows these experts to effectively work together in forming and documenting their judgments.  Using this technology, they can collaboratively review model results and judgments from other experts.  They can adjust model parameters and re-run the models.  They can debate and revise judgments.About this DocumentIn the interest of conceptual brevity and clarity, this document merges together work from a variety of programs.  Some of these concepts are in operational use and are part of formal US Military Doctrine.  Some of these concepts exist only in cutting edge Research and Development programs.  These programs include: US Defense Logistics AgencyIntegrated Consumable Item Support (ICIS) ModelBlackjack program US Defense Advanced Research Projects AdministrationJoint Theater Logistics Advanced Concepts Technology Demonstration (JTLACTD) Advanced Logistics Program. (ALP)US Transportation CommandAnalysis of Mobility Platform (AMP)The MathematicsAt its foundation, this process uses Expected Value models.  Roughly speaking, the Expected Value is the average of a distribution.  These models use this single Expected Value to represent a distribution. One could argue against this approach, from the statistical and mathematical perspectives.  Practically speaking, the full distribution data is not readily available.  Expected values are often all we have to work with.The statisticians tell us that this approach is statistically correct.  When you have a large collection of items, and you do not have good distribution data, using expected values is an acceptable and correct approach.  As the statisticians put it, in these expected value models “everything is a clam”.  The life expectancy of a clam turns out to be a flat distribution, where the expected value is also the only value that appears in the distribution.  All the models underlying this Process rely on this statistical approach.The ResultsWhat do the results mean?  We tell decision-makers that the model results tell you what would happen in the average case if you fought the war 100 times.  This assumes no errors in the input data or in the model algorithms.How is this useful?  You never fight a war 100 times, and the input data always has at least some flaws.  If a user goes through this entire planning process, how much faith can that user place in the quantitative results?At the end of World War II, Admiral Chester W. Nimitz wrote "The war with Japan had been re-enacted in the game rooms at the War College by so many people, and in so many different ways, that nothing that happened during the war was a surprise - absolutely nothing except the Kamikaze tactics towards the end of the war - we had not visualized these."  [3] This quote is often used to demonstrate that Operations Research and Wargaming have value.  The process described in this document descends directly from those War College re-enactments.  The technology has evolved substantially, but the same principles apply.In many instances the Process described in this document produces more precise results that were previously available.  The results are auditable, and the underlying assumptions are clearly documented.  Auditors from the US General Accounting Office have strongly supported the use of this approach within the US Military.  In addition to the quantitative results, the Process itself has tremendous value. General Dwight D Eisenhower said, "In preparing for battle I have always found that plans are useless, but planning is indispensable." [2]  While the warfighters realize battlefield realities will never precisely match projections from an expected value model, they find tremendous value in working through the planning and plan assessment process in close coordination with the logisticians.No model can reliably predict battlefield results.  This Process can and does identify projected logistics problems, and it identifies them early enough that planners can fix them before they become battlefield problems.  No one expects these models to project all problems.  The more problems we can resolve early, during the planning phase, the more energy we will have available to handle the inevitable unpredicted fog of war that arises during execution.Planning quicklyMajor warplans are voluminous, complex documents.  Before the advent of computer-based planning systems, developing a single plan took many man-years of labor.  It’s difficult to express the tremendous amount of extremely tedious work required to ensure that all the interrelated components meshed.  Here’s an illustration from Navy legend.Chester Nimitz was promoted to full Admiral and became Commander-in-Chief Pacific on January 1 1942, three weeks after Japan attacked Pearl Harbor.  One of is first acts was to call his planning staff into his office.  This large planning staff had labored for many months developing the detailed plan for a Pacific Theater war with Japan.  The plan occupied about a dozen thick volumes, and took up many feet of shelf space.  This was in the days before word processors and calculators, where text was hand-typed and calculations were done with a pencil or a mechanical adding machine.This plan essentially said that the US Navy would take its battleships and go slug it out with the Japanese Navy.  Admiral Nimitz gestured out his office window at the panoramic view of Pearl Harbor, littered with shattered ships.  “Well”, he said, “there are the battleships.  What’s our plan now?”The planning staff looked at the battleships.  They looked at the plan they had so laboriously assembled.  They looked at the Admiral and said, “We need to build more battleships.”  From their perspective, developing a plan was so difficult that it was easier to build a fleet of battleships than to build a new plan.  The Admiral rejected that answer, and the rest is history.Today, plans are far more complex than in 1942.  Fortunately, computers now handle much of the tedious plan development work.  Planning well still requires expert judgment from human beings.  Planning quickly is extremely important.  If your enemy can build plans and test them by wargaming faster than you can, he can adapt and respond more quickly to changes in the tactical and/or strategic situation.  Fast, accurate planning is a force multiplier and a major advantage.Communicating the plan is just as important as developing it.  A great plan is useless unless the players all understand their roles.  If those players participate in the plan development, it becomes much easier to quickly and accurately develop great plans.The Process defined in this document allows the logisticians to build the logistics plan in concert with the warfighters developing the operational plan.  This produces a logistics plan at the same time as the operational plan.  By collaboratively building these plans in parallel, the quality of the plans increases substantially, and the time required to produce the plans decreases dramatically.  This gives us high quality, integrated plans quickly, allowing the planner to war game the plans in a realistic model.  Assessing the operation plans with analytical models helps find predictable problems early, enhancing the probability of mission success.Plan RepresentationThe ICIS, ALP, and JTLACTD Programs have invested substantial effort in developing a plan representation with sufficient detail to support Logistics planning.  This section briefly describes the conceptual framework used by these programs.Representing TimeIn modeling military plans, the hardest part is representing time.  Everything changes over time, including command structures, forces, equipment on hand, capabilities, threat, etc.To handle time, we represent nearly all links among objects as Time Bounded Relationships (TBRs).  Consider an object representing a Unit.  That unit has equipment and personnel.  It can have superior and subordinate units.  It has capabilities, location, readiness, tasks, support relationships, inventory, storage capacity, handling capacity, Operational Tempo (OPTEMPO), support requirements, capabilities, etc.  All these vary over time.  Time Bounded Relations (TBRs) are of the form: R(x, y, s, e, v)Where R is the relation, x and y are the Domain and Range, s and e are the start and end times, and v is a value. TBR Domain & RangeThe domain of a TBR is often an object like an Organization or Task Force.  The range is often attributes of that object, such as equipment, location, task, etc.  For example, a subordinate TBR might link a force to its operational command.  An equipment TBR would link a unit to its equipment. TBR Start and End TimesStart & End times are in C-days.  (In the US Military, C0 is the day deployment begins.  All other dates can be described relative to C0.)  Once the plan execution date is set, these dates can be mapped to calendar dates.  In the future, JTL will expand this to represent sequencing, as in predecessor/successor/simultaneous relations.TBR ValuesMany TBRs have a value.  These values are objects themselves.  In many instances, the value will contain a quantity, such as the number of tanks or the fuel inventory. In all cases, the TBR value object contains information about that TBR’s origin.  If the TBR contains the quantity of tanks, it will also indicate the source of that data.  The source could be a standard data source.  In the United States Department of Defense, our models use such standard data sources as the Joint Deployment Data Library (JDDL), Table of Organization and Equipment (TO&E), Type Unit Characteristics (TUCHA), Joint Total Asset Visibility (JTAV), or a Time Phased Force Deployment Data (TPFDD). The source might also be a manual entry from a user.  In addition to the source, the TBR value will indicate the "as of" date for the data source.  The TBR value object also provides a place for documentation as to the reasoning behind a particular value.   For example, consider the "equipmentTBR" relation for a given force, called "Force A", and a given piece of equipment, the "M1A2 Abrams", from day C+30 to C+45.  The value of that relation might be 12 tanks, according to the Central Command (CENTCOM) JTAV data on a particular date for “Force A.”  Alternatively, the value could be 14 tanks, because a user said so.  If that user cared to, he might enter an explanation as to why he entered a value of 14 tanks.  Such an explanation might read, "JTAV says they have 12 tanks, but they’re only taking 10 and they’re going to receive an additional another 4 that are prepositioned in theater."Some relations have no "value" as such.  For instance, the "subordinateTBR" indicates the operational command relationship between two forces.  In cases like this, the TBR value object still captures the TBR’s origin and any explanation.The value of a TBR can be a static, extensional value, as in the example above.  It can also be a derived, intentional value.  For example, an intentional fuel inventory value for a supply point might basically say, "Go to the CENTCOM JTAV and get the latest value".  Here’s an analogy.  The difference between an extensional value and an intentional value is like the difference between a stored value and a stored query in a database.  They both provide a value.  The intentional value stores the question, and it recalculates the answer every time it is read.  The extensional value simply stores the answer, and it is unchanged by reading.Command GuidanceCommand Guidance often comes in the form of an alert order.  It can also be a phone call.  This command guidance defines the mission to be accomplished, and the forces available to accomplish those missions.  From this guidance, the planners build an Available Forces Palette containing those forces available for executing this command guidance.  Then, they build alternative Courses of Action (COAs) for executing that guidance using those available forces.Course of ActionA JTL COA contains a plan and a library.  The plan contains the forces, their configurations, missions, tasks, and timelines.  It tells who will do what, with what equipment, when, where, and how hard they will work.  The COA library contains force structures and other information which the user uses to construct the plan.The COA contains all the data necessary to analyze the plan.  Looking at the COA, models can determine Logistics Sustainability, Transportation Feasibility, etc.Typically, the planners will develop a number of Alternative COAs for a given operation.The JTL plan representation currently does not support branching within a plan.  A branch is a “what if” extension to the plan.  For example a branch plan may be developed to take into account that the bridges on the avenue of approach are undamaged when captured.  If a plan conceptually has branches, JTL users currently represent each path through those branches as a separate COA.Branching will be handled more elegantly in future enhancements to the system.ForcesJTL represents forces as Organizations and Task Forces.  Examples of organizations include Units, tailored units, Host Nation Support, etc.  From the JTL perspective, an organization is a bundle of personnel and equipment which requires support and offers capabilities.  A Task Force is a task-organized group of Organizations and other Task Forces.AssignmentsTask Forces and Organizations have various assignments over time.  Typical assignments include things like move, maintain, attack, defend, support, etc.In the JTL system, Task Force Assignments and Organization Assignments can also define the configuration of the Task Force or Organization.  The configuration defines personnel, command structure, and equipment. Future versions of the system will separate these concepts of Assignment and Configuration, to make the user’s plan editing experience cleaner.  Early in the planning process, JTL users often create Organization Configurations that correspond directly to US Military Units in their standard peacetime configuration, including their peacetime Order Of Battle (OOB).  Later on in the planning process, JTL users often tailor these configurations as they refine the plan.  For example, a humanitarian mission might require more trucks and fewer tanks than the standard configuration.While Organizations have well defined default configurations (their peacetime OOB), Task Forces have no such default.  Early in the planning process, JTL users often create empty (forceless) Task Forces and Task Force Assignments.  Once the Task Forces and their assignments are laid out over time, the JTL users will define the required capabilities for each Task Force Assignment, and then assign organizations to provide those capabilities.UnitsUnits rarely deploy in their standard, doctrinal configuration.  They often deploy in tailored configurations, perhaps leaving some people and equipment behind, perhaps taking with them additional people and equipment.  JTL Organization objects represent units as they will deploy.At some point in the tailoring process, it can become unclear whether the tailored force package is still the originally selected Unit.  This is especially true when most of the unit does not deploy, or the unit has significant attachments that greatly enhance their capabilities.Many types of units typically deploy in pieces, with different parts of the unit deploying to different locations at different points in time.This notion of tracking partial Units can get very chaotic, especially after some fragmentation and reassembly occurs.  The JTL plan representation handles the issue by modeling Organizations rather than Units.  If a user wants to structure his or her organizations to precisely match existing units in their standard configuration, that’s fine.  Later on, if the user decides to tailor and/or fragment those, the plan representation does not suffer because it does not rely on the notion of Unit as a monolithic entity.UTCIn the US Military, a Unit Type Code (UTC) defines a type of unit, including doctrinal equipment, personnel, capabilities, etc.  Users can rapidly define notional forces using UTCs.UTCs have the following Time-Based Relationships:CodeDescriptionServiceRolesSymbolEquipmentPersonnelCapabilityUICIn the US Military, a Unit Identifier Code (UIC) identifies a specific unit.  Tasks Forces perform tasks.Tasks structures consist of tasks linked by subordinate/ordinate and or predecessor/successor relations.Tasks typically have the following Time-Based Relationships:Has-Location (locations)Assigned-Forces (forces)Documentation-Pointers (documents)DescriptionSubordinate tasks (tasks)Ordinate tasks (tasks)A Task may also have the following Time-Based Relationships:OPTEMPOs (OPTEMPOs)Predecessor-Tasks (tasks)Successor-Tasks (tasks)Required-Capabilities (Capabilities)Required-Forces (force_structures)CapabilityForces have capabilities that they offer, and support capabilities that they require.  Tasks require capabilities of the forces that perform those tasks.When a user tailors a force, they must also tailor that force’s offered capabilities, and its support requirements.  For example, on a humanitarian mission, the planners might need additional personnel to provide more hands-on support to the people in need.  For the sake of this example, let’s say the planners choose to send just the personnel from an available truck transportation unit.  In sending the personnel without the trucks, the JTL planner would need to tailor the unit’s capabilities and requirements.  For instance, the unit would still require subsistence, but they would not require fuel for their trucks, since they left the trucks at home.  The unit would no longer offer transportation capability.JTL relies on the user to keep “capabilities offered” and “support required” up to date as they tailor units.OPTEMPOOPTEMPO is the tempo of operations.  It is a measure of miles rolled, rounds fired, flight hours, etc.An OPTEMPO is a percentage.  It can exceed 100%.  OPTEMPO is a factor applied to the Failure and Consumption Rates.  Forces operating at high OPTEMPO generally consume more than they would at low OTEMPO.LocationThe US military does not have a good handle on clear standards for representing location in software.  Various systems represent location in different ways, and these ways are not always compatible.  In the JTL system, Locations have at least one name.  Locations can have International Civil Aviation Office (ICAO) and/or Geographic Location (GEOLOC) codes.  A location can be a route, region, operating area, country, or theater.  A location can have latitude/longitude, grid coordinates, etc.  This representation does not capture all the complexities of location, but it’s a good start.ConsumersConsumers are the people, equipment, and facilities that consume food, fuel, clothing, ammo, and all other commodities.People People have a Service.  They may have a type, such as Military Occupation Specialty (MOS).  JTL may eventually develop a hierarchy of types.MOSAssigned Unit->unitGenderGradePrimary MOS (PMOS)Major End Items (MEIs)MEIs are the trucks, tanks, ships, generators, aircraft, and other major pieces of equipment used by forces in the field.  JTL tracks quantities of MEI types, not individual tail or bumper numbers.MEIs have at least one identifier.  They may also have names.  NSNLINTAMCNMDSShipClassServiceDescriptionWtCubeFCRArmy LINsThe Army identifies equipment by Line Item Number (LIN).  A LIN might correspond to several NSNs.  For example a single LIN for a 2.5-ton truck might be used for the Chevy, Dodge, and Ford trucks.  Each of those trucks will have a different NSN, and they each consume different parts.The LIN provides sufficient detail for assessing capabilities and fuel requirements, but not for assessing spare part requirements.  Navy ShipsNavy Ships are identified by Class and Hull Number.  Each ship also typically has several names.  For instance, the Carrier John F. Kennedy is hull number CV-67.  It is known as the Kennedy, JFK, and by other nicknames, all of which can appear in source data feeds.AircraftAircraft are identified by Mission, Design, and Series.  Mission can be B for Bomber, F for Fighter, A for Attack, C for Cargo, K for Tanker, etc.  Design is a number, such as 16, 18, etc.  Series’ run alphabetically.For example, the F14G is a Navy Fighter, Design 14, Series Golf.  The F/A18 is a small, short-range aircraft that can be configured as a fighter or for attack.  The KC135 is a tanker, which can also carry cargo.  (The fuel tanks occupy the space below the cargo deck.  If you fill them with gas, it can carry no cargo.  If you put in only enough gas for the aircraft itself, it can carry cargo.)USMC Ground EquipmentThe Table of Authorized Materiel Control Number (TAMCN) is the USMC’s equivalent to the Army’s LIN.FacilitiesA facility is a consumer whose location is fixed, like a sea or air port.Facilities have the following attributes.  (Note these are not time-based relations, because they do not vary over time.)Type [geoloc, ICAO, etc.]IDLatitudeLongitudeCountryAddressBare Base Support PackagesThe USAF and US Army store and maintain packages with all the material required to quickly construct bases.  These packages each contain a small tent city, including things such as power generation, communication, sanitation, dining facilities, medical facilities, etc.  The USAF has packages called Harvest Falcon, Harvest Eagle, and Red Horse.  The Army has one called Force Provider.  When deployed, these packages become fixed bases, and they consume material just like other fixed bases.Organizations with ConsumptionSome forces consume material, but we do not have data on their consumers as described above.  That is, their consumption is not driven by their personnel and equipment.  For example, medical units consume material based on patient load.  Navy Construction Battalions (CBs, pronounced Seabees) consume construction material based on the tasks they are assigned.  The same applies to Army Engineers.  Ports also consume materials.In these cases, we model the organization itself as the consumer, rather than modeling the individual consumers within the organization.Consumable ItemsConsumable items are minor items that are not repairable, such as food, fuel, oil filters, spark plugs, tires, etc.  Consumable items are produced by producers.  They are stored at depots, supply points, and in industrial warehouses.  They are consumed by consumers.The US Military divides the inventory into 10 classes of supply, listed below.Subsistence  Each Service has doctrinal meal plans that define the type of meals to be fed to their personnel.  These doctrinal plans can change for a given conflict, for a given force, etc.Clothing Each person consumes clothing.  The clothing type depends on Service and MOS.Petroleums, Oils, and Lubricants  While there are NSNs for the various types of bulk fuel, very few people know what they are, and even fewer people use them.  Typically, the fuel names are used.  JP8 is Jet fuel, JP5 is Navy jet fuel (it has a lower flash point to reduce the risk of fire aboard ship), DF2 is Diesel, F76 is ship fuel, and MG1 is gasoline.To simplify logistics, the DoD fuel community is moving toward JP8 as a "Universal Fuel".  Most DoD fuel burners can burn JP8.Construction and Barrier Material  This is the concrete, lumber, fence posts, barbed wire, etc.AmmunitionComfort Items  Comfort items include things like soap and toothpaste.Major End Items  These are the trucks, tanks, aircraft, etc.Medical  This document does not cover medical logistics.  Modeling medical logistics is a fundamentally different problem than the other commodities discussed in this document.  For information on medical logistics, see: HYPERLINK http://www.dmmonline.com http://www.dmmonline.comhttp://dscp103.dscp.dla.mil/anrep99/ar99med.htmSpare PartsMiscellaneousChemical Equipment Chemical Equipment is modeled separately because only people in a region under chemical threat consume it.  Chemical Equipment items include clothing, medical, and electronic items.Failure and Consumption RatesFailure and Consumption Rates define the rate at which a consumer consumes an item.  Some items fail and require replacement, such as fuses, spark plugs, etc.  Other items are consumed, such as food and fuel. Failure and Consumption Rate is a function of OPTEMPO.  The higher the OPTEMPO, the higher the Failure and Consumption Rates.Repairable ItemsWhen radios, engines, and other valuable devices fail, they enter into a repair pipeline.  Simple repairs happen in the field.  The more complex repair jobs happen at the repair depots.Repair DepotsRepair Depots require another separate analysis.  They have repair tasks, each of which consumes a Bill of Materials.  For efficiency, depots tend to set up lines which rebuild large quantities of a single item.  Each rebuild consumes the items on its Bill of Materials.  Sometimes, once the item has been opened up, the technician discovers that other unanticipated items are required.Repair Depots store broken equipment for later repair.  They have their own schedules and plans, which determine the repairs they make.  In times of crisis, they can increase their rate of critical repairs by putting on multiple shifts, working overtime, and deferring nonessential tasks.ProducersProducers manufacture the material the military consumes.  They include oil refineries, manufacturing plants, etc.Each producer has a production capacity.  Problems with suppliers, labor, and other influences can all limit this capacity.  Typically, producers allocate much of their capacity to their non-military customers, so the military might not have access to full production capacity.Producers and vendors also have their own inventory.  In time of war, the military can sometimes get priority access to that inventory.  Also, modern material management techniques include “Vendor Managed Inventory” (VMI), where the military essentially pays the vendor to maintain inventory for the military.  By leaving the inventory with the vendor, it rotates continuously, reducing shelf life problems.ContractsContracts serve to define accessible production capacity.  Logistics Sustainability Analyses can provide essential information to the contracting officers.  If we know what wartime demand to expect, we can build surge clauses or other strategies into the contracts, to ensure timely access to the required production capacity in time of crisis.We want to establish contracts in the absence of a crisis, to allow the contracting officers to obtain the most favorable terms.  Detailed Logistics Sustainability Assessments performed during the course of deliberate planning can feed crucial data to the contracting officers.The same process applies in time of crisis, if unanticipated shortfalls arise.  In this situation, the contracting officer simply has less leverage to negotiate favorable terms.  The LSA data requirements remain the same.Supply WebSupply Chains rarely happen.  Suppliers and manufacturers more often organize themselves into complex webs, with many-to-many links among suppliers and manufacturers.This structure makes it very difficult to determine actual production capacity.  For instance, 5 tire manufacturers might each have the capacity to produce 10,000 tires per month, if they ramp up from one to three shifts.  That looks like an aggregate production capacity of 50.000 tires per month, but the upstream rubber providers might be able to provide raw materials for only 25,000 tires per month.This type of problem is hard to detect, because each manufacturer knows they can produce 10,000 per month, and they know their suppliers can meet demand for 10,000 per month.  The problem only arises when 3 or more manufacturers try to produce 10,000 per month.This example illustrates only one of the difficulties in reliably assessing maximum production capacity.  The current approach to this problem is to simply rely on the contracted production capacity, and not to look upstream of those contracts at the supply web.  To do more than this would require access to detailed capacity data from suppliers and manufacturers, and that data is simply not available.Skilled Industrial Base Planners can and do perform more detailed analyses of the supply web, but to do a reliable analysis requires substantial time and effort.  This means we can only afford to do it for key items.  The LSA process described in this paper can help identify and prioritize the critical items that require such attention. LiftLift is the capacity to move material.  Strategic Airlift flies people and cargo among theaters.  Tactical Airlift does the same within a theater.  Sealift is slow, but it can handle massive tonnage.  In-theater, trucklift is a crucial factor.The models calculate when and where material is required, when and where that material is available.  Once the supply and demand models have projected the demand for material, and the source of the material, the transportation models can assess whether we have sufficient lift to move the material. Transportation NetworkStrategic and in-theater transportation is a key component of the Logistics picture.  Given the state of the roads, how quickly can the trucks move?  What pipelines may we use?  Rail infrastructure can help the in-theater transportation picture immensely, as can access for barges and ships.Available material can exceed the throughput capacity of strategic lift, tactical lift, ports and material handling facilities.  All these problems can add to the ship time, and hence the Logistics Response Time.ConclusionThe modeling efforts mentioned in this paper have made substantial progress in representing and assessing operational plans.  The ICIS Fuels software is approved for fuel requirements determination, per the Joint Strategic Capabilities Plan (JSCP) Log Annex.  The JTL ACTD has dramatically advanced the state of the art in operational plan representation, and in collaborative tools to allow the experts to develop, refine, analyze and assess those plans.  The AMP program brings a variety of transportation models together to provide an integrated Transportation Feasibility Assessment capability.  The ALP program has developed new paradigms for distributed simulation.  The Blackjack program has applied advanced technology to the sourcing problem.All of these modeling capabilities seem relevant to the SISO vision.  The SISO community certainly has a tremendous amount of expertise relevant to these modeling efforts.  Hopefully, this paper may foster further communication and collaboration among these groups.References[1]	http://carlisle-www.army.mil/usacsl/divisions/std/branches/org/histwarg.htm[2]	 HYPERLINK http://carlisle-www.army.mil/usawc/Parameters/96autumn/czerwins.htm http://carlisle-www.army.mil/usawc/Parameters/96autumn/czerwins.htm[3] http://www.nwc.navy.mil/wgd/default%5Fold.htmAuthor BiographiesJOHN P. GUNSHENAN is a Program Manager in the Distributed Systems and Logistics Department at BBN Technologies in Cambridge MA, USA.  He has spent the last 20 years building advanced military decision support systems in various areas including communication, capability assessment, transportation feasibility assessment, aircrew scheduling, and logistics. JTL also has a separate, global library.  Each JTL COA Library contains information relevant to the specific COA.  The global JTL Library is not COA-specific.