Tri-Service Modeling and Simulation Resource Repository(Air Force Case Study)Cathy DiPlacidoAir Force Agency for Modeling and Simulation  (AFAMS)12350 Research ParkwayOrlando, FL 32826-3276407-208-5756    DSN: 970 HYPERLINK mailto:cathy.diplacido@afams.af.mil cathy.diplacido@afams.af.milRobert RohlfingUniversity of Central Florida, Institute for Simulation and Training3280 Progress DriveOrlando, FL 32826-0544DSN: 970 HYPERLINK mailto:rrohlfin@ist.ucf.edu rrohlfin@ist.ucf.eduKeywords:M&S, MSRR, AFMSRR, AMSRR, NMSIS, SBA, sharing, metadata, DIRRABSTRACTThe Tri-Service Steering Group (TSSG) Modeling and Simulation Resource Repository (MSRR) Cooperative Development Team has contributed significantly to development, implementation, and support of the MSRR.  Team contributions directly furthered MSRR objectives of providing affordable, reusable, interoperable, readily available, and operationally valid M&S resources.  Although designed originally for DoD, the application has suitability for academia and industry use, especially in two areas:providing metadata for components to support the characterization of components and their composition as part of a simulation systemproviding interfaces and standards that facilitate sharing models and data between government and industryBy applying the Tri-Service MSRR technology, the sharing of information, whether metadata, simulation software, or other resource is greatly enhanced.Since its inception, the Tri-Service Team has an exceptional record of cross-Service cooperation.  The Team harmonized all requirements and constructed an MSRR that provided affordable, reusable, interoperable, readily available, and operationally valid resources.  This same construct could readily be applied to the Defense/Industry Resource Repository (DIRR). IntroductionThe Tri-Service Modeling and Simulation Resource Repository (MSRR) is part of the overarching Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) MSRR.  The Tri-Service MSRR solves a need that the Services have long left unfilled – the sharing and reuse of modeling and simulation (M&S) resources plus the linking of information resources to aid decision-makers.  The MSRR goal is to provide a single comprehensive source of coordinated modeling and simulation information. The Tri-Service Steering Group MSRR Cooperative Development Team (Air Force, Army, and Navy), has jointly shared development costs of the Service MSRRs.  The Tri-Service Team has developed an interoperable MSRR allowing for search of M&S catalogs of the Air Force, Army, Navy, and other MSRR selected nodes.  Recently, a test with the DMSO Authoritative Data Source (ADS) catalog was conducted, proving that resource is also accessible through the Tri-Service MSRR search.  Other MSRR nodes and resources are being added to the Tri-Service search capability as they are identified and authenticated for currency and accuracy.  The Tri-Service MSRR assures that the DoD M&S community is being served by a customer oriented service providing up to date M&S information in a timely manner.2. Department of Defense DirectionThe DoD 5000.59-P, Modeling and Simulation Master Plan (MSMP), October 1995, first established the MSRR requirement – “DoD must establish a distributed system of M&S Resource Repositories to efficiently and effectively provide the community with timely, verified and validated data, metadata, algorithms, models, simulations, and tools.  The MSRRs should also provide background information (e.g., model assumptions, source of data, classification of data, range of data, validity of algorithms, VV&A/C history).  This will promote reuse and sharing of M&S resources and will improve credibility of M&S results.  These repositories will provide tools for configuration management and for accessing, browsing, and retrieving M&S resources.”   As proposed by DMSO, the MSRR was to be a distributed system of networked resource servers to support registration, storage, discovery, and delivery of M&S resources.   These capabilities were defined as:Cataloging of resources that are of use to modeling and simulation sponsors, developers, and users (registration)Storage of registered resources in electronic format (storage)Searching for resources (discovery)Restrictions on access to resources, at the discretion of the resource provider (authentication and authorization)The ability to download or provide a resource to a user (delivery)User account creation and maintenanceThe servers were to be interconnected through the World Wide Web (WWW) using the INTERNET for the unclassified MSRR or through the Secret Internet Protocol Routing Network (SIPRNET) for the classified MSRR.  Registered resources models, simulations, object models, Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS), algorithms, instance databases, data sets, data standardization and administration products, documents, references, facilities, tools and utilities. 3.  Air Force DirectionFor illustrative purposes, we will take one Service as an example of the Tri-Service MSRR process.   Although all Services vary to some degree in their implementation of the MSRR, all use the same software and development tools.  Air Force guidance derived from DoD 5000.59-P and published in the US Air Force Modeling and Simulation Master Plan, 1 December 1995, states that an Air Force Modeling and Simulation Resource Repository (AFMSRR) will be developed to improve M&S information flow, reduce duplication, and foster reuse of software.  Sharing and reuse of resources was to be accomplished by:Providing a M&S repository where resource owners can catalogue resources of interest to the Air ForceProviding a convenient way for Air Force users to search classified and unclassified networks for resourcesProviding a way for users to contribute to the resource pool4.  Registration ProcessIn concert with this guidance, the AFMSRR elected to use a decentralized approach to resource registration, with a centralized catalog of metadata – unlike the DMSO approach which uses centralized registration and cataloging.  Each Air Force owner of a particular resource is responsible for registering that resource within the repository. (see Figure 1) EMBED Word.Picture.8Figure 1.  AFMSRR Registration ProcessThe AFMSRR, its users, and its resource providers appear as show in the figure above.  The AFMSRR metadata points to resources physically maintained and located with the resource provider on a local server or filing system.  A description of the resource resides at the central AFMSRR in the form of metadata describing the resource.  This detailed record is entered into the AFMSRR, which then permits searching of the database for discovery.Searches are focused at the AFMSRR level or extended to include the other MSRR nodes.  Other nodes currently searchable from the AFMSRR are Army, Navy, BMDO, and DMSO, as well as the Authoritative Data Source (ADS) repository maintained by DMSO.  Other nodes will be searchable in the very near future, further extending the utility of the AFMSRR.5.  Submission ProcessOnly registered personnel may submit resources for the AFMSRR.  The individual submitting the resource is responsible for accuracy, obtaining clearance for public release, updates, and answering questions from potential users of the resource.  Registration is required to provide a reliable link from the system to the individual nominating a resource for the AFMSRR.  It is important to have reliable access to the submitter during the approval process and after entered into the AFMSRR so users can contact a knowledgeable individual with pertinent questions.  Individuals are required to log in and acknowledge they understand the responsibility for obtaining release authority and clearances and that no classified or proprietary information is entered.Modeling and simulation resources currently registered within the AFMSRR include:Data SourcesModelsReferencesSimulationsSimulatorsSupport Tools/UtilitiesRelated SitesPoints of ContactWithin the AFMSRR, the submission of resources begins with the resource submitter entering data into an on-line template to provide descriptive information for the AFMSRR metadata.  The submission is then placed in a pending database for review as indicated by (1) in Figure 2 below.EMBED Word.Picture.8Figure 2.  AFMSRR Approval ProcessAutomatic email notification is sent to the first reviewer (2) based upon the submitter’s sponsoring organization.  The reviewer logs into the AFMSRR and performs the appropriate review.  The Public Affairs Office and/or Security Office of the sponsoring command may review a submission independently from the normal approval chain as directed by local policy.  This process continues until the last reviewer (n) and MAJCOM Resource Coordinator have been notified (3).  After the last review is complete, the AFMSRR Resource Coordinator is notified.  Upon approval by the AFMSRR Resource Coordinator, the resource moves into the public database (5) allowing access by any AFMSRR user.If a submission is subsequently determined to be in error, inappropriate, or incomplete, it will be returned to the previous reviewers for further action and resubmission, demotion, or deletion. Quality is also controlled by an automated update system that assures resources are current. This process begins when the resource owner is periodically (selectable) notified by email that the resource needs to be checked for currency and accuracy.6.  ObjectivesThe overall objectives of the Tri-Service MSRR system are to:Leverage new and emerging technologies and standards to provide a next-generation electronic repository capabilitySupport significant software reuse and reuse process improvement through application of advanced repository capabilitiesMaximize the use of simulation and its supporting technologies to include use for conceptual modeling, system engineering, software development, High Level Architecture (HLA), and Authoritative Data Sources (ADS).Support information sharing and coordination with the M&S community through collaboration with ongoing MSRR efforts and connectivity with other MSRR nodesOperate as a central repository with decentralized controlAllow all descriptive data within the system to be considered publicly releasable as attested to by the providerThe Tri-Service MSRR development has satisfied these initial objectives and will continue to be enhanced in an effort to satisfy Service M&S requirements.7.  Tri-Service SolutionThe Tri-Service Cooperative Development Team, initially led by the Air Force, was formed to satisfy Service input into the larger MSRR vision.   The Air Force decision to develop their own MSRR software was cost driven, with the objective of using commercial off the shelf (COTS) products as much as possible driving the decision – unlike plans implemented by other MSRR nodes.  Soon after striking off on this development effort, the Army and Navy joined to share in development cost and assure a system that would be interoperable and link all M&S catalogs into one system capable of being searched across all DoD domains at minimal cost.  Since its inception, the Tri-Service Team has been an outstanding example of cross-Service cooperation in MSRR design and development, proving the benefit of Joint, mutually shared software.  The Team began development of a web-based “virtual card catalog” designed to avoid duplication, foster reuse, and save resources.  They contracted with the University of Central Florida’s Institute for Simulation and Training (IST) to develop state-of-the-art, tailorable software supporting overall MSRR objectives.  The Tri-Service Team recognized the value of the cataloging approach originally proposed by DMSO, and shared in the developmental funding of a collaborative, spiral development of a “same look and feel” common tool.  The Team harmonized all requirements and constructed an MSRR that provided affordable, reusable, interoperable, readily available, and operationally valid resources to the DoD M&S user community.As additional capabilities were added, the Team agreed on funding, with each sharing in the final development cost.  Configuration management was accomplished at the quarterly Team meetings with IST serving as the integrator, assessing what future capabilities might be pursued by the Tri-Service coalition.  This approach resulted in totally electronic registration, submission, approval, revision, administration, and automated currency monitoring, saving countless hours.  This strategy reduced the total cost of the program with each Team member leveraging the efforts of the others.The Tri-Service Team was phenomenally successful in putting aside Service rivalries and developing a structure and taxonomy for the final MSRRs.  The Team cooperatively designed and developed enhancements making the MSRR even more supportable and user friendly.  By testing, then fielding rapidly developed enhancements, new capabilities were fielded in minimal time.  Recent versions include an improved search capability that enables cross-node search of all M&S repositories, consolidating results into one easily readable report.The Tri-Service classified MSRR (CMSRR) exhibits the same level of Service cooperation that the original MSRR demonstrated.  The Team recently agreed to an Authoritative Data Source (ADS) development that will assure Service collaboration in registering ADS resources.  The next major push will be quantifying metrics to evaluate the contribution the Tri-Service MSRRs make to the M&S community.  Quarterly Team meetings further cement this strong cooperation and build a consensus on the future of Service MSRRs.The Tri-Service Team is breaking new ground for M&S cooperation and interoperability within the DoD.  The three sites prove that this concept works and works well.  The combined resources of the Service MSRRs now exceed 2300, with the number growing daily.  Over 500 registered points of contact are available to request additional M&S information.  Each site has a distinct Service character but shares identical implementing software – proving the savings of shared Joint design and development.ServiceModels & SimulationsData SourcesReferencesTools/utilitiesRelated Web SitesNavy1044900411Air Force10071761961Army75810021332BMDO31Figure 3.  Service MSRR ResourcesTeam success stories are numerous.  WARSIM (Army) is using the AWSIM (Air Force) surface-to-air engagement algorithm as a result of information obtained from the AFMSRR.  FALCON, a force allocation and contingency tool, was discovered by the Air Force Flight Test Center through a Tri-Service MSRR search.  The Joint Strike Fighter development test and evaluation team praised our site as an excellent source of information.  The MSRR also has led to the identification of numerous out of date publications in the Electronic Listing of Air Force Publications on line – all corrected because of discovery used with the MSRR.  The Tri-Service MSRR has already proven its worth in many other accounts similar to these. The Tri-Service Team’s numerous contributions truly demonstrate the value of Joint cooperation.  By working together, this Team has provided affordable access to M&S resources.  8.  Future PlansThe Tri-Service MSRR will continue to leverage new and emerging technologies and standards to provide the Services with a next-generation electronic repository capability to support more frequent, more automated, more effective, and less costly acquisition, training, and analysis.  The plans for the Tri-Service MSRR are cutting edge, maximizing the use of simulation and supporting technologies to include use for conceptual modeling, system engineering, software development, and test and evaluation.Short term goals for the Services include the addition of new categories of resources.   We have recently added the ADS category that allows the Tri-Service Team to categorize and measure the quality of data sources within the MSRRs.  This capability, once again, is automated and has an approval process that assures the information is of the highest quality before being entered in the MSRR.  Planned additions include a category called facilities that will identify those facilities currently in use by the M&S community with a detailed description of their capabilities to support acquisition, analysis, training, and test and evaluation.  This category will enable a potential facility user to find the correct location for his use based upon a list of searchable capabilities.  Another category being contemplated is the user category, or inventory module.  This module will identify those users of a particular resource so that support communities can be established using communication tools such as reflectors and forums to elicit improvements and to assure that a funding stream supported by the user community always remains available.   A category called emerging technologies is currently in development.  This category will be an avenue to submit new technologies for funding consideration.  Following submission, each new technology will follow a clearly defined, automated progression through the research and acquisition communities.  In addition to the new resource categories, the Tri-Service MSRR will also establish a continual improvement program for improved search capability.  This new search, or reports module, will use state-of-the-art search operations to create reports more useful to the user community.  The search will not only include the current MSRR level search, but will also incorporate other useful INTERNET sites that have useful M&S data.   As a part of the spiral development process, security will continue to be assessed and improved through new technologies developed by the Tri-Service Team.Less clearly defined, but high on the priority development list in the coming years are the following:Develop applications to permit management of the MSRR at distributed locationsDevelop extensive resource search capability providing access to databases at distributed sites currently maintaining inaccessible, but valuable resourcesDevelop capability to save searches for others to use or for downloadIncrease the number of decision support tools capable of accessing all M&S information Develop customer required VV&A, HLA, SBA, and DMT information outlinesDevelop a calendar used to schedule M&S events (interfacing with DMSO)Improve communication tools to include video teleconferencingEstablish relational databases to aid decision-makers in daily command decisionsThe continued development of new capabilities will remain a high priority for the Team.  The search for improved M&S decision tools is an ongoing process that will continue to lead to continuous product improvement.8.  Conclusion HYPERLINK http://www.msrr.army.mil/ The Tri-Service MSRR development approach is a success story for the Services and DoD.  Through the Tri-Service development, the Services have leveraged their ability to field an MSRR system that supports the M&S community of DoD.  Continued spiral development of enhancements to the Tri-Service MSRR will ensure its viability well into the 21st Century.