Developing a Consensus Perspective on Conceptual Models for Simulation SystemsLee W. LacyWayne RandolphBruce HarrisDynamics Research CorporationSimone YoungbloodJack SheehanDefense Modeling and Simulation OfficeDr. Robert MightMichael MetzInnovative Management ConceptsABSTRACT: The development of simulation systems is a complex systems engineering process.  Key artifacts of this process should include conceptual models.  The term “conceptual model” is extremely overloaded within the simulation community.  For example, it has been used to describe the first abstraction of what is represented in a simulation and to describe a high level design of how all the components in a simulation are related.  The variety of interpretations of conceptual modeling has caused a great deal of confusion.  Although consensus has been difficult to achieve on the definition of conceptual modeling, most experts agree that conceptual models are needed.  A meeting was recently held to try and reach consensus among DMSO programs on a unified perspective of conceptual modeling.  This paper provides background on conceptual modeling and documents efforts to develop consensus on conceptual modeling.1. IntroductionThe development of simulation systems is a complex process.  Key artifacts of simulation development are conceptual models.  However, a great deal of confusion exists in the community regarding conceptual models.A meeting was held in Orlando on September 18, 2000 to clarify the differing conceptual modeling perspectives within the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO).  Issues regarding conceptual models include their definition, the need for them, when they occur within the simulation development process, and how they are developed.  These issues are introduced at a high level in the following sections.1.1 Defining Conceptual ModelsThe term “conceptual model” is extremely overloaded within the simulation community.  The variety of interpretations that already exist has caused a great deal of confusion.  Developing clear descriptions and references to conceptual modeling will help evolve and mature simulation development practices.As with many general terms, context is critical in understanding a reference to conceptual modeling.  The unqualified use of the term will continue to occur in the community.  However, the use of more precise terms will reduce confusion and enhance communication.Although consensus has been difficult to achieve on the definition of conceptual modeling, most experts agree that conceptual models are needed.  For example, a common perspective is that conceptual models are used in support of Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A).Helpful definitions of conceptual models should include describing the components of the conceptual model, its purpose, and where it fits within the simulation development lifecycle.Throughout this paper, the term “conceptual model” will be qualified whenever possible to clarify the specific type of conceptual model being discussed.1.2 Need for Conceptual Modeling Different types of conceptual models are developed to support needs of simulation developers, sponsors, and users.In general, conceptual models are used to help document simplifying assumptions that must be made in simulating the complex “real world” environment.  They are often used as intermediary artifacts of the simulation development process that help isolate a critical set of information.  During validation, references can be made to items documented in conceptual models.   A full understanding of a simulation is needed to determine the potential reusability of the simulation.  The description provided by a conceptual model can support the reusability determination.    1.3 Conceptual Modeling in the Simulation Development ProcessConceptual modeling is performed at key points in the simulation development process.  Conceptual models provide a transitional view between specific phases in simulation development.  Domain-oriented conceptual models occur early in the development lifecycle to assist in requirements analysis.  Design-oriented conceptual models occur at the beginning of the design activities.1.4 Conceptual Modeling Development The development and documentation of conceptual models is closely tied to their individual purposes.  For example, domain-oriented conceptual models may be developed as part of a knowledge acquisition phase and may result in natural language representations of the domain.  In contrast, design-oriented conceptual models may be developed as part of the software development effort and be documented in CASE diagrams.In general, informal requirements must be specified, the requirements must be converted into more formal structures, and the formal structures must be represented.  A variety of methods for documenting conceptual models have been identified (Firat, 2000).1.5 ScopeThis paper focuses on clarifying perspectives of conceptual models for military simulation systems.  The VV&A of conceptual models is addressed in the VV&A Recommended Practices Guide (RPG) (DMSO, 2000).The purpose of this paper is to encourage dialog on the subject of conceptual modeling and to begin to unify perspectives on the various themes of conceptual modeling.  There are many conceptual model ideas related to simulation that are not addressed in this paper.  Undiscussed conceptual model ideas are related to database management systems, object-oriented design, and computational science.The following sections provide background on conceptual modeling concepts and document efforts to clarify the perspectives within DMSO.  Most of these concepts are related to either domain-oriented conceptual models or design-oriented conceptual models.2. Perspectives on Conceptual ModelingA variety of perspectives about conceptual models have been promulgated in the simulation development community.  However, many of these views appear initially to conflict.Discussions of conceptual modeling must take into consideration historical perspectives on simulation practices.  A variety of papers and presentations have been authored dealing with the subject of conceptual modeling.  However, the simulation development community continues to be confused about what specific products need to be generated to prepare conceptual models for a particular simulation.Several groups have worked to mature the science of conceptual modeling and the related simulation development process.     The following sections describe well-documented and widely presented perspectives of conceptual modeling within the DoD simulation community.  2.1 Sargent PerspectiveDr. Robert Sargent, from the Syracuse University, was an early leader in recommending the use of conceptual models to support simulation VV&A.  Sargent’s concepts have evolved from his early writings, but his definition of conceptual modeling terms are interesting from a historical perspective.  Sargent describes the relationship of a problem entity (domain), conceptual model, and computerized model (Sargent, 1986) (Sargent, 1987).  Sargent focuses on validation of computerized models and simulations using conceptual models.Sargent’s view is that a conceptual model is a mathematical, logical, or verbal representation of a problem entity (domain) for a particular study.  He does not differentiate between problem domain and solution space representations in the conceptual model.Sargent has continued to update his perspective.  A representation of his current perspective was presented at a recent DMSO VV&A TWG.  Sargent’s has developed a diagram that depicts the use of system models that are developed from experiments with operational systems and results from simulation exercises.2.2 Davis PerspectivePaul Davis from RAND has documented issues with conceptual modeling as defined by Sargent and others (Davis, 1992).  Davis describes conceptual modeling as laying out the theories and algorithms formally to create implementation independent specifications.Davis recognizes the advantage of separating model design from detailed design.  However, he identifies potential problems with conceptual modeling.  He doubts that organizations can enforce design practices prior to coding.  He is concerned that new software development tools will blur the distinction between design and code.  Davis is not sure that reviewers need simpler views than code and associated diagrams.  He is also concerned that underspecified conceptual models will lead to coders defining more of the models than intended.2.3 Pace PerspectiveDr. Dale Pace, at Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, has written extensively on the subject of design-oriented conceptual modeling (Pace, 1999) (Pace, 2000a) (Pace, 2000b) (Pace, 2000c).  Pace describes the conceptual model as translating modeling requirements into a detailed design framework from which a system can be built.Pace describes conceptual models as consisting of Simulation Context and Simulation Concept components (see Figure 1).  The Simulation Context describes the domain.  The Simulation Concept is the developer’s perspective of how the simulation will be built, and includes Mission Space information and Simulation Space information.  The Mission Space information provides representation descriptions in terms of Simulation Elements that represent entities or processes.  The Simulation Space information describes control elements such as hardware and software.   Figure 2 was developed to show the decomposition of the Pace perspective on conceptual models.Pace is careful to distinguish between the high level needs statement or objectives for a system (he refers to them as "requirements") and the more detailed requirements (he refers to them as "specifications").He says the conceptual model identifies “what” is to be represented and “how” the representation will satisfy the requirements.  The detailed design framework explains “how” it is to be done.  This results in a functional definition of a system2.4 Verification, Validation, and Accreditation Recommended Practices GuideMuch of Dr. Pace’s work has evolved into the conceptual modeling sections of the DMSO VV&A RPG.  The RPG describes conceptual model development as a critical step between planning and design.  A diagram showing conceptual modeling with the simulation development process is presented as figure 3.The RPG describes conceptual model development as representing the real-world system with a computerized representation that defines the M&S behavior.  The RPG considers a simulation conceptual model as a way of translating the requirements into a detailed design framework, from which the software that will make up the simulation can be built.  It describes a simulation conceptual model as the collection of information that describes the simulation and its pieces.  That information consists of assumptions, algorithms, relationships (i.e., architecture), and data.  Taken together, these describe how the Developer understands what is to be represented by the simulation (e.g., entities, actions, tasks, processes, interactions) and how that representation will satisfy the requirements to which the simulation responds.  The RPG stresses the importance of verifying and then validating the conceptual model.  2.5 CMMS Technical FrameworkDMSO has championed the development of domain conceptual models for simulation development.The DMSO CMMS TF provides the technical standards, administrative procedures, and operational infrastructure required for conceptual model integration within simulation projects.  It includes a Common Semantics and Syntax (CSS) for describing the mission space, a process for developing and maintaining CMs, and a DIF for interchanging conceptual models. (CMMS, 1997) CMMS are “simulation-implementation-independent functional descriptions of the real world processes, entities, and environment associated with a particular set of missions.” (Sheehan, 1998)The DMSO website describes conceptual models as a primary component of CMMS.  It says that they are consistent representations of real-world military operations. The DMSO M&S glossary defines a conceptual model as a “statement of the content and internal representations which are the user’s and developer’s combined concept of the model. It includes logic and algorithms and explicitly recognizes assumptions and limitations”.  It defines a CMMS as “First abstractions of the real world that serve as a frame of reference for simulation development by capturing the basic information about important entities involved in any mission and their key actions and interactions. They are simulation-neutral views of those entities, actions, and interactions occurring in the real world.” (DMSO, 1998)CMMS was recently renamed to Functional Descriptions of the Mission Space (FDMS).  This change should reduce confusion with design-oriented conceptual models.Figure 1. Pace Simulation Conceptual Model Componentsg Figure 2. Aggregation Diagram of Pace Simulation Conceptual Models  Figure 3. M&S Development within VV&A RPG2.6 Johnson Perspective Thomas H. Johnson, with Innovative Management Concepts, has been involved with the DMSO FDMS (formerly CMMS) toolset.  He describes the development and reuse of Mission Space Models (MSM) within the CMMS toolset (Johnson, 1998).Johnson defines a MSM as representing the specification of a warfighter’s view of a real world operation that military simulations must reproduce to be considered credible.He says the CMMS should provide a common starting point for constructing M&S representations, and should capture the features of the problem space or subject domain.Johnson says the CMMS should denote the essential characteristics of a military mission and provide authoritatively defined conceptual boundaries relative to the perspective of the user.  He also suggests that the CMMS be developed so that it is a simulation-neutral view of the real-world, acting as a bridging function between the warfighter and the simulation developers.  Johnson says the CMMS will provide a common viewpoint and a vehicle for communication.2.7 YEROOS Perspective YEROOS (Yet another project on Evaluation and Research on Object-Oriented Strategies) is a research project focused on object-oriented conceptual modeling for complex application domains, and methods for analysis and design of information-system applications.YEROOS describes the activity of conceptual modeling as building an application domain in terms that are familiar to actors in the domain in the real world.YEROOS identifies possible uses for a conceptual model that are very similar to Johnson’s perspective.  The believe that conceptual models improve understanding, provide a precise vehicle for communication, specify the design and implementation phases, provide domain-oriented documentation, and structure a record of the abstraction process.2.8 Haddix PerspectiveDr. Furman Haddix, at the University of Texas Applied Research Laboratory, defines a set of related but separate conceptual models  (Haddix, 1998) (Haddix, 2000).  Haddix’s view depends on whether a federation or individual simulation (federate) is being developed.  Haddix states that the needs should be documented in a Conceptual Models of the User Space (CMUS) (requirements) that in turn provides scope, fidelity, and resolution constraints to CMMS (FDMS).Haddix distinguishes between the conceptual model, which he views as the ultimate definition of the requirements, and the conceptual design, which represents the initial descriptions of the system’s implementation.He believes that a fully articulated conceptual model should serve as the basis for VV&A.  A validated conceptual model would identify a system’s functionality.  The implementation could be verified against the validated conceptual model.Haddix has defined the relationships between several types of conceptual models (see Figure 4).  A taxonomical view of the models is presented in Figure 5.2.9 JSIMSPerhaps the largest set of domain-oriented conceptual models ever developed were for the Joint Simulation Systems (JSIMS) effort.  The JSIMS Conceptual Models of the Mission Space were developed by a team of development agents (Risner, 1999) (Porter, 2000).A large portion of the JCMMS was developed as part of the U.S. Army’s Warfighter Simulation 2000 (WARSIM) program.  The WARSIM effort described the products of their knowledge acquisition effort as conceptual models.  These conceptual models were used to populate the Army’s Functional Description of the Battlespace (FDB) to make the information available for reuse by other simulation programs.The WARSIM conceptual modeling process is documented in the WARSIM Knowledge Development Plan (Lacy, 1998).  This plan details the contents and format of each conceptual model product and the process for developing and validating these products.The WARSIM program documented the Army domain in their performance of knowledge acquisition, knowledge engineering, and algorithm development processes.   The resulting products include behavioral models, organizational models, equipment models, and algorithm descriptions (Sagan, 2000).  These domain-oriented models were used by simulation developers in defining the requirements and design of the WARSIM software.2.10 JWARSThe Joint Warfare System (JWARS) is a closed-form analytic model of joint warfare. It is designed to represent joint functions and processes and component warfare operations.The JWARS software development process did not include production of a formal documented conceptual model.  However, the V&V agent recognized the need for such a product in support of the JWARS V&V  process.  Therefore, the V&V agent developed a “constructed” conceptual model from the software development artifacts.  (Metz, 2000)The JWARS constructed conceptual model includes artifacts from the simulation development process.  The process phases of interest are between the user requirements gathering phase and the design phase. The artifacts included in the JWARS virtual conceptual model are the Joint Analysis Design Packages, the JWARS Conceptual Model of the Mission Space (CMMS), and the JWARS Algorithm descriptions.The Joint Analysis Design Packages (JADs) document derived requirements.  JADs were associated with JWARS threads/processes.  As part of describing JWARS functionality, these requirements provided details about entities, actions, tasks, and interactions that JWARS will represent.The JWARS Enterprise Model was used as the JWARS CMMS.    This enterprise view was used to describe US-led coalition forces in a Joint Task Force.  This view described the represented organizations and their interactions to developers.  The JWARS Enterprise Model / JWARS CMMS was represented using simple flow charts.  The JAD packages support the development of initial use cases in the Unified Modeling Language (UML).The JWARS Algorithms Descriptions identified each JWARS algorithm, along with some associated conditions, limitations, and assumptions.  The JWARS Office is now considering adopting a modified version of the JWARS User Manual documentation as a more formal JWARS Conceptual Model.2.11 FEDEPThe HLA FEDEP describes the development of a Federation Conceptual Model (FCM).  It decomposes the development of the Federation Conceptual Model into the development of a scenario, the performance of conceptual analysis, and the development of federation requirements.Figure 4. Haddix Relationship Between Conceptual ModelsFigure 5. Conceptual Modeling Taxonomy based on Haddix Discussion3. Clarifying the Varying PerspectiveVarious attempts have been made to clarify the different perspectives on conceptual modeling.  There has been confusion specifically between the CMMS and the FCM (Lewis, 1997).The DMSO meeting described earlier included discussions on terminology and the differentiation between FDMS and conceptual models.The overloading of the term “conceptual modeling” was discussed.  Participants eventually described two types of conceptual models – the domain-oriented Functional Descriptions of the Mission Space (FDMS) and the design-oriented Conceptual Models of Systems (CMoS).  The group viewed FDMS as providing detailed representations of the problem domain.  The FDMS is then used in requirements development.  Requirements are a critical element in the simulation development process and impact the conceptual modeling process (Might, 2000).  The CMoS is developed based on detailed requirements.  The CMoS is used in the design of the simulation.  Implementers use design artifacts to build a real world capability.Reuse is supported by domain-oriented conceptual models and design-oriented conceptual models.  Domain-oriented implementation independent conceptual models can serve as validated reusable representations.  Design-oriented conceptual models support reuse by providing development artifacts that can be reviewed by new system development efforts to determine a simulation’s components’ appropriateness for reuse.The FDMS and CMoS were viewed as key communication mechanisms between system developers and stakeholders to insure that the “right thing is built”.  In contrast, requirements, design, and implementation were viewed as artifacts used for communication by the system developers internally to “build it right."  The FDMS and CMoS were expected to influence VV&A practices with a shift in emphasis to validating the FDMS prior to VV&A of the CMoS.Many development efforts already employ these techniques implicitly.  It was agreed upon in the meeting that the simulation development community should formalize, structure, and retain FDMSs and CMoSs.A diagram was developed at the DMSO meeting that summarized the perspective of the attendees (figure 6).The meeting resulted in a candidate perspective that should be considered as the authoritative view of conceptual models for military simulations within the DMSO community, if not the larger military simulation community.4. SummaryConceptual modeling is an important step in the development of simulation systems.  A great deal of confusion has existed over specific conceptual modeling products and how conceptual modeling fits within the simulation development lifecycle.Key conceptual modeling issues that should be clarified include the definition of conceptual models, the purpose of conceptual models, where conceptual models fit into the simulation development lifecycle, and how conceptual models are developed.Many researchers and simulation practitioners have defined conceptual modeling perspectives that have been presented and published.  Most of the conceptual models described can be categorized as domain-oriented or design-oriented.A DMSO-sponsored meeting was held to resolve the confusion and to begin to develop a consensus view on conceptual modeling.  This meeting resulted in the definition of new, more precise terminology and a lifecycle diagram that reflected the new terms.This perspective was compared and contrasted to other documented views on conceptual modeling.  Figure 6. DMSO Meeting View5. ReferencesDavis, P. K. (1992) “Generalizing Concepts and Methods of Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) for Military Simulations," Paper R-4249-ACQ, RAND, Santa Monica, CA.DMSO (1997) “Conceptual Models of the Mission Space Technical Framework," USD/A&T-DMSO-CMMS-0002, revision 0.2.1, February 13, 1997.DMSO (1998) DoD Modeling and Simulation Glossary, DoD 5000.59-M, January 1998, http://www.dmso.mil/briefs/msdocs/policy/glossary.pdfDMSO (1999) High Level Architecture Federation Development and Execution Process (FEDEP) Model, Version 1.4, June 9, 1999.DMSO (2000) Verification, Validation, and Accreditation (VV&A) Recommended Practices Guide, http://www.msiac.dmso.mil/vva/FEDEPFirat, C. (2000) “Conceptual Modeling and Conceptual Analysis in HLA”, ," Paper 00F-SIW-157, Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Fall 2000Haddix, F., (1998) “Mission Space, Federation, and Other Conceptual Models” Paper 98S-SIW-162, Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Spring 1998.Haddix, F., (2000) “Conceptual Modeling," Presentation at Summer Computer Simulation Conference, July 2000.Johnson, Thomas H., “Mission Space Model Development, Reuse and the Conceptual Models of the Mission Space Toolset,” 98 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop Papers, March 1998, Volume 2, pp. 893-900.Lacy, L. (1997) "Conceptual Modeling for WARSIM 2000", Proceedings of the Interservice/Industry Training Systems and Education Conference, (I/ITSEC '97), Orlando, Florida, December 1-4, 1997.Lewis, R. O., Coe, G. Q., (1997) “A Comparison Between the CMMS and the Conceptual Model of the Federation” Paper 97F-SIW-162, Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Fall 1997.Metz, M. L. (2000) “Comparing the Joint Warfare System (JWARS) Conceptual Model to a Conceptual Model Standard," Paper 00F-SIW-129, Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Fall 2000.Might, R. J. (2000), “Developing Requirements for Analytical Models and Simulations," Paper 00F-SIW-130, Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Fall 2000.Pace, D. (1999) “Conceptual Model Descriptions”, Paper 99S-SIW-025, Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Spring 1999.Pace, D. (2000a) “Simulation Conceptual Model Development", Paper 00S-SIW-033,  Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Spring 2000.Pace, D. (2000b) “Simulation Conceptual Model Issues", Proceedings of the Summer Computer Simulation Conference, July 2000.Pace, D. (2000c) “Simulation Conceptual Model Development Issues and Implications for Reuse of Simulation Components", Paper 00F-SIW-019, Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Fall 2000.Porter, K. (2000) “JCMMS: Domain Knowledge for Developing Military Models”, ," Paper 00F-SIW-122, Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Fall 2000Risner, S.  (1998) " Conceptual Modeling in the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS)",  Proceedings of the 1998 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, http://www.sisostds.org/siw/98fall/view-papers.htm, September, 1998.Sagan, D. (2000), “Conceptual Modeling Lessons Learned from WARSIM 2000," Paper 00S-SIW-052, Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Spring 2000.Sargent, R. G. (1986) “An Exploration of Possibilities for Expert Aids in Model Validation," Modeling and Simulation Methodology in the Artificial Intelligence Era, Elzas, Oren and Zeigler (Editors).Sargent, R. G. (1987) “An Overview of Verification and Validation of Simulation Models," Proceedings of the 1987 Winter Simulation Conference.Sheehan, J. et al (1998) “Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS):  Basic Concepts, Advanced Techniques, and Pragmatic Examples," Paper 98S-SIW-127, Proceedings of the Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Spring 1998.YEROOS (2001) on-line:   http://yeroos.qant.ucl.ac.be/dummies/concmod.htmlAuthor BiographiesLEE LACY is Director of Orlando Operations for Dynamics Research Corporation.  He has worked on major simulation programs including WARSIM 2000 and the Close Combat Tactical Trainer (CCTT).  He serves on the Board of Directors of the National Center for Simulation.  He is currently the Principal Investigator on the described effort.  His research areas include XML and Computer Generated Forces.  He received an M.S. and B.S in Computer Science from the University of Central Florida.Wayne Randolph is a Staff Analyst and the Network Administrator for the Orlando Operations of Dynamics Research Corporation.  He has worked on numerous projects for the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) , to include the Data Dictionary and the Knowledge Acquisition Tool for Conceptual Modeling.  He has an extensive background in military operations, planning, training and the military logistic system, based on a career in the Army as an Army Aviator.  He recently received a M.S. in Computer Information Systems University of Phoenix and also has a M.S. in  Education from Kansas State University.MR. BRUCE HARRIS is the Director of the Training and Performance Analysis Department for the Dynamics Research Corporation. He is also the Program Manager for Data Engineering projects with the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO). He has an extensive background in operations, planning, training and education, based on a career in the Army; and provides an operator’s perspective in the management of numerous modeling and simulation projects with DMSO. Mr. Harris is a graduate of Hofstra University in Political Science. He earned a Masters Degree from Seton Hall University in History and Education, as well as diplomas in National Security Strategy from both the U.S. Army War College and the National War College, where he later served as the Chief of Staff, Army Chair and head of the Military Strategy and Operations Department.Simone Youngblood leads the VV&A program in the Warfighter division of the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office.Jack Sheehan is the Data/FDBM Enterprise Division Manager at the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office.ROBERT J. MIGHT, Ph.D., has accumulated over 18 years of experience in modeling and simulation of military operations through his research, his planning and development of models and simulations, and his teaching.  He has conducted extensive research in military modeling and simulation, particularly for representation of command and control for the Air Force, Army, and the Office of the Secretary of Defense.  As a full-time faculty member at George Mason University, he taught modeling, simulation, wargaming, and systems engineering courses at the graduate-level, and he managed interactive wargames and simulations to support the curriculum at the National Defense University Gaming and Simulation Center.  He has been involved in the planning and development of large-scale theater-level models and simulations.  He has been instrumental in emphasizing the need for reusable representation requirements for models and simulations, and has played a key role in the development of the Conceptual Models of the Mission Space (CMMS) at the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office.  He is currently president of Innovative Management Concepts, Inc., a systems engineering and information technology firm in northern Virginia.MICHAEL METZ, Technical Director of the Joint Warfare System (JWARS) Verification and Validation Program at Innovative Management Concepts, Inc., is a specialist in the design, development, verification, validation, and accreditation of simulations.  He has been involved in the development of the RAND Strategy Assessment System, the Joint Resource Allocation Model, the Naval War College Air Model, JWARS, and TASCFORM.  He is a member of the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office’s Verification, Validation and Accreditation (VV&A) Technical Working Group and its VV&A Technical Support Team.  PAGE  1PAGE  1