JWARS Communications ModelingJames W. Jones, Jr., Ph.D.CACI, Inc.1600 Wilson BlvdSuite 1300Arlington, VA 22209703-696-9490, 703-558-0276jwjones@hq.caci.comKeywords:Communications, networks, perception, warfare, military, latency, object oriented, modeling, simulationAbstract:  JWARS is a closed-form (no operator intervention) analytic simulation of joint theater warfare that will eventually replace such models as TACWAR and MIDAS. Since JWARS potentially will be used well into the twenty-first century, it needs to allow the representation of yet unknown systems and capabilities. A flexible, data-driven communications modeling approach was devised to provide a framework to realistically model virtually any kind of communications systems of the future. It supports any number of networks, any connectivity, and each network has its own performance characteristics. It also allows the user to define the background message traffic load for each network, and the load varies with activity phases of the war. It allows analysts and planners to investigate the effects of communications enhancements or degradation on the outcome of a campaign.IntroductionThe Joint Warfare System, JWARS, is an analytic simulation development effort of OSD/PA&E. Its purpose is to develop a balanced joint-force model of theater warfare that can be used for several purposes: force assessment, planning and execution, system effectiveness and trade-off analysis, concept and doctrine development and assessment. Users will include the Joint Staff, the military services, military commanders in chief (CINCs), the Office of Secretary of Defense, and other Department of Defense organizations.A list of some of the stated requirements (see reference [1]) for JWARS is as follows:Balanced representation of joint military operationsRepresentation of Red, Blue, Neutral, Coalitions (forces can change “sides”)Strategic mobility and intra-theater logistics effectsWarfare operations – Air, space, land, maritimeCommand, control, communications, computer, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (C4ISR)Perception-based – not ground truthUse synthetic natural environmentSpeed of execution: 1000 faster than realtime – 1 day of war in 1.44 minutesConform to Technical Architecture for Information Modeling (TAFIM) architecture, and High Level Architecture (HLA) compliantOne of the main distinctions of JWARS is that it makes decisions based on perception rather than ground truth. Its sensor models report through simulated communications networks what they perceive to be locations and features of targets, taking into consideration realistic system characteristics. The communications path can delay or potentially fail to deliver the reports, thereby further affecting perception. Since assessment of enemy intentions, command and control decisions, target locations for firing decisions, and the like are based on perception, resulting actions (or inactions) can potentially change the outcome of a battle. Other things like adjudication and attrition accounting, and movement are based on ground truth.JWARS Model HighlightsThe stated requirements mentioned above give rise to a number of derived requirements that drive the development of JWARS. Some of major highlights of the JWARS modeling approach are summarized below. Battlespace EntitiesJWARS has defined a generic software representation of military objects called a Battlespace Entity (BSE) [2] that contain a standard set of classes, attributes, resources and behaviors that can be specialized to create specific types of equipment, systems or organizational units. Specifically, a BSE has: A command and control element (C2, the BSEs thinking component), a platform (for physical location, movement and presence), resources (such as guns, personnel, ammunition), sensors (such as eyeballs, SIGINT, radar), signatures that are detectable, and a communications manager for communicating with other BSEs. Examples of BSEs include, the Joint Task Force (JTF) Headquarters, a Tank Battalion, an Air Control Unit, and an Aegis Cruiser.All communications are initiated by the C2 element of a BSE. The C2 can send and receive communications messages through its Communications Manager (CM).Organization Units AggregationTypically, aggregation of organizational units is kept as high as possible (for better simulation speed) but still support determination of required measures of effectiveness. Some examples are as follows:Joint forces – Joint Task Force (JTF)/Joint Force Air Component Commander (JFACC)/Joint Force Land Component Commander (JFLCC)/Joint Force Maritime Component Commander (JFMCC)Ground forces - Corps/Division/Brigade/BattalionAir forces - Air Operations Center/Wing/Squadron/Flight group/Air Mission ElementNaval forces - Task Force/Task Group/Task Unit/Task ElementEffects ModelingBecause of the 1000 to 1 performance requirement, JWARS models the effects, not the detailed behavior of its systems, weapons and many factors and activities, including C2, sensors, communications, and the environment. It does not model the details of those factors, but rather the aggregate effects. For example, JWARS does not model air-to-air engagements of one aircraft against one aircraft, but instead models the outcome of many-on-many engagements of specific combinations of aircraft and weapons in flight groups.C4ISRC2 (orders generation and situation assessment) in JWARS is dynamic and closed-loop. That is, C2 is not scripted, but is based upon dynamic decision logic that uses information created from within the model.PerceptionPerception is what or where one thinks something is, and it may or may not agree with truth. A commander’s situation map shows what he perceives to be the location of friend and foe, and the composition and intent of enemy forces. The equivalent of a situation map (SITMAP) or common operational picture (COP) is modeled in JWARS. C2 decisions are based on that perception-based picture. C2, sensors and communications are major contributors to the perception model in JWARS. Enemy information typically comes from intelligence, surveillance, or reconnaissance (ISR). Friendly information may come from situation reports (SITREPs).ISR contribution to perception. A major component of perception is the result of reports received from ISR assets and tactical sensors such as air-to-air radar, for example. This obviously highlights the importance of modeling sensors to reflect real-world limitations of their accuracy and ability to “see” and extract information from their intended targets.Sensor systems effects on perception. Sensors are modeled as systems, not necessarily as individual components or stages of a system, and the “final” output is reported, not intermediate products such as video. These reports are inputs to correlation and fusion algorithms that contribute to the SITMAP/COP.Communications effect on perception. Communications affects perception by causing ISR reports on enemy forces and SITREPs on friendly forces to be delayed or not delivered and thereby report stale positions.Course of Action EstimationIn JWARS, commander’s estimates of an enemy’s planned course of action is performed by the thinking component of command and control.Adjudication and AttritionIn JWARS, when opposing forces meet, and if rules of engagement dictate, they enter into combat. JWARS has adapted well-known attrition algorithms [3] that perform all types of adjudication including air-to-air, ground-to-ground, surface-to-surface, air-to-ground, and so forth.Other Effects of CommunicationsThere are other things that communications delays affect. For example, delays of orders to warfighting components can potentially cause shooters to fire at targets that have moved. Delays in requests for resupply can cause a unit to lose battle effectiveness.Communications Modeling ApproachModeling the details of the myriad of military communications systems is a daunting task from many technical aspects: media, topology, routing, flow control, performance characteristics, connectivity, bit error rates, etc. The task of finding and populating the model with reasonable and realistic detailed data is a substantial task in itself.The level of detail of the JWARS communications model has to be consistent with the rest of the model. Detailed communications models such as the Joint Staff/J-8 NETWARS and the DISA/D8 CAM model are too detailed for JWARS. NETWARS, for example, models all messages, including hand-held radio conversations, not just important messages. It basically is a bottom-up approach to communications modeling. Those models are more suitable for detailed analysis of specific communications systems. JWARS is investigating the use of those models as data sources.Derived RequirementsA summary of some of the communications model requirements helps to show how the model was developed.Provide modeling framework for all units (BSEs) in JWARS. Must support potentially hundreds of different military communications systems from the Joint Task Force level all the way down to the battalions, flight groups, and surface-action groups. Each service has significantly different communications systems. The number of BSEs in JWARS is typically in the low thousands.Model must be data-driven. Performance characteristics, background traffic and connectivity must be setup through data.Provide the ability to change communications traffic and latency through data. It is well known that combat situations can change communications traffic significantly and JWARS should be sensitive to that.Support multiple media and modes. Includes UHF, VHF, EHF VLF, Satellite, troposcatter, mobile subscriber equipment (MSE), landline, broadcast, multicast, singlecast, point-to-point, local area and wide area networks, voice and data.Accommodate wide variety of network architectures. Any BSE can connect to any number of networks, allowing the user to setup any configuration of networks, whether flat or vertical structures.Model external effects such as physical damage, environment, terrain, electronic warfare (EW), movement.Important MessagesSince it is intended to evaluate force-level factors in a campaign, JWARS only explicitly simulates important messages. All other messages are considered background traffic and are implicitly represented as explained in section 3.5.Important messages to JWARS are those that may cause a state change or may change a decision. This includes the following general categories:OrdersSituation reportsSensor reportsLogistics requestsFire support requestsTarget cueingOverview of Communications in JWARSThe data required as input to JWARS specifies:List of NetworksNetwork parameters such as speed of each networkNode parameters (by network) such as speed of the nodesMessage loading for each networkConnectivity of BSEs (nodes) to networksFigure 1 illustrates by example how messages are transmitted in JWARS. In this figure, BSE 1 is the sender, and BSE 2 and BSE 3 are the recipients. The C2 of BSE 1 initiates a transmission by passing a message to its Communications Manager (CM). The CM and the Communication Architecture (CA) are the main components of the communications modeling approach. There is an instance of the CM for each BSE (although not all BSEs communicate, they have the facility available), but, in effect, there is only a single CA. The primary function of the CM is to hand over the message to the CA to find the network to use, compute the time delay for the message, and deliver the message to the recipients after the computed time delay.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1.  	Example of a message being sent from one BSE to two BSEs through the Communications Architecture.  The C2 of BSE tells its CM to transfer the message “Msg” to BSE 2 and BSE 3. The CA determines what networks to use, computes the message delay for each, and schedules the message for delivery after T2 and T3 respectively.When the sending C2 has a message to send, it passes the following information to its CM:Message Type (ATO, SITREP, etc.)Message Content (the message)Content Type (Data or Voice)List of Recipients (one or more BSEs)The CM does not have to specify the network. The CM hands the message to the Communications Architecture (CA), which then finds the highest priority network common to BSE 1 and BSE 2, computes the time delay, and schedules the delivery of the message. It repeats the same actions for BSE 1 and BSE 3. When the time for the delivery occurs, the CA determines if there are any external events or conditions extant that could possibly delay or deny delivery (for example, jamming or weather effects). If for example, an event causes the message to be further delayed, the CA would schedule another event to deliver the message at a later time to that BSE.Clouds and Logical NetworksIn order to meet the stated and derived requirements JWARS chose a communications network-modeling context referred to as a “cloud.” A cloud is a commonly used technique that allows one to model a network without having to represent all of the details of message transmission such as protocols, intermediate nodes, relays, and the like. The cloud contains performance behavior and connectivity that can be applied to virtually any kind of network at an effects level. Nodes that send and receive messages are connected (specified in input data) to the cloud and the cloud provides delivery services. Nodes send messages to the cloud, which then delivers them to connected node addressees. A node can connect and disconnect from the cloud dynamically. The cloud does not have a specific physical topology or physical location.In JWARS, clouds are referred to as logical networks (as distinguished from physical networks). Each logical network (also referred to herein as simply a network) is assigned performance properties including throughput and speed of service. The networks perform services for the user demand as discussed in the previous section. Figure 2 illustrates the notion of clouds with BSEs connected as nodes.Demand and ServiceOne of the underlying modeling notions of the JWARS communications model is that of demand and service: Communications traffic load is a demand from users; in the case of JWARS, users are the BSEs. BSEs in JWARS explicitly communicate “important” messages only. Background traffic is not communicated explicitly. Therefore, communications demand or load in JWARS is not affected by explicit messages but is a function of state variables that indicate what is going on in the simulated war.The network simply provides a service; it has no knowledge of what it is delivering. It has a maximum message handling capacity or bit transfer rate. The network has a finite queue that causes messages to be delayed; queuing delay can grow rapidly as message load increases.Data networks. For data networks, demand is in terms of messages per hour (or bits per second). The network can service data messages at some rate with some time delay (queuing delay). The length of a data message results in additional delay (transmission delay).Switched voice networks. For switched voice circuits, demand is in terms of calls per hour. The switched network can service calls with some probability of blocking. A blocked call results in a time delay (also referred to as a queuing delay). The length of the call causes additional delay (transmission delay).Connection MatrixA connection matrix defines the connectivity of nodes to networks through data. For JWARS purposes, any BSE connected to the same network can communicate with each other. BSEs that don’t have a common network cannot directly communicate.An example is shown in Table 1. As can be seen from the table, each BSE can have multiple networks and each network has a priority. Table  SEQ Table \* ARABIC 1.  Example Connection Matrix illustrating connections and priorities.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 2.  Users create communications traffic load, or Demand, and Networks, or Clouds, provide Service.Communications Traffic Load (Demand)Communications Traffic Load varies as a function of operational phase, combat posture and time of day. For example, Air Tasking Orders (ATOs) are transmitted every 24 hours, at approximately the same time each day. A ground brigade that is in attacking or defending will typically generate more communications traffic than a unit in an assembly posture.Input data for each network describes communications traffic volume (load) as a function of phase of the war, combat posture of the communicating units, and time of day. For each message presented to the network, the Communications Load is looked up in the table. In order to provide additional realism, the output of the Communications Load block in Figure 3 is randomized by multiplying it by a random number with mean 1.0 and (for example) standard deviation 0.1. The result is the Presented Load.Queuing Delay (Service)The Presented Load represents the current load or demand on the network. The queuing time-delay for this load is determined by the Queuing Delay block, sometimes referred to as Speed of Service. The output of that block is the queuing delay for the presented message.Input data describes Queuing Delay block as a function of load. This data is input as a series of straight-line segments that are interpolated to get the corresponding time delay.Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 3.	Communication Latency is calculated by the Communications Architecture for each message. Each network has its own performance data values.  This example is for a data network. A voice (switched) network is similar but with different units. This block diagram illustrates the calculation of queuing delay, Tqueue .Message LatencyA message presented any network is subjected to a time delay. Total time delay for a message can be written as:Ttotal = Tprep + Tqueue + Txmit + TrecvTqueue is the queuing delay calculated as shown in Fig. 3Tprep represents message preparation time at the transmit end and Trecv is the receive time. These are accounted for by the C2 of the respective BSEs.Txmit = throughput * message_length In general, each network has its own latency or time delay. Figure 3 illustrates how the queuing delay is computed.External EffectsA number of external factors affect communications depending on the media, frequency band, modulation scheme, and many other properties of the system.Physical damage (requires time to repair)Environment (weather, sun spots)Electronic warfare (EW)Terrain (line of sight)Moving (tear down, setup)Two effects are generally available: reduced communications load capacity and activation/ deactivation. Activation/deactivation can be used to disable communications of a node (BSE) or the entire network. When a node is disabled, that cannot transmit or receive messages. If a BSE tries to send a message to a deactivated BSE, the sending BSE is notified. For example, a ground unit with a satellite antenna or a tall mast has to tear down their communications, move and then setup again. During that time, the node BSE would be deactivated. Tear-down and setup times are user input.In another example, the actual effect of communications jamming may be to garble or deny receipt of a message, but the secondary and important effect for JWARS is that the message is delayed or denied completely. Generally speaking, BSEs with a specific location are susceptible to jamming. The network per se does not have a location so it doesn’t make sense to jam the network. If a unit is jammed, the model reduces capacity of the network with respect to the jammed unit only. As shown in Figure 3, the capacity could be reduced from normal (Hi), to medium (Med) or low (Lo). As can be seen from Figure 3, for a given value of Presented Load, reducing capacity increases time delay.Physical damage could either reduce capacity (e.g., damaged antenna) or deactivate (e.g., destroyed antenna communications equipment). Mean time to repair (MTTR) is user input and is used to schedule restoration to full capacity or reactivation.ConclusionJWARS has developed a data driven communications model that is suitable for theater-level campaign modeling. Network performance is input as a series of straight-line segments and therefore is general enough to accommodate yet unknown networks. Communications traffic load for each network is a function of phase, posture and time of day. It also is randomized to provide additional realism.The JWARS Communications Model is being implemented in stages. The initial stage designed as a single network with a constant time delay was implemented in the Fall of 1997. In the Fall of 1998, a major upgrade based on the approach outlined in this paper was implemented. It has been tested and is in the “Alpha” release of JWARS. Some of the features discussed in this paper will be completed prior to Release 1.0 of JWARS. Research is yet to be completed for some of the features such as how to characterize the degradation due to weather, jamming and damage depend on obtaining credible data. Benefits of the approach:Developers of the functional behavior of the warfare elements do not need to know anything about its network(s) performance, or (2) connectivity.Network and node speed and other performance characteristics are provided in input data.Network connectivity is provided in input data.A sound framework has been established for modeling the diverse military communications systems in a campaign model. The cloud concept means that the specific topologies do not have to be determined to run the model, which reduces the time required to explore other facets of a theater warfare scenario. When specific networks are known, external models can be used to develop data to support the JWARS model. Using the cloud concept, only the behavior from the node’s point of view is important. It supports complex networks such as the SIPRNET and NIPRNET, while at the same time supporting non-network broadcast VHF systems or landlines, voice, data communications, connection-oriented or non-connection-oriented protocols, or even low-latency networks such as Link-16.Jamming and other external effects can affect message delay. Finding data to represent these effects is an ongoing challenge.JWARS is currently attempting to obtain data to characterize the effects of physical damage, weather and jamming.References[1]	Operational Requirements Document (ORD), Joint Staff, 27 August 1998[2]	JWARS Problem Domain High-Level Design, JWARS Project Office, Version 1.5, 25 September 1998[3]	JWARS Alpha User Manual, Vol. II, Analyst Supplement, 15 January 1999, JWARS Project OfficeAcknowledgementsThe author wishes to acknowledge Mr. Greg Hawk/ GRCI for the detailed design and implementation of the initial stage of the communications model, and detailed design of later enhancements. For their support in reviewing the high- level design documents and this paper and participation in seemingly uncountable meetings refining the modeling approach, thanks to LTC Dan Maxwell, US Army, LTC Martin Allen, US Air Force. And finally to Dr Jim Metzger/OSDPA&E, JWARS Project Director for his patience with us in finally producing a sound, working, supportable model.About the AuthorJAMES W. JONES, JR is the Systems Engineering and Software Integration Lead for JWARS. Jim is an employee of CACI, Inc., a software and systems integration company headquartered in Arlington, VA. Jim has worked in systems engineering, simulation and modeling, and software development for over 25 years. He has worked for the federal government and contractors and has consulted with several communications companies. Jim has a PhD in Electrical Engineering from Auburn University.Delay CalculationFor VHF Net A, Calculate T2For Sat Net, Calculate T3Msg to BSE 2 & 3Receive MessageReceive MessageInitiate MessageDelivered at T2via VHF NetDelivered at T3via Sat Net ACMC2BSE 3CMC2BSE 2BSE – Network / PriorityBSE 1 – Sat Net A / 1BSE 1 – UHF Net / 2BSE 1 – MSE Net / 3BSE 1 – VHF Net / 4BSE 2 – Sat Net B / 1BSE 2 – VHF Net / 2BSE 3 – Sat Net A / 1BSE 3 – VHF Net / 2 Communications Architecture (CA)Assigns global message sequence numberHolds List of Networks by BSE and PriorityFinds Recipients in list and chooses NetworkComputes Time Delay for NetworkSchedules delivery to RecipientRepeats for each RecipientCMUser 1User 2User 3User 4User 5User 6Service(Network Performance)ConnectionsVHF NetUHF NetMSE NetComms LoadBackground Message Load (different for each network)C2Network Data Load(Msgs/hr)Demand(Communication Traffic)Time of DayMultiply by Random NumberOperational Phase  Prehost  (Crisis Response)Lodgement (SLOC Operations)Lodgement (Halting)Lodgement (Buildup)Decisive Combat (Counterattack)Follow-Through (Peace Enforcement)Posthostilities (Peacekeeping)PostureAssembleMoveAttackDefendWithdrawOPPOperational Phaseand PostureOperational Phase and Posture by Quarter of DayNetwork (e.g., Command, Intell., Mobility)Network Data Load(Msgs/hr)Time Delay(min.)Adjust Max Capacity for Degrade Factor(weather, damage, etc.)DegradeFactor Hi  Med LoMax. LoadCapacityAverageNetwork Data LoadQueuing LatencyComm System Latency(due to network queueing)Presented LoadBSE 1Time Delay Tqueue(minutes)SERVICEDEMANDSat Net A EMBED Excel.Sheet.8  