The Treatment of Logistics in the Joint Warfare System (JWARS)C. Parks SchaeferGRC International1900 Gallows RoadVienna, VA 22182703-696-9490 HYPERLINK mailto:pschaefer@grci.com pschaefer@grci.com,  HYPERLINK mailto:Charles.Schaefer@osd.pentagon.mil Charles.Schaefer@osd.pentagon.milABSTRACT: The JWARS logistics implementation consists of three principal constructs: a transportation system, a consumption mechanism and a sustainment planner mechanism.  Each combat force or side employs those constructs, though each construct only accesses data appropriate to its side.Only the blue side uses a strategic transportation system.  The strategic system consists of the aircraft and ships, the ports-of-embarkation, enroute ports, ports-of-debarkation and the route structure for air and sea routes.  Strategic arrivals at ports-of-debarkation become movement requirements within the theater system.Each independent side uses a theater transportation system.  Allied combat forces may use one transportation system.  Each theater transportation system is comprised of the transportation order of battle (OOB), the multi-modal infrastructure and a theater supply and transportation controller entity.  Consumption of fuel, munitions and bulk resupply occurs at all entity levels.  Several consumption mechanisms are used.  Population-based rates for bulk resupply, e.g., pounds per man per day, are aggregated up through the operational chain and passed to the supply controller.  Equipment-based rates, e.g., fuel usage per day and munitions expenditure over time, are similarly treated.  These rates are also affected by an activity state.   Activity states change the rates with respect to what the entity is doing.  For example, higher consumption rates for attack/defense and lower rates for movement.  Consumption mechanisms are used to decrease commodity inventories.Sustainment planning provides the data necessary replenish the commodity inventories.  The sustainment planner establishes a consumption plan and forwards that plan to the next level.  The highest level plans are acted upon by the theater supply and transportation controller and resolved as movement requirements based upon the availability of commodity inventories.  If blue force theater inventories are at or below user-validated thresholds, requests are made to the strategic system for additional resupply.  Red forces have only theater inventories.JWARS logistics is based on functionality and representation of real-world interactions.  Actual consumption drives sustainment planning.  Sustainment planning yields movement requirements for transportation.  Transportation provides commodities for consumption.IntroductionThe Joint Warfare System (JWARS) is an object-oriented, closed-form simulation of joint campaign-level warfare.  The Department of Defense (DoD) and the several unified commands will use JWARS for analytical support of joint theater warfare analyses.  These analyses will be used to support force assessment, deliberate and crisis action planning, system effectiveness and trade-off analysis and concept and doctrine development and analysis.The Office of the Director, Program Analysis & Evaluation (OD PA&E) of the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) and the Joint Chief of Staff/J8 co-sponsor the development effort.  A team of contractors was selected to develop the simulation to replace the legacy models TACWAR and MIDAS at Full Operational Capability (FOC).Currently, JWARS is approaching the first functional release of the simulation—Release 1.0—and will undergo operational test and evaluation after Release 1.2 beginning in June 2000.This paper examines the implementation of particular elements of traditional logistics systems within the JWARS simulation.  A general description of logistics would typically involve multiple commodity supply operations—retail and wholesale, multi-modal global and theater transportation systems and equipment repair and maintenance operations.  At the present stage of development of the JWARS simulation all of these elements are not yet available.  This paper examines those elements available in the simulation today and those elements that will become available by Release 1.2.The elements examined include a bi-modal global transportation system for Blue Force deployment operations, a multi-modal theater transportation system, a consumption mechanism and finally, a sustainment planner.2.  Logistics Implementation in JWARS2.1 Transportation systemsJWARS includes fully functional representations of a global bi-modal transportation system for deployment and sustainment operations and a multi-modal theater transportation system for theater operations.  Additionally, the enemy (Red Force) has a separate representation of theater transportation using the same underlying network structure for logistics dependencies.The global transportation system is derived from the Model for Intertheater Deployment by Air and Sea (MIDAS) and uses a modified Time-Phased Force Deployment Data (TPFDD) from the Joint Planning and Execution System (JOPES) as its basic initial input.The multi-modal theater transportation systems for both Red and Blue Forces use a road network representation that is derived from the Compact Terrain Database (CTDB) developed for the Synthetic Theater of War (STOW) program.  The derived network has several levels of resolution and represents vehicle capability using several classes and configurations.  The Application Program Interface (API) provided by the US Army Corp of Engineers Engineer Research and Development Center (ERDC) also accounts for degradation of the arc capacity due to vehicle passage and environmental effects as well as changing networks capacities caused by battle effects.Today, the representation within JWARS is limited to only road networks.  Release 1.2 of the simulation will have user-validated default mechanisms for inputting air, waterway and rail networks.  Fuel pipelines are specified within the JWARS design, however, the implementation has not been fully developed and may not be available for Release 1.2.2.2 Consumption mechanismJWARS is a theater campaign simulation.  As such, combat unit performance is a key factor.  Within JWARS, units will be able to have defined capabilities enhanced or degraded by the presence or absence of key resource items.Military units consume supplies: fuel, ammunition and other commodities.  JWARS battlespace entities (BSEs) are dependent upon the explicit possession of sufficient stores of fuel, munitions and other commodities to generate capability.  Battlespace entities include organizations, units, and systems that have presence and capability in a military scenario.  Additionally, for many BSEs a change in activity state will predicate a change in consumption factors that, in turn affects the inventory of commodities held by the BSE.  This dependence upon an explicit level of resourcing within a BSE is a unique feature of JWARS.  Today however, full development and representation of this design is not yet realized.  Some BSEs have explicit consumption methods already embedded within the BSE functionality, most do not.  This specific development is underway as of the writing of this paper and should be tested and installed by Release 1.2.2.3 Sustainment plannerSustainment is described in JCS Publication 1-02 as the provision of personnel, logistic and other support required to maintain prolonged operations.  Sustainment is closely related to the consumption mechanisms discussed above.  The sustainment planner is a command and control function that provides a timely generation of resupply demands to the appropriate higher echelon within the force structure.  For example, when forces are in the defense sustainment requirements can run heavy for consumable supplies (dry bulk) and light on fuel and munitions.  When that activity state changes to attack, it is reasonable to plan for increased fuel and ammunition consumption.  The sustainment planner’s task is to capture and anticipate that change in activity state and increase the demand for appropriate commodity deliveries in advance of the consumption period.  Extending this concept through the theater and back to the continental US (CONUS) for Blue forces, provides the analyst a mechanism to better understand the theater’s demand profile and consequently the Nation’s capacity to support the projected campaign.3.  Strategic Transportation System Blue forces are capable of deployment operations from the CONUS as well as dozens of locations throughout the world.  The JWARS representation of the strategic deployment system closely resembles the implementation of deployment operations found in the legacy model MIDAS (Model for Intertheater Deployment by Air and Sea).  In JWARS, the deployment scheduler is a separate programming module within the simulation.  The deployment scheduler processes movement requirements for delivery to the theater area of operations (AO) by airlift and sealift.Currently, movement requirements are derived from a Joint Operations Planning and Executions System (JOPES) Level 3 TPFDD format.  The initial data is modified during the preparation and initialization of the simulation to add several dozen additional data fields of particular interest to the deployment scheduler.  These additional data fields are derived from Tables of Organization and Equipment (TOE), Standard Reference Files (SRF) and Type Unit Characteristics files (TUCHA).  Today, JWARS developers do most of this data modification by hand, however by Release 1.2 this data modification should be done automatically by software tools developed by the JWARS Program Office.  The added fields include data representations of the transportation characteristics of the equipment and commodities included within a particular movement requirement.  This additional detail allows the transportation functions within the simulation to access the appropriate characterization of a unit for a particular move or move segment.  Also, the added fields provide a “mapping” of the actual equipment described in a unit’s TOE and the equipment explicitly modeled within JWARS.The object-oriented design of the JWARS simulation is particularly useful.  At the software implementation level, a specific BSE may be required by the campaign plan to move from one location to another.  This movement requirement can be handled by either the deployment scheduler if global transportation is required, or by the theater scheduler if movement within the AO is required.  Under either circumstance, the object-oriented design allows the requirement to hold its own characteristics and respond to a particular mode selection with the appropriate data.Extending this concept to any movement requirement allows the scheduling mechanisms to handle each requirement as a separate object.  As the program becomes more refined and more efficient, it is possible that requirements will ‘schedule’ themselves.  This means that the separate movement requirement objects can hold enough information about themselves to efficiently schedule—set an appropriate event—within the simulation to accomplish the campaign plan requirements.Within the deployment scheduler, movement requirements are queued according to the Required Delivery Date (RDD) which is a function of the theater campaign plan.  Using an association of requirement origins to ports-of-embarkation (POEs) and an algorithm to resolve port-of-debarkation (POD) to destination travel times for movement requirement origin-destination pairs, the deployment scheduler uses minimum route distance tables to evaluate the performance of the airlift and sealift system for the same requirement.If a requirement can be delivered to its destination by its RDD using sealift, that is the preferred mode and is established for that movement.  If however, sealift cannot meet the RDD limitation, then airlift is evaluated for suitability.  If available airlift resources can meet the movement constraints of the RDD then airlift becomes the assigned mode of transport.  If the movement requirement cannot be satisfied by either airlift or sealift within the RDD specification the movement requirement is scheduled on the mode that most closely meets the RDD constraint within bounds established by the JWARS user.Significant numbers of movement requirements that cannot be scheduled to successfully meet the RDDs may perturb the flow of forces into the AO at a sufficient level to cause the theater commander-in-chief to evaluate the campaign plan.  This feature, whereby an analyst can use the simulation to directly describe to the planner how the flow of forces into a theater AO might affect a proposed campaign plan support deliberate planning, course of action evaluations and force sufficiency assessments.3.1 Strategic transportation assets Within the global transportation system only two type of transportation assets are considered.  Aircraft of several distinct models and designs comprise the airlift fleet and an explicitly described array of ships comprise the sealift fleet.Transportation asset characteristics are input through a Human Computer Interface (HCI) specifically designed to accommodate the data requirements and decisions necessary to initialize the fleets.  For example, the airlift fleet consists of military and civilian design aircraft.  Only in a perfect world would all aircraft ever be available at the start point of the analysis so the JWARS designers have accounted for a “growth curve” of availability.  For example, some aircraft will be immediately available; most will “phase in” over the early period of the simulation.  Some assets may not become available unless certain conditions are met or changed as a result of events within the simulation.  The HCIs allow the user to establish the essential pattern of fleet availability for both airlift and sealift fleets.3.2 Transportation infrastructure The transportation infrastructure is reasonably well understood and is not likely to change drastically over the projected period of any particular JWARS simulation experiment.  Comprehensive databases in use for many years currently provide the information about ports, conditions and constraints.  Since JWARS is to be used for future force assessments, it is critical that the JWARS user is able to modify today’s infrastructure as well as create infrastructure and conditions that we may not have explicit data on.  This data validation and modification has necessitated the development of another user interface for ports and installations.  Under design development as this paper is being written and on schedule to be fully integrated by Release 1.2, the Installations HCI will allow the JWARS user to create or modify a specific installation within the simulation prior to initialization and execution.3.3 Route structure Airlift routes within the global transportation system are great circle routes established between POEs and PODs after the user has input known restricted and prohibited areas.  An HCI is being implemented to allow the JWARS user to input prohibited or restricted flying areas.  The network is then generated during setup and stored as a route distance table for purposes of deployment scheduling.The sealift system uses advanced mathematical concepts derived from work using Delauney triangles and Voronoi diagrams to establish a global representation of the sealift route structure, avoiding land and using canals, natural passages and straits to provide shortest path route distances between POEs and PODs.  Under consideration for future development is a methodology that provides actual sealift routes as opposed to the shortest distance routes presently resolved from the network generator.  Known sea current and navigation conditions may change the actual distance to be stored in the route distance table and used by the scheduler.  This effort will not be integrated until after Release 1.2.While the deployment scheduler resolves for deliveries both airlift and sealift using route distance tables, the underlying development of those tables for a given JWARS experiment is significantly different for each mode.  The deployment scheduler can access and re-compute the air distance table much more rapidly than a similar recalculation for the sea distance table.  4.  Theater Transportation SystemThe theater transportation network is derived from the underlying road structure provided by the CTDB.  The network is established during the set-up phase of model initialization and can be modified by the JWARS user using an HCI.Each node within the resolved theater network is assigned to one side—red or blue—or the other.  The side value of two connected nodes establishes the access of the associated arc.  Blue forces and movements will be scheduled using only blue and neutral nodes and arcs; red forces will only be scheduled using red and neutral arcs.  Perception of control by a side is the mechanism that can change the side of a node and cause that node to be included or excluded in the next scheduling cycle.  4.1 Transportation order of battleJWARS uses an order of battle representation for much of its force structure description and definition.  The theater transportation system needs a repository for the transportation assets required for successful execution of the simulation.  The JWARS developers implemented a transportation order of battle for Red and Blue forces.To date, within the campaign modeling community little effort has been undertaken to detail exactly what transportation units are required for what missions and how are those units organized and sustained within the AO.  Red transport units are often only described at the equipment count level and then only when the particular piece of equipment is either distinctive—heavy equipment transports (HETs)—or of such magnitude that failure to describe these assets would skew analysis.  On the Blue side, most transport assets for theater use are deployed and hence described in force deployment plans.  Yet beyond describing these assets as quantities of equipment that must be deployed, little understanding of how and where these units and this equipment must be employed in theater has been included in campaign level models.JWARS, with its consumption-sustainment dimension, requires that the transportation systems access and employ appropriate transportation assets.  Thus, the hundreds of cargo trucks must be accounted for and represented within the model in order to support the analysis with sufficient movement capability and sustainment.  Both Red and Blue forces have similar consumption-sustainment mechanisms, therefore both sides need similar transportation orders of battle for the required transport units.Currently JWARS developers are using a modified transportation group structure loosely patterned after the US Army’s organizational structure.  In the future, we expect experience with the simulation to provide information to refine this early development decision.  For both sides, transport companies are organized into groups and located at specific installations.  This simple order of battle description and structure provides a foundation for the necessary consumption-sustainment planner mechanisms without having to provide each transportation company the same mechanism.  In this manner, potentially duplicative interactions can be aggregated at a level commensurate with the rest of the simulation, thereby reducing the workload on the interaction manager.  Aggregating these interactions to a higher level improves simulation runtime.4.2 Transportation infrastructureThe theater transportation infrastructure is held in a data object that originates with the output of the API.  Currently, only road networks are resolved from the CTDB, but development is establishing the data representations for rail, air, waterway and pipelines to be installed and tested for Release 1.2.The JWARS user can select between high-resolution representations that closely resemble the actual underlying road networks or the user can reduce the level of resolution to a more aggregate representation.  Higher resolutions will introduce more interactions within a particular JWARS experiment, increasing the computation time for the theater scheduler.  Therefore it is important for the JWARS user to understand and decide what level of representation is appropriate for a given experiment.The user is able to select the desired level of resolution using the HCI.  The HCI also enables the user to select, describe, or modify the several other modes of theater transportation.  Theater air operations, nominally originating from a base within the AO and servicing all other theater air destinations on a prescribed schedule, can be input through the HCI.  In a similar manner, railroads and waterways--representing the other modes of theater transportation--between theater installations can be input into the network data object.The data object holds arc and node characteristics for the entire theater network.  Algorithms requiring a destination node to be of the same side—or neutral—as the last node passed ensures that only Blue movements are made on that portion of the network accessible to Blue nodes and that Red movements are similarly treated on that side.  The JWARS synthetic battlespace environment can change the side of a node as a result of combat activity.  This method provides a fluid network that must be validated each scheduling cycle—currently every 24 hours.With respect to the road network, the capacity of the network is preserved by using a new concept, derived from concerns of the transportation community that measures capacity according to a vehicle pass rate.  Consider that a given road is two lanes wide and can accommodate three hundred vehicles per kilometer.  Traditional measures have attempted to describe that particular road’s capacity in terms of ton-miles, however this measure does not provide sufficient understanding to make useful evaluations of alternatives in many types of analyses.  JWARS incorporates a more useful measure of effectiveness based on the vehicle passage rate of a particular arc.  By categorizing known and descriptive vehicles into several classes based on power-to-weight ratios, ERDC was able to develop methods to calculate how many vehicles of a particular class could pass a point on an arc in a given period.Using this pass rate methodology and the classes of vehicles, the JWARS developers have been able to use the pass rate as a constraint on a particular arc.  For example, if an arc capacity is 300 vehicles per hour for a particular class of vehicle, then a 100-vehicle convoy of that class will require twenty minutes to access that particular arc.  Currently, JWARS developers are using simple rules to resolve conflicts such as heterogeneous convoys—mixed vehicle classes—and other issues, however, as functionality matures and JWARS users provide comments, those rules will be improved.  Additionally, ERDC has already been tasked to provide a more thorough analysis of the impact of mixed convoys on the original homogenous pass rates.4.3 Theater transportation schedulerThe theater transportation scheduling cycle begins with the accumulation of movement requirements.  Each force component: land, air & space, maritime and special forces, from each theater-level combatant submits unit movement requirements and demands for resupply.  During the experiment setup the user establishes the prioritization scheme used by the theater transportation scheduler.  The JWARS user validates a default scheme provided by the developer or inputs a prioritization scheme based upon conditions important to the JWARS user.  This operation is handled through the HCI and the JWARS user can establish distinct schemes for each distinct theater-level combatant.  This methodology allows the Red force to have a separately defined set of priorities than the Blue force, quite possibly contributing to different campaign outcomes across a series of JWARS experiments.The theater transportation scheduler accesses the theater infrastructure object and the data on prioritized movement requirements.  A scheduling cycle is initiated and the transportation scheduler works each movement requirement until the requirement is satisfied or available transportation resources are exhausted.Each possible mode of transportation is checked against the conditions or constraints applicable for a particular movement requirement.  As long as transportation assets remain, or movement requirements remain, the scheduling cycle continues.At the present stage of model development theater transportation assets are limited to trucks only.  Within the next development period, before Release 1.2, constraints on truck quantity and availability will have been implemented and the other modes discussed above will have been added.  Additionally, the road network degradation due to environmental effects (typically rain) will have been implemented.Consumption MechanismsJWARS is a theater campaign simulation.  As such, a unit’s capability and performance are key factors. Units will have defined capabilities enhanced or degraded by the presence or absence of resource items: equipment and personnel, fuel, munitions and other supplies.  Consumption mechanisms for BSEs are either population-based or equipment-based and may be responsive to changes in the activity state of a BSE.   5.1 Population-based ratesPopulation based consumption rates are provided by the several Services as a result of formal data calls throughout the DoD.  This data becomes a part of the data support provided to JWARS by the Joint Data Support (JDS) activity of OSD.  The relational database system populated by JDS is a fundamental input to JWARS.The JWARS user validates or changes the default consumption rates through the HCI during the set-up and initialization of the simulation.  A population-based rate might be the demand for dry bulk resupply, i.e. rations, in a unit with 1000 personnel.  The BSE resource manager maintains the count of personnel in the BSE and can report that number to the BSE C2 method that calculates the actual consumption over time.  As the count of personnel changes within the BSE due to battle effects, the consumption method changes the amount of commodity consumed.  Commodity inventory held within the BSE resource manager is updated on a cycle commensurate with the commodity.  In the case discussed here, the cycle could be event based, precipitated by a change in the number of personnel assigned to the BSE.Both the Red and the Blue forces will use similar consumption mechanisms; however, the default rates are likely to be different between the two sides.  While the JWARS user can change the rates at initialization, it is likely that the Blue dry bulk consumption rate will be substantially higher than the Red dry bulk consumption rate for an individual.  In the future, if our understanding of the other side’s capability and requirements improves, it is relatively easy to adjust the modeled rates.In the case of rations, the consumption is likely to be a constant rate.  The design goal for Release 1.2 is to have a realistic rate which when functional, results in the steady decrease in ration inventory.  The effect sought within the model is to degrade BSE capability as a result of lack of ration resupply after BSE ration inventories have been exhausted.  Essentially, the BSE becomes less capable of performing its mission if the troops have not been fed.Equipment & inventory-based ratesEquipment and Inventory-based consumption rates are collected and initialized in a similar manner to the population-based consumption rates.  In this case the commodities under development for Release 1.2 are fuel and munitions consumption.  Fuel usage is accounted by using burn rates and information on hours of operation in a particular cycle.  Munitions usage is designed to account for both those munitions used in a “by each” mode, e.g., Harpoons, JSOW, JDAM, Tomahawk, etc., and those munitions consumed using time-in-combat calculations.  For example, small arms ammunition, “dumb” bombs and non-guided artillery and tank high explosive rounds are suitably accounted for using tons as the unit of interest.These rates may be affected by the activity state of a BSE.  The JWARS developers will provide default rates that the user can modify through the HCI as well an understanding of the relationship, if any, to an activity state or activity state change.Activity statesAs discussed above, some consumption rates may also be dependent upon the activity state of the BSE.  Land units could be in one of four activity states: move, assembly, attack, defend and retrograde.  Land-based air-capable units have a surge rate and a sustained rate that translate into numbers of sorties produced per cycle.  Maritime forces do not presently employ an activity state concept.   Where a consumption rate is dependent upon an activity state, the methods that calculate actual consumption are structured to access the current activity state and apply that factor to the calculations.  As always, the JWARS user will have the opportunity to validate, modify or accept the default rates and relationships during simulation set-up and initialization through the HCI.Explicit linkages to capabilityConsumption decreases commodity inventory over time without resupply.  Without resupply, capability will typically degrade over time as a result of decreasing or exhausted commodity inventories.  As capability degrades, the effectiveness of a BSE to perform its designated mission also degrades.  The embodiment of this concept is a fundamental design goal of the JWARS simulation.  By June 2000, JWARS BSEs will respond to changes in commodity inventories in the manner described here.  Combat units will check and ensure adequate levels of munitions before executing planned activity state changes, e.g., defend to attack.  Transport units will have trucks, with fuel stores available, before convoy operations begin.  Air capable units will explicitly arm air mission elements with specific inventories of weapons to attack specific targets.  Adjudication mechanisms will know whether sustainment stocks within a warehouse are destroyed when the warehouse is attacked.Sustainment PlannerSustainment, the resupply of units with supplies and services to ensure full capability is maintained throughout the operation is closely related to the consumption mechanisms discussed above.  Sustainment planning starts at the echelon just above the BSE where commodities are consumed.  For example, if in a land component battalion fuel and munitions are consumed, then the method that will compute the anticipated requirements for that battalion reside in the sustainment planner at the parent brigade level.  Rules, validated by the JWARS user through the HCI, establish the required level of a particular commodity that must be on-hand for a consuming BSE to change activity state and maintain an un-degraded level of capability.  Of course, if enemy action or other events within the execution of the simulation change a BSE’s activity state, then it is likely that the BSE’s capability will be negatively affected.Each echelon that computes sustainment for its subordinate units submits those requirements to its parent BSE.  Higher echelons aggregate subordinate requirements, add inventory margins or safety levels appropriate to the user-validated scheme and pass the new total to the next higher echelon.  In this manner, all sustainment requirements will flow upwards through the components to the theater command level.For the Blue force, the BSE that accumulates requirements is the JTF/J4.  The Red force BSE that does the same work is named GHQ Supply & Transport.  These are convenient names selected to provide a location for the execution of the function.  JWARS does not explicitly represent all elements of each Service organization within the logistics modeled.  In order to reduce the number of entities created within the model and reduce the number of entity interactions, the necessary functions of sustainment generation, requirement aggregation and inventory management have been combined.  What are represented are the effects of the total system.  BSEs require sustainment to maintain capability.  Those requirements are aggregated and met using the transportation systems available to the extent of the available inventories.  In this manner, there exists a closed-loop system between resources, capabilities and BSEs.6.1 RequirementsThe JWARS HCI is the key to requirements generation for BSEs.  The user validates or modifies the necessary commodity inventories for the various activity states associated with a BSE or class of BSEs.  At set-up, the user can accept the system defaults or modify the consumption rates and safety margins associated with particular BSEs.As the campaign plan is created during set-up, the future demands for sustainment can be represented as functions of commodity quantity over time.  These functions are the result of the BSE’s projected activity states during the execution of the campaign.  Aggregation by commodity is accomplished by adding the several functions together for a particular set of BSEs.  The resultant function passed by the component command level or highest echelon below the theater command is the net of the sustainment requirement for the entire campaign.  The supply manager, a method within the theater command BSE, is responsive to this as a demand for resupply to the component.  The theater supply manager recognizes the appropriate level of the requirement and establishes a transportation request to distribute appropriate commodities to the appropriate echelon.Commodities JWARS is a campaign level simulation.  Discussed above are reasons for entity aggregation within the simulation.  Aggregation also exists at the commodity and resource level in the model.  Early development decisions have limited resolution of sustainment commodities to three distinct commodities: fuel, munitions and dry bulk cargo.  The munitions commodity has been further subdivided into munitions delivered to the target from air platforms and munitions delivered to the target from surface platforms.  This early limitation has been enforced to allow rapid model development and functional testing.  The development team is confident that this restricted commodity set can be extended as the JWARS community provides feedback on the model’s performance.  When more commodities are explicitly represented, there will be a set-up and runtime degradation.  More commodities require more explicit asset characteristic data, more explicit consumption rates and activity state-driven changes to those rates and will result in more object interactions during simulation execution.By Release 1.2, the sustainment and consumption development will have extended the commodity representation of munitions to account for several types of missiles and several types of enhanced capability munitions—brilliant and smart weapons.  This development feature has been driven by the development of various adjudication mechanisms within the model, which currently require explicit weapon representation.  Additionally, some types of combat missions require knowledge of the type weapon chosen before being scheduled.Fuel is all assumed to be the same commodity, however, BSE fuel requirements are established using the characteristics of the appropriate fuel for that entity.  Separating the various types of fuel in future JWARS versions is anticipated to be more of an exercise in precision accounting than new design and development.Dry bulk cargo is the net requirement of all other commodities.  For development through Release 1.2, dry bulk cargo is assumed to be non-hazardous, containerizable, palletizable and include sufficient weight to account for potable water demands.  The development team recognizes the potential discrepancy this decision can precipitate.  As the total set-up and runtime of the full theater simulation becomes better understood, the development team anticipates decisions allowing explicit of those specific commodities, which could potentially individually perturb the output of the simulation.  For example, segregating potable water from dry bulk requires consumption rates for water by BSE and activity state, water source data and water transport assets.  The sustainment planner can respond to this commodity if the user validates the data and constraints.RequestsRequests for sustainment are resolved as requests for transportation from an inventory holding point to the appropriate consuming BSE.  All of the discussion to this point has assumed that sustainment demands will be met by some distribution of on-hand inventory from the theater to the requesting unit.  As long as there exists sufficient inventory in-theater to meet anticipated demand, the system will remain in balance.When the theater supply manager calculates that the projected demand will exceed the theater inventory a report to the theater command is generated.  The report will contain information on the anticipated status of theater stocks, the projected distribution of those stocks and the projected shortfall.  Methods to be developed within the theater command entity will initially have only a limited set of outcomes to the necessary theater command decision.  If sustainment stocks cannot be increased through increased strategic delivery, then the campaign plan will likely have to be delayed until inventories can be increased.One other type of request will impact the theater logistics manager.  BSEs can request movement within the theater via common carrier transportation.  These moves can be over the entire available theater network, using any mode meeting the constraints of the movement request.  In this manner, the network can be “loaded” to account for the impact of these moves on both the availability of transportation assets as well as the impact on the capacity of the transportation arcs.SummaryThe Joint Warfare System (JWARS) is an object-oriented, closed-form simulation of joint campaign-level warfare.  JWARS represents major warfare areas and functionality in a balanced and coordinated approach.  Not all JWARS users will desire or need the same level of representation of all functional areas all of the time.  It is a development goal to provide a simulation tool that can be configured to meet the analytical requirements of the user without sacrificing functional representation.  Fuel and munitions will always be consumed and capability will be dependent upon possession of sufficient inventories.  Late deliveries, interdicted supply routes and insufficient planning will be reflected by changes to unit capability.This paper has examined the implementation of particular elements of traditional logistics systems within the JWARS simulation.  The elements examined include a bi-modal global transportation system for Blue force deployment operations, a multi-modal theater transportation system for each combatant side and finally, consumption mechanisms and a sustainment planner.Future analyses using JWARS will support force assessment, deliberate and crisis action planning, system effectiveness and trade-off analysis and concept and doctrine development and analysis.  JWARS is in full-scale development as of this writing.  The concepts and descriptions contained herein are what is either already in the model or what is currently in design and development for the next release in June 2000.  There will be development beyond what is described in this paper.  A significant proportion of that development will depend on JWARS user community input as a result of what is either already in place or what will be in place by Release 1.2.Author BiographyC. PARKS SCHAEFER is a Principal Analyst with GRC International and the Transportation & Logistics Integrated Product Team leader for the Joint Warfare System program in Rosslyn, VA.  During a twenty-five year Air Force career, he spent over twelve years flying special operations aircraft and much of the remainder as a strategic transportation operations research analyst and the Chief of Staff’s wargame designer and developer.  His previous publication, “Computer-Assisted Wargaming for the Military Airlift Command,” was published by the Air University Press in 1987.  He joined GRC International in March 1998 to take the lead role in the transportation and logistics development for the JWARS program.