IMAPS: Integrated Framework for ADSDr. George Ball The University of ArizonaBiosciences East Room 204Tucson, Arizona   87521520-621-5951 HYPERLINK mailto:gball@nexus.srnr.arizona.edu gball@nexus.srnr.arizona.eduCindy SullivanJohn Kruger U.S. Army Yuma Proving GroundYuma, Arizona520-328-6180, 520-328-6128csulliva@yuma-emh1.army.mil,jkruger@yuma-emh1.army.milKeywordsADS,HLA,integrated systemsABSTRACT: The use of modeling and simulation in test and evaluation hinges on the capability to integrate all aspects of the test scenario.  The missing piece in most ADS activity is the framework into which the models will be placed.  The ImapS project at Yuma Proving Ground, specifies the integration framework necessary to link all aspects of testing into the system.  Within that framework, components are being designed and implemented to support each phase from pre-test planning to post-test analysis.  This approach assures that all activities using ADS will interact properly with other models, the SUT and the range instrumentation. As a ground up ADS-design incorporating HLA, system interactions between remote locations are the same as within the proving ground.  This paper discusses the implementation strategy and key issues in the use of M&S for monitoring live tests through simultaneous comparison with validated models.  Discussion of the integration of synthetic environments and collaborative testing are presented along with the implications of the use of ADS.1.  INTRODUCTIONThe personnel at Yuma Proving Ground, in conjunction with researchers at the University of Arizona in Tucson, have worked for the past two years to design a framework for integrating modeling and simulation into testing at YPG.  The result is the Integrated Management and Proofing System or IMAPS.  IMAPS is not a single program, but the blueprint for the development of an integrated test system.  It provides the means for IMAPS components to interact with each other and with external systems.  In this paper we will provide a general overview of the IMAPS vision and a description of how IMAPS will initially be used in supporting the Crusader program.  In our conclusion, we show how other test centers, government researchers, or government contractors can participate in the development of new IMAPS functions.  A working prototype of IMAPS will be completed around January 1999.  A fully documented, useable, version will be available early 2000.  Enhancements are planned yearly after that. The version available in 2000 will fully meet DOD’s mandate for High Level Architecture (HLA) compliance for simulations and will enable a live and a modeled system to interact together in a common synthetic environment. The version planned in 2001 will be able to support multiple live and modeled systems interacting together.  Others who are contributing to this effort include J-Squared LLC, and the Army Research Labs.2.  THE IMAPS VISIONFigure 1 shows the general architectural design of IMAPS.  The architecture uses the established components of traditional testing with the addition of VPG specific extensions.  The following paragraphs describe each of these components.  The architecture will support traditional testing, as well as, virtual testing with any combination of live and/or virtual systems.  The traditional testing components can be found in the boxes labeled “Natural Environment”, “System Hardware”, “Live Instrumentation”, and “Test Data”.  In addition to the VPG specific extensions shown in the figure, the IMAPS method uses context based filtering to reduce the flow of data to visualization software or other components that provide a quick look at how the test is proceeding.  This gives test directors and customers near real time feedback on how well a test is conforming to a desired scenario and provides a greater amount of information for making more informed decision. Data from virtual instrumentation will be in the same format as live instrumentation.  This enables IMAPS to use the exact same tools for both live and virtual testing.  It will be transparent to the user whether test data is coming from live or virtual systems/instrumentation.Figure 1.  IMAPS Architectural DesignWhat does this do for the tester and evaluator?  Analysis of  test data for some system, subsystem or component results in a performance number of  .5 with a 90% confidence level.  This number is derived after all the tests have been done and is extremely sensitive to the number of test samples.  The decision maker is then must decide to continue funding or fielding the item under test based on these numbers.  The Army's Comanche project will probably have 2 complete helicopters through the entire development process.  Statistics say that with two samples, the confidence level is pretty low no matter how well, or poorly, the system does during the test process.If we have VV&A’d models, we can change the initial conditions for any number of variables that simulate the actual performance of the helicopter and as we do this, the sample size increases.  Using M&S we can now increase the sample size to some number (like a 1000) and statistically, we have a much larger sample size.  A larger sample size means that the confidence level in the performance number is better.  Of course this is predicated on an excellent model that has significant credibility and replication of the real system.Figure 2 is another example of how IMAPS will help the tester by providing virtual targets for a live system to shoot at.  This reduces costs through the reduced need to obtain or construct hardware targets or drones which are frequently destroyed during the test process.2.1 Test planning and execution tools Test planning and execution tools will support scenario development, instrumentation operation, data analysis, and data control.  The data flow is handled by a Distributed Simulation Interface (DSI).  The DSI is the mechanism that allows any authorized observer, anywhere to also see how the test is progressing.  This is accomplished by the use of multiple communication protocols, including the High Level Architecture (HLA).  The use of HLA in IMAPS allows YPG to seamlessly integrate developmental testing with operational testing or weapons design, or any function that is HLA compliant.  In order to provide the best communication protocol for all types of data transmission, the DSI also provides access to the Message Passing Interface (MPI), Common Object Request Broker (CORBA), JAVA RMI, SOCKETS, and the Common Object Model (COM).  The DOD HLA specification is the protocol for use in communications between simulations. IMAPS will allow pre-test planning, in-test monitoring, comparative testing, post-test analysis, and distributive collaborative testing.  These modes of operation are described below. Pre-test planning – the setting up of test scenarios, for example, the selection and placement of targets, countermeasures, instrumentation, terrain, environmental conditions, maneuver scripting, interfaces with other locations and simulations, and real-time display options.  Figure 2. IMAPS ExampleThe focus is to be able to communicate test set-up alternatives visually via a distributed network to the customer’s desktop computer.Simulate testing – the utilization of only modeled systems to rehearse the execution of test scenarios, instrumentation operation, data analysis, and control. Both the developer and the user will be able to visualize in animation how the test will be conducted and evaluate the adequacy of the data he or she will be able to obtain during and after the test.In-test monitoring – the monitoring of a test with live systems to include data collection, data analysis, and test control. Modeled systems may also be used during the test, for example, to simulate other components of a unit, other military units, or targets. Test participants will be able to monitor tests at their own desktop computer via a network.Comparative testing – the combining of one or more test iterations for comparison purposes. Models can be verified and validated through the comparison of live and simulated tests that use the same scenario.  Test factors can be varied in several test iterations and compared by sensitivity analysis of that factor.Post-test analysis – the replaying and detailed data analysis of tests composed of live and/or modeled systems.Distributed collaborative testing – simulated testing or in-test monitoring involving one or more distributed locations with one or more of the sites interfacing their own HLA-compliant model or models.  Participants at remote locations will be able to interface and run their own model or models concurrently with the choice of sharing or not sharing that information back to one or more of the other locations in a federation.  Remote sites could integrate hardware in the same manner. IMAPS allows four basic forms of collaboration: remote monitoring, collaborative testing with isolated response, collaboration with selected response, and collaboration with shared response.  Figure 3 shows an example of collaborative testing with isolated response.  In this mode, the data stream provided by IMAPS is directed to an authorized participant.  Once the authorized participant receives the data, they can use the data to run additional checks or even to drive other simulations.  In the example, only one site (United Defense) is aware of the injection of the additional simulation (the UDLP model).  Figure 3.  IMAPS Collaborative Testing2.2  Synthetic EnvironmentThe Synthetic Environment will be generated from databases and models that describe various natural environments. Initially, YPG plans to integrate models for the four major climate zones – desert, tropic, arctic, and temperate. Data from the synthetic environment will be fed to either models or the actual system being tested.  For example, the input might be in the form of a change in wind direction.  The databases and M&S that will make up the synthetic environment will include the following:Geographical Information System (GIS) Terrain elevation model: Goal is one meter grid sampling or better for all test areas with sub-meter sampling for road courses.Vegetation: association level (species level where possible) Other thematic data: soils, roads, hydrology, geology, buildings, bridges, etc.Full color ortho-rectified imagesMillimeter-wave and infrared ortho-rectified imageryClimatic databasesWeather data: wind speed, wind direction, temperature, relative humidity, temperature, relative humidity, sky conditions, precipitation, barometric pressure, solar radiation, etc.Climatic response data for various materials, e.g., thermal response in a desert, tropic, or arctic extreme environmentEnvironmental modelingModeling interactions between weapon systems and the environment.  This could include modeling targets, situational awareness, own units, adjacent units, other services, and/or allied units.  IMAPS will facilitate integrating wargame simulations in support of operational testing and training.The incorporation of existing environment models, e.g., wind, precipitation, hydrologyModeling synthetic scenes through the incorporation or adaptation of existing synthetic scene generators.  The IMAPS of the future will be able to generate full in-band synthetic scenes (i.e., infrared, millimeter-wave, visual, etc.)2.3  Natural EnvironmentThe Natural Environment conditions will be measured and recorded in real time capturing the effects of such things as wind, temperature, solar radiation, and other environmental effects that influence live system hardware and operators. Data from either the synthetic world or the real world can be fed to either models or the actual system being tested.  For example, input test data for a system model might be in the form of wind data from a real world sensor.2.4  System Models and System HardwareSystem Models and System Hardware will be able to interact with each other within the synthetic environment.  IMAPS will accept a wide variety of HLA compliant models for any weapon system.  The models can be exercised using environmental data obtained during an actual test or data generated from the synthetic environment.  Both models and actual systems will produce outputs that represent the results or status of the simulation, test, or both. 2.5  Virtual Instrumentation and Live InstrumentationIMAPS will use the outputs from any number of digital instrumentation systems and models of those systems to include operational test instrumentation. Virtual Instrumentation (i.e., instrumentation models) will output test data in the same format as the actual instrumentation. System models will provide performance data for input into instrumentation models.  Virtual Instrumentation models mathematically depict instrumentation and output to the test database.  For example, the University of Arizona and the Army Research Lab are currently developing an instrumentation model of Hardened Subminiature Telemetry (HST).  HST is a new technology that is composed of very small sensors, transmitters, and batteries that can be placed in the tracer well of a munition or attached to a rotor blade.  HST measures and telemeters data including position, acceleration, pitch, roll, and yaw rates.  We will integrate other instrumentation models in addition to HST. 2.6  Test DataTest Data could include 1553 bus, crew action, weapons performance (e.g., velocity, spin rate, cannon pointing, recoil pressures, and blast overpressure), and/or carriage performance (speed, location and vibration).  In some cases, the raw data stream might not be useable in its pure form and may first be reduced. Test data will be made available to other processes, sent to storage, or put to other uses by sending it through a distributed interface (i.e., HLA, MPI, JAVA RMI, CORBA, or COM).  IMAPS will treat the test data from virtual and live sources in the same manner.  Modeled test data will be in the same format as test data produced from the real instrumented system.  This will enable the same analytical tools used for live systems to be also used for modeled systems.  This will also facilitate the verification and validation of models when the results of a modeled system are compared with a live system in the same scenario.  2.7 Quantitative Visualization (QV) QV uses the output from models or live tests to provide a graphic representation of test results. These outputs will be displayed in a manner consistent with each user’s needs and specific interest.  Interpretation of data is a primary concern of IMAPS and user input will be requested in order to provide the best functionality to meet his or her requirements.  QV can combine real test measurements with simulation data to allow the near real-time quality assurance of test data and precise monitoring of weapon systems in a metrically correct test environment. QV uses this information to build a quantitatively precise analysis of a real test process in the digital world. 3.  INITIAL IMPLEMENTATIONInitially, IMAPS development is concentrated on the components necessary to support Crusader firing tests.  These components comprise three primary groups: on-line, pre-test planning; synthetic environments; and in-test monitoring.  The following paragraphs describe the underlying requirement for each group.3.1  On-Line, Pre-Test PlanningWe will examine existing pre-test planning tools currently being used by testers and work with them to design and implement “web-based” tools.  Some of these tools might be simple enhancements to existing programs.  Other tools will provide greater access to databases and collaboration with other testers.  A primary goal of IMAPS is to provide all phases of the T&E process with access to the GIS database.  The direct integration of GIS into the procedures will allow immediate access to range conditions (e.g. current range usage, network conditions, risk management assessment), and provide improved decision making by integrating the entire YPG data structure into the system.  This will include not only the spatial data, but also all on-line relational databases (e.g. ballistics archives, TIRs).3.2  Integrated Synthetic EnvironmentThe primary mission of YPG is artillery testing and as such, accurate ballistics information is of paramount concern.  The IMAPS is making use of the latest environmental simulations to provide the tester with the best information with which to conduct the tests. The primary environmental model will be the 4DWX (a weather model based on the NCAR MM5).  This will be supplemented with models that provide higher resolution wind profiles (10s of meters as opposed to 1Km).  Models for other factors such as ground temperature profiles will also be integrated into the system.  The synthetic environment will provide the key to pre-test planning as well as rapid assessment of alternative performance under different conditions.3.3  In-Test MonitoringThe development of the IMAPS framework will provide the YPG testers, administrators, and support personnel with unprecedented access to information.  The best use of this information is the development of instantaneous interaction with all activities at YPG.  During testing, the test director, testers, clients and other authorized personnel should be able to see how the test is progressing as well as how any other factors at YPG might be influencing the test.  For instance, the system should alert the users to the loss of instrumentation or telemetry, the unexpected intrusion of vehicles into the test area, sudden changes in weather conditions.  The use of on-line monitoring techniques, coupled with the built-in HLA capabilities, will allow the IMAPS enabled user to assess not only the current test, but also share that information with others at YPG or anywhere in the world.4.  CONCLUSIONSIMAPS is an on-going development of next century capabilities in the use of modeling and simulation for test and evaluation.  The use of a framework architecture assures that the development of current and future components in the system will function together.  The modularity of the structure provides for easy upgrade and transition from current technology as well as enhancements to existing systems.  As more components are put into the framework, the capabilities of the system will grow and additional features will be identified.  The development of newer techniques and the use of older components can be done with little difficulty.  Since there is no requirement for any particular component to be used, side-by-side use of older and newer approaches can be done with the selection of the best component to do the job.  In addition, any IMAPS enabled component on any system could be accessed, thereby greatly expanding the capability to do developmental and operational testing in the same environment. EMBED Word.Picture.8   EMBED Word.Picture.8  