Development and Performance of the Hydrogeologic Simulator - Environment FederationDr. Stephen J. AdelsonAnnette C. JanettDr. Dale D. MillerLockheed Martin Information SystemsAdvanced Simulation Center3605 132nd Ave. SE, Suite 400Bellevue, WA 98008(425) 957-3209 / (480) 595-0220sadelson@lads.is.lmco.com, ajanett@lads.is.lmco.com, ddmiller@lads.is.lmco.comKeywords:synthetic environment, SNE, hydro, atmosphere, simulationABSTRACT: As part of the Environment Federation project sponsored by the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO), we have completed implementation of a Hydrogeologic Simulator, HydroSim. The HydroSim tracks changes in soil strength due to weather conditions and soil types, and transmits those changes to interested federates in real time, where the soil strength changes are used to affect vehicle mobility. Weather input to the HydroSim is provided by the Environmental Data Server (EDS), the JointSAF (JSAF) uniform and gridded weather editors, and by pre-generated soil condition files. Soil strength modification is calculated by the Short-Term Operational Forecast of Trafficability (SOFT) model developed by the Army's Waterways Experiment Station (WES). The output is visualized on the HydroSim, JSAF, and ModStealth Federates, and consumed by JSAF to calculate vehicle mobility. A similar method could be used to track other dynamic changes to soil, such as thermal attribution. In this paper, we discuss the design, development, and implementation of the HydroSim, its successes and shortfalls, and our plans for a future implementation to address these shortfalls.IntroductionHydrology can have a significant impact on vehicle mobility in a simulation. Ground-based forces can be slowed or halted by saturated terrain, losses can mount before a tactical goal is achieved, and a previous simulation result using dry ground may even be reversed when the terrain conditions are affected by moist conditions. To provide accurate planning and training for real-world situations, it is desirable to reproduce these soil “wetness” conditions in synthetic natural environments (SNE).However, the hydrologic cycle is complex and extremely difficult to model in real-time. (A detailed discussion can be found in Xi and Cornish [1]). Figure 1 illustrates the interdependence of atmosphere, precipitation, existing ground water, and water flow in this cycle. Instead of attempting to calculate all of these variables, we have chosen to focus on the effects of hydrology which are important to the simulation; that is, those which affect mobility directly.In this paper we discuss the hydrogeologic simulator, HydroSim III, with its historical relationship to two previous HydroSim efforts. Hydrogeologic is the term we use to describe areas of terrain with like hydrological attributes that affect mobility. We also use the expanded term Hydrogeologic Areal Features to refer to these areas.HydroSim is an integrated federate of the Environment Federation, using federation weather data to dynamically change soil conditions. In turn, JointSAF (JSAF) uses these attributes supplied by HydroSim in its mobility calculations to affect the speed of forces traversing the soil.We begin with a discussion of previous HydroSim implementations, both stand-alone demonstration applications. From the lessons learned, as well as the goals of the Environment Federation, the HydroSim III design will be discussed. Finally, we will detail the shortfalls of the HydroSim and a plan for a future rearchitecture to address them.EMBED Word.Picture.8Figure 1 An overview of the hydrologic cycle and the relation to mobility. From Xi and Cornish [1]2. Previous HydroSim ImplementationsThere have been two previous implementations of HydroSim, each intended towards approximately the same goal, but differing significantly in the details. In this section, we present the previous HydroSim models.2.1 HydroSim I / SE 4The first (prototype) HydroSim was created as a part of the Dynamic Virtual World effort under the STOW Synthetic Environments program [1], and demonstrated at STOW SE Demonstration 4 in October, 1996 [2]. As a stand-alone demonstration executable, HydroSim I was developed to show the feasibility of using hydrologic information and weather events to affect vehicle mobility.Prior to the exercise, the terrain was analyzed to calculate basin and saturated soil conditions using TOPMODEL [3]. The resulting areal features were divided into five wetness categories ranging from “dry” to “extremely wet”. At execution time, the HydroSim server “listened” for precipitation event PDUs originating from the ModSAF weather editor or the TAOS weather server; made an estimate of the resulting wetness; and distributed one of the five sets of areal abstracts most closely approximating the soil conditions, via Environmental Change Notices (ECNs). The areal abstract attribute values were used by an enhanced ModSAF mobility model to affect vehicle behavior.HydroSim I was successful as a demonstration of the technique but contained several obvious (and noted) drawbacks. The program was limited to uniform weather, specifically responding to rain events only. The influence of soil characteristics were ignored (e.g. clay vs. fine-grained sand), as was antecedent meteorological information. Soil saturation was calculated by means of a crude, non-authoritative model. Clearly it was necessary to evolve the methodology of HydroSim in order to truly simulate real world situations.2.2 HydroSim II / RRIEHydroSim II was created as a part of the DMSO-funded Representational Resources Integration Experiments (RRIE) project [4], and demonstrated at the fifth RRIE experiment in November 1998 [5]. In this experiment, the HydroSim was used to affect the plowing operations of a virtual Grizzly vehicle. Figure 2 illustrates the experiment process flow.The stated purpose of HydroSim II in the RRIE experiment was to answer the questions of “When it rains, does the soil get wet?” and “Do soil hydration conditions ‘appropriately’ affect mobility?” Basically, both questions were asking if the HydroSim would work as advertised. Analysis of the completed experiment determined HydroSim to be successful. EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure 2 Overview of RRIE experiment 5, from RRIE Final Report [5]Unlike the first HydroSim, this implementation changed the soil directly by adjusting Polygon Attribute Table (PAT) entries for the polygons. Since each type of polygon has its own row in the PAT, adjustment of this table effectively changed all of the polygons of the same soil type in the database. Because of the soil moisture model used, polygons of the same soil type (USCS) were further broken into four slope ranges, and each had a unique PAT entry.2.2.1 TAOS Weather InputThe RRIE experiment was based on the ability to realistically saturate the soil to a given level. Once the required precipitation amount was calculated, an appropriate precipitation event was identified, and the Total Atmosphere-Ocean Services (TAOS) system [6] provided temporal input for use by the HydroSim.2.2.2 SOFT Hydrologic DriverHydroSim II incorporated the Short-Term Operational Forecasts of Trafficability (SOFT) model [7], developed at the Army’s Waterways Experiment Station (WES). SOFT is a simplification of WES’s Soil Moisture and Strength Prediction II model (SMSP-2), an iterative, physics-based soil model that calculates an approximation of soil moisture content. SMSP-2 can utilize input of soil type, vegetation type, current soil moisture, soil slope; and account for the effects of weather phenomenon such as relative humidity, barometric pressure, wind speed, temperature, and the amount of rainfall since the last invocation of the model. For HydroSim II, the only inputs used by SOFT were precipitation amount, USCS soil type, slope bin, and total time since the last SOFT run. SOFT was also modified from SMSP-2 to operate on a time scale of hours, rather than days.2.2.3 HydroSim Update ECNsThe soil information calculated by HydroSim and SOFT was communicated to interested simulation participants by means of Environmental Change Notices (ECNs) over a DIS-based network. The ECN data consisted of a polygon attribute table (PAT) row, and soil moisture content at two levels (3” and 12”) and soil strength (cone index) at the same levels. Receiving parties were expected to replace the given PAT row with the new values. By doing so, all polygons of the same type were simultaneously modified.2.2.3 NRMM Mobility ModelWES also developed the mobility model used in the RRIE experiment, NATO Reference Mobility Model II (NRMM II) [8]. The traction model is based on complex computer simulations of running a particular vehicle with different terrain in varying wetness conditions. Given output matrices from these simulation runs, plus a vehicle type, soil strength, slope, and soil type, it is possible to quickly calculate a top speed for the vehicle, as in [9]. In the JSAF implementation of the mobility model, surface level soil strength has less of an effect on mobility than the subsurface level strength used with the NRMM tables. Below a certain surface strength, the soil is considered “slippery” and vehicle top speed is degraded by 40%.2.2.4 HydroSim II ShortfallsWhile the HydroSim II was judged to be an important and successful part of RRIE, several impediments remained to integrating the process further. First, it was based on the DIS protocol instead of the HLA/RTI protocol. Second, it communicated soil changes via ECNs, a “bag of bits” format which is incompatible with the open structure of HLA. Third, the “change this PAT row” format of communicating changes was implementation specific, and not extensible. Fourth, since polygons located in very different physical areas of the database could reference the same PAT row, HydroSim II could not accurately represent gridded (spatially varying) weather. Finally, SOFT and HydroSim II underutilized the power of SMSP-2 by defaulting the majority of available input parameters. In order to support gridded weather, a more robust soil hydrology model, and the requirements of HLA/RTI, more changes were needed.3. HydroSim III Design and ImplementationHydroSim III was developed as a federate of Environment Federation II in FY 2000. The first Environment Federation (FY 1999) was tasked with transitioning the common simulation federates (JSAF, ModStealth, and DTSim) to RTI, changing DIS-based ECNs into RTI Interactions and Objects, and using Environmental Data Coding Specification (EDCS) designations for reusability and general applicability to other federations. The term HydroSim, which originally represented “hydrological simulator”, has come to mean “hydrogeologic simulator”. This change in terms represents the shift in focus from the movement of water on the soil to areal features representing the water contained in the soil itself.HydroSim III is the first implementation of HydroSim to be completely incorporated as an integrated federate instead of a stand-alone demonstration. It supports uniform and gridded weather, and the update interaction content has become more generic, rather than implementation specific.3.1 Modifications to SOFTWith continuing support from WES, SOFT remains the internal soil strength projection algorithm. One significant modification from the previous implementation is the addition of a more precise calculation of evaporation. In HydroSim II, evaporation was set to a constant 10%. Now it is determined from the actual weather conditions.As before, the SOFT algorithm uses soil type, slope bin, precipitation amount, and elapsed time (now in seconds rather than hours) as input. Additionally, the algorithm considers wind speed, barometric pressure, and relative humidity in its calculations. Hooks for surface temperature, current precipitation rate, time since last rainfall, and subsurface saturation category exist in SOFT, but are currently unused. For calculation purposes, these values are set internally to default values.3.2 Building the Perfect DissolveIn order to support gridded weather, we must be able to reference disjoint but identically attributed polygons separately. This task is complicated by the complexity of modern databases, where polygon counts can reach into the hundreds of thousands even in a relatively simple database. While the most accurate hydrogeologic results would be achieved by running SOFT on each of these polygons, it is simply not feasible to do so in real time. On the other hand, we have already noted the HydroSim II’s method of treating all like polygons in the database as one type does not sufficiently represent the environment. As a compromise, we gather like-attributed adjacent polygons together into hydrogeologic area features to be included in the pre-distributed database. The polygons are grouped, or dissolved, by soil type (USCS designations) and slope bin, which are the two SOFT input parameters that do not vary with time and weather. Additionally, there are also polygons that do not generate hydrogeologic abstracts. These are made up of soil types whose soil strength is unaffected by precipitation, such as bathymetry, railroads, or paved roads. Some of these categories may be non-obvious at first… surely a road is more difficult to traverse in heavy rain, or under icy conditions! While this is so, the underlying soil (pavement in this case) is considered to be unchanging. We have left these situations to special case handling in the mobility code. Other types of terrain whose traversability is not easily described in terms of soil moisture, such as tundra or rice fields, are also left to the mobility code to properly interpret.Databases used by HydroSim II divided polygons into four slope bins. HydroSim III was designed to use a (somewhat) more accurate nine slope bins, however analysis shows this does not increase the number of dissolves by any significant amount.3.2.1 Simplifying the DissolvesOur first attempt at dissolving the target database – the one-degree geotile containing Camp Pendleton, California (GTRS designation ej0102) – resulted in over 142,000 hydrogeologic features in a geotile that has a significant portion of water. Figure 3.1 shows the geotile in shaded relief and with the hydrogeologic features that resulted. For several reasons, this was problematic. First, internal structures of JointSAF Compact Terrain Database (CTDB) limit the number of features in a single geotile to 64K. Second, we were concerned about transmitting a large quantity of data (over 6.6 megabytes per hydrogeologic timestep) in a reasonable amount of time without flooding the RTI. Third, even if we could send this data, the method was clearly not scalable.In a second attempt, we removed the higher detail features from the geotile excepting the area of interest of the intended exercise, a 1600 square Km area surrounding Camp Pendleton. This action reduced the number of hydrogeologic features to approximately 59,000. While within our technical limits, RTI and scalability issues remained.Further examination of test simulation results revealed the surprising fact that the slope binning was having little effect on the hydrogeologic update results. The reasons for this involve the mechanics of the SOFT code. SOFT does indeed use slope as one of its inputs, but it is used only for calculating migration of water in the soil to the water table below. This process is generally several orders of magnitude smaller than the effects of evaporation, and nearly unmeasureable over the time scale of our intended exercises (hours to days). Additionally, SOFT does not account for runoff of precipitation, nor runon from higher elevations, which would be directly affected by slope. Therefore, binning soil on the basis of slope appears to be currently unjustified. Recalculating the reduced- feature geotile on the basis of a single slope bin results in a much more tractable count of 900 features. Figure 3.2 shows the Camp Pendleton area with the reduced features.Figure 3.1 Geotile ej0102 (Pendleton) in shaded relief (l) and hydrogeologic features made with nine slope bins (r)Figure 3.2 Hydrogeologic features in ej0102 created with a single slope bin (l) and a close-up of the Pendleton area (r).3.3 The HydroSim III Algorithm and Update InteractionsIn basic terms, the HydroSim operates by listening for weather updates, processing each hydrogeologic feature through SOFT, and sending modified feature interactions to subscribing Federates. An overview of the HydroSim operation appears in figure 3.3. In this section, we discuss in detail the method by which the HydroSim functions.EMBED Word.Picture.8Figure 3.3 HydroSim is fed by weather data from JSAF or OASES and calculates hydrogeologic updates (via SOFT) for the features stored in the CTDB.3.3.1 Weather Data Input and Updating the WorldThe HydroSim subscribes to weather objects (uniform or gridded) in the Federation. In the Environmental Federation, weather updates are generated by either the JSAF Weather Editor or by the Environmental Data Server (EDS) of the Ocean, Atmosphere, and Space Environmental Services (OASES), the successor to TAOS [10]. In the case where EDS provides weather, JSAF libraries (shared by the HydroSim) publish weather objects updated from received EDS data.A given Global Coordinate System (GCS) geotile may have a single uniform or gridded weather object published in the federation, but not both. However, a single weather object may cover portions of more than one geotile.The HydroSim parser also provides the ability to update a single hydrogeologic feature, a single geotile, or the entire database based on several predefined soil states. This operation occurs independently of the existence of a weather object, and can be used for validation or demonstration purposes.When the HydroSim receives a weather object update, it examines all of the hydrogeologic features in its copy of CTDB covered by the weather object extent. The weather information, together with the soil state information from the feature (soil type, slope, moistures and cone indices), is input to the SOFT code, which returns an updated set of soil moisture and cone index attributes for the feature.If the weather object is gridded, the weather for each feature is bilinearly interpolated to the centroid of the feature. This is, of course, a gross simplification of what should probably be integration of weather values throughout the feature coverage. However, we believe this simplification to be justified, since hydrogeologic features tend to be small, and weather values often contain only minor variation between grid points.3.3.2 The HydroSim Update InteractionThe updated state of a hydrogeologic feature is sent to subscribing federates as a HydroSim Update Interaction. The interaction is a simple structure made up of the following fields:	First Point	Interior Point	Soil Moisture, 76mm	Soil Moisture, 305mm	Cone Index, 76mm	Cone Index, 305mmFirst Point and Interior Point are identifying points for the hydrogeologic areal features. Point values are represented as (X, Y, Z, C) float values, where C is a GCS cell number (e.g. 35197, as opposed to the GTRS designation ej0102) and is used if the database is in GCS coordinates. Since one feature may be wholly contained in another and may share one vertex, both points are necessary to insure the unique identification of a feature. The two Soil Moisture and Cone Index values correspond to the output from SOFT. They represent the surface layer of the soil (top 3”) and the soil as a whole (top 12”). All quantities are four-byte float values. The total size of a HydroSim update interaction is 48 bytes.3.3.2.1 Reliable InteractionsUnlike the conceptually similar Dynamic Terrain (DT) interactions, the state of the HydroSim Interaction is simple. DT interactions require a sense of history; one change to the database must occur in a strict order. Hydrogeologic updates, on the other hand, are completely unrelated to each other as they always refer to disjoint regions of the database. Furthermore, only the current state must be known. A newcomer wishing to get subscribe to DT database changes needs to receive the entire history of DT changes. A newcomer to hydrogeologics needs only know the current state of the world. For these reasons, we dispensed with the “nack” suppression mechanisms utilized in DT updates.On the other hand, hydrogeologic updates are much more numerous as compared to DT, so it would be difficult for a federate to know if it had received the full state of the world or missed some along the way. For this reason, hydrogeologic interactions are sent reliably.3.3.3 The HydroSim State Request InteractionA newcomer requiring the hydrogeologic state of the world must be able to request and receive the state before fully joining a federation. To facilitate this, a HydroSim State Request Interaction was created, consisting of two geodetic points. The points define the lower left and upper right limit of the bounding box of interest, expressed in geodetic coordinates. The HydroSim is the only Federate that subscribes to this interaction.In response, the HydroSim first sends an update start sentinel, a hydrogeologic update interaction with first and interior point set to a trio of 0.0 values, followed by the updated set of hydrogeologic states of features in the area of interest. We assume that a new Federate begins with the same state of the world as a virgin HydroSim, so there will be no “current state” to send if no SOFT runs have yet been made. Completion of state transmission is signified by an end sentinel. When RTI DDM is active, these updates are sent via a special newcomer routing space. Just as with regular feature updates, newcomer updates are sent reliably.3.3.4 Receiving and Using Hydrogeologic UpdatesIn the Environment Federation, the HydroSim Agent receives hydrogeologic updates, which is responsible for notifying the libraries have registered to respond to hydrogeologic updates. This includes the CTDB update code (used by DTSim and JSAF) and by the OpenScene libraries (used by ModStealth for visualization). In the CTDB code, the appropriate hydrogeologic feature is retrieved by using the two identifying points. This feature has a unique “PAT table row” attribute, and the soil moisture and cone index values in that row are replaced with the values contained in the hydrogeologic update.Vehicle mobility in the JSAF uses NRMM-derived tables as before, retrieving cone indices from the PAT table as needed. As the PAT table changes with hydrogeologic updates, so does the speed of vehicles using the NRMM mobility model.3.3.5 HydroSim Federate ReliabilityThe HydroSim contains the only “definitive” hydrogeologic state of the world, and it is important to protect that state from machine crashes, which might cause the loss a simulation run. To help alleviate this problem, the HydroSim saves the current state of its CTDB PAT table after a geotile has completed its HydroSim/SOFT pass. If the HydroSim process fails, the HydroSim can restart by restoring the last saved state.3.4 HydroSim III and the EnviroFed II DemonstrationThe Environment Federation II Demonstration took place at the Army Topographical Engineering Center (TEC) in Alexandria, VA on November 1, 2000. The HydroSim was a part of a series of scenarios in which Blue forces attempted to secure an airport area held by Red forces. Weather was provided by OASES/EDS, forces controlled by three JSAFs, visualized on ModStealth, and, in some excursions, vehicle fighting positions dynamically emplaced by the DTSim were utilized. The scenarios were recorded with the use of HLA Results.Several runs were made while varying weather, visibility, soil wetness, and sensor capability. It was shown conclusively that the soil conditions modifications made by HydroSim as a response to weather slowed the Blue advance and resulted in significantly more Blue kills. This result was independent of the usage of fighting positions by the Red forces.A stand-alone demonstration of tanks racing up an incline was given. The incline was a specially constructed terrain database ranging in slope from 0 to 70%. There were six lanes, comprised of wet and dry versions of three different soil types, as shown in Figure 3.4. Poorly graded gravel or gravel-sand mixtures become stronger when wet, silty gravels have little change in soil strength, and inorganic clays become weaker. The vehicles, racing up the ramp under JSAF control, behaved as predicted. EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure 3.4 Six lanes for tank races4. Future Rearchitecture of HydroSimThe major issue with HydroSim as it stands is one of scalability. While 900 features per geotile are not excessive, it must be remembered that this test geotile contains about 40% water and that features outside the area of interest were removed. Furthermore, if we can include the runoff/runon calculations into SOFT, we will again require binning on several slope ranges. Based on these observations and other noted efficiency issues, we have begun a rearchitecture for the HydroSim.4.1 Represent Groups of Hydrogeologic Features as ObjectsAside from visualization, the only use of hydrogeologic features is to drive the vehicle mobility model. As such, it makes sense that a federate really only needs to know about those features in the vicinity of active vehicles it is simulating. This could be facilitated by representing the feature updates not as individual interactions but rather as objects to be discovered in a (DDM) region of interest. Newcomers would simply discover the appropriate objects as they activated vehicles, and the regions of interest would change as the vehicles move.It is unclear at this point about what the granularity of the objects should be. Single features tend to be small, so a better situation might be to group them into square patches. Features are not currently clipped to patches, so features may exist in more than one object. The RTI discovery mechanism will support this.Another question is the size of a region around a vehicle to which to subscribe. Too large of an area and the Federate may be busy processing features far beyond the true area of interest. Too small of an area, and the vehicle might overrun the boundary before the Federate discovers and processes the objects for the new region. Tests and heuristics need to be made.Of course, this plan does not address the problem of a Federate wishing to visualize everything in a geotile, or on a database. Simply put, if the Federate wishes to display everything, it is going to have to receive everything. Our intention here is to mitigate the effects of this massive quantity of data for non-visualizing Federates - such as a SAF - which only require a small portion of the hydrogeologic information at a given moment.4.2 Ignore Soils Whose Cone Index is UnmodifiableThe soil strength (cone index) of the USCS gravelly soil types, GC and GM, do not change with moisture. Since cone index is the only hydrological component of the mobility calculations, it makes computational sense that hydrogeologic features are not created for these types, or that they simply be ignored by the HydroSim until such time that soil moisture changes are desired by subscribing federates.4.3 Send Hydrogeologic Updates After “Significant” Change OnlySMSP-2 was originally developed to operate over simulated time periods of no less than a day. While the SOFT adaptation of the algorithm can operate over any period, the soil moisture / soil strength change over short timesteps is sometimes very small, particularly for the subsurface soil layer. Recognizing the limited role played in mobility by the surface layer wetness, it should be possible to withhold sending hydrogeologic updates until a significant change in soil wetness / soil strength occurs and thereby decrease network traffic.4.4 Send Aggregated Changes on the NetworkCurrently, hydrogeologic updates are sent individually. This is an inefficient use of the network and the RTI. We expect that it would be possible to send a “20 pack” of hydrogeologic updates instead, whose total size would be less than 1K and lead to much better use of the network.4.5 Model Runoff / RunonRunoff and runon are generally insignificant to mobility except in flat regions surrounded by slopes, such as the bottom of a valley, where the extra precipitation would collect. However, implementation of runoff and runon directly apply to flooding which is a significant mobility concern. Real-time simulation of soil runoff may not be currently possible. However, by identifying such areas using basin analysis (going back to HydroSim I), it may be possible to modify SOFT or a SOFT post-process to make a rough estimation of the effects of runoff and runon. One plan might be to assume if “flat” soil has received X quantity of precipitation, it will receive Y * X additional moisture of runon from higher elevations. More collaboration with WES or other providers of authoritative models needs to be made before we can successfully model this effect.5. ConclusionThe HydroSim has evolved from a stand alone soil wetness simulator to an integrated module that can serve soil data based upon input published by other Federates and uses sophisticated soil moisture and strength models. HydroSim supports uniform and gridded weather, and the method is extensible to serve other types of soil information, such as thermal data. We have identified impediments to accuracy, efficiency, and scalability, and we are working on a rearchitecture to address them.6. References[1]	X. Li, et al.: “Virtual World Environmental Simulation in Distributed Simulation” Proceedings of Interservice / Industry Training Systems and Education Conference, Orlando, FL, December 1996.[2]	X. Li and C. Cornish: “HydroSim: Hydrologic Modeling in the Synthetic Natural Environment” Proceedings of the 1998 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, paper 98S-SIW-146, March 1998.[3]	K. Bevel and M. Kirkby: “A physically based variable contributing area model of basin hydrology” Hydrological Sciences Bulletin, volume 24 (1) (1979), pp. 43-69.[4]	Defense Modeling and Simulation Office: “Representational Resources Integration Experiments (RRIE) Experiment Plan”, September 1998.[5]	Defense Modeling and Simulation Office: “Representational Resources Integration Experiments (RRIE) Final Report”, April 1999.[6]	D. Whitney, et al.: “TAOS: Providing and Managing Natural Environments for Virtual Worlds” Proceedings of the 1997 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, paper 97F-SIW-154, September 1997.[7]	G. Mason: “Short-Term Operational Forecasts of Trafficability (SOFT)” Proceedings of the 2000 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, paper 00S-SIW-066, March 2000.[8]	R. Ahlvin and P. Haley: “NATO Reference Mobility Model Edition II, NRMM II User’s Guide” US Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station Technical Report GL-92-19, December 1992.[9]	U.S. Army: “Planning and Design of Roads, Airfields, and Heliports in the Theater of Operations – Road Design” U.S. Army Field Manual FM 5-430-00-1, August 1994.[10]	R. Reynolds, et al.: “OASES: A System for Constructing Multi-Regime Synthetic Natural Environments” Proceedings of the 1999 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop, paper 99F-SIW-086, September 1999.Author BiographiesDR. STEPHEN J. ADELSON is a senior software engineer at Lockheed Martin Information Systems - Advanced Simulation Center in Bellevue, WA. He contributed to all aspects of the DARPA and USATEC projects Dynamic Terrain and Objects in a Virtual World, with a special interest in the repoly service, which allows dynamic terrain modifications of all sizes (a result of engineering or munition damage) and database tailoring aimed towards specific training goals. He was an integral developer in the first phase of the DMSO-sponsored Dynamic Terrain in the Environment Federation project, and continued as a primary developer of the latest incarnation of the Hydrogeologic Simulator federate (HydroSim III). Dr. Adelson received his Ph.D. in computer science from the Georgia Institute of Technology in 1993, with a specialty in efficient graphics algorithms for VR, simulation, and animation. Before joining LMIS-ASC in 1996, he served as a postdoctoral research associate at Los Alamos National Laboratory, researching advanced computer simulation algorithms and web-based tools for collaboration.Annette C. Janett is a senior software engineer with Lockheed Martin Information Systems Advanced Simulation Center. She has led development teams in the development of the OpenScene visualization system, and DARPA and USATEC projects Dynamic Terrain and Objects in a Virtual World and Dynamic Virtual Worlds. More recently she has led development efforts on the DMSO Dynamic Terrain in the Environment Federation project. Ms. Janett has been a contributor to distributed simulation and synthetic environments since 1986 and her experience includes ground and air virtual simulation systems, constructive simulation systems, distributed simulation networks, environmental capabilities in distributed simulation, real-time image generator design and development, data modeling for distributed simulation systems, and SEDRIS production and consumption.DR. DALE D. MILLER is the manager of Advanced Technology Development for the Advanced Simulation Center group of Lockheed Martin Information Systems. He led the projects Dynamic Terrain and Objects in a Virtual World and the Terrain Database Generation & Technology for Synthetic Environments both sponsored by DARPA and USATEC. He was also the technical leader for the terrain database and terrain data fusion development for the WARSIM Program. Currently he leads the STRICOM Common SNE and DMSO Dynamic Terrain in the Environment Federation projects. Dr. Miller received his Ph.D. in Mathematics from the University of Washington in 1976. Since then he has contributed to the areas of DIS and its successor, HLA, data models for terrain representations, real-time computer graphics, computer image generator design, adaptive filtering, image processing, feature extraction, machine vision, and optical character recognition.