Spatial and Temporal Scales of Variability in Temperature, Sound Speed,and Acoustic Propagation in the New York Bight Region:An Application to Battle Field SimulationsJames K. Lewis, Peter J. Stein, and Subramaniam D. RajanScientific Solutions, Inc.18 Clinton DriveHollis, NH 03049 HYPERLINK mailto:ocnphys@aloha.net ocnphys@aloha.net,  HYPERLINK mailto:pstein@mv.mv.com pstein@mv.mv.com, rajan@gte.netAlan F. Blumberg and Nicholas B. KimHydroQual, Inc.1 Lethbridge PlazaMahwah, NJ 07430 HYPERLINK mailto:ablumberg@hydroqual.com ablumberg@hydroqual.com, nkim@hydroqual.comKey Words: simulation training systems, ocean variables, spatial and temporal scalesABSTRACT: The challenge for simulation/stimulation training systems is to provide all the ship-board systems a consistent synthetic environment that drives a given scenario.  Here we focus on providing water column information for quantifying sensor-target interactions in littoral regions.  An important ingredient in developing a simulation strategy is the determination of the temporal and spatial scales at which the information to ship-board training systems is updated.  We conduct an analysis to determine these scales using an existing, calibrated, and verified, ocean model for the New York Bight region.  This high-resolution model is used to determine the ocean structure (temperature, salinity, sound speed, currents, and tides).  We investigate the spatial and temporal scales of the variability of the sound speed field and the temperature field by computing the decorrelation distances and times.  The decorrelation times and scales in shallow depths are found to be much smaller than the values for deeper waters.  Differences are also noticed between values for summer and winter.  From these decorrelation scales, we determine minimum requirements for calculating and storing oceanic parameters.  This allows the inputs to ship-board training systems to have the spatial and temporal resolution to resolve significant variations in the ocean.1.  Training ConceptsMilitary training must be as close to reality as possible.  In the past, Naval forces were able to achieve training objectives by relying on live exercises configured specifically as a means of training.  But force deployment, even for a training exercise, is very expensive as well as being manpower intensive.  Equipping classrooms with consoles that enable the trainee to use shipboard equipment in a training environment is a possible but expensive alternative to live exercises.  Moreover, since ships are configured differently, it is difficult to train the personnel who will be the ship’s complement on the equipment that they will be using shipboard.  The Battle Force Tactical Training (BFTT) system provides a simulation-based supplement to both live training exercises and classroom study.  BFTT uses the actual on-board systems, configured in a simulation-stimulation environment, to provide training experiences for the con-sole operators.  Because the actual systems are used, the trainees are together as they would be in actual operations.  The problem remains to make the simulation environment sufficiently robust that there are virtually no differences between the simulation and the real world.A tactical training system should be built around the wide variety of systems that together form the ship’s operational environment.  The consoles should control and receive information from sensors of every type: radar, lidar, sonar, infra-red, and visual.  They span every frequency range used in the atmosphere and underwater.  The challenge is to provide a consistent environment that can be used by all the ship's systems during a simulation.  This is regardless of whether the systems rely on atmospheric conditions, water surface motion, the underwater environment, or the nature of the sea floor.  Providing such a geotemporally-consistent environment is challenging.  For example, if a simulation includes blustery winds over several days, it should also include the appropriate build-up of the sea state, those currents associated with the wave field at a given time, and the correct scattering of underwater sound due to the surface roughness resulting from the waves.  Moreover, the problems of today's training systems are yet more demanding because their scope extends into the littoral regions with all its complexities.  Moreover, these training systems should operate in real time.  The problem is nearly impossible unless it can be bounded in some robust fashion.To address those factors related to providing realistic simulations in littoral regions (and all the possible sensors and systems found there), the Navy has initiated work to model water column variables that will act as inputs to all systems.  The potential environmental variables in littoral regions involve complicating factors such as waves, tides, time-varying river inflows, longshore currents that can carry plumes of fresh water, and the usual problems of diurnal heating and mixing.  Thus, we must investigate the utilization of wave and circulation models, ideally coupled to one another and as well as coupled with a model for the atmospheric forcing.  We must also investigate acoustic propagation models since each ship-board system “sees” through the environment acoustically.  The frequency range of acoustic systems of the Navy covers 10's of Hertz to >1 MHz.  As a result, we must utilize different propagation models to accommodate the different frequency ranges.The initial objectives of the project include determining the temporal and spatial scales at which environmental information has to be provided to the ship-board systems in order to reproduce the variations we could expect in nature.  While the sensitivities of ship-board systems will be explored with the best possible models, actual tactical training systems will typically be constrained to use computational models that can execute faster than real time.  Thus, the overall objectives of the project at this stage are threefold: determine the sensitivities of systems to environmental drivers; determine the temporal and spatial separation of data samples and how they are to be fed to the simulation; and create performance models of the systems that are capable of using the realistic natural environment to produce a valid training environment.Using Numerical Models for the OceanThe ocean environment in any tactical training system needs to include sea state, water depths, bottom type characteristics, and the three-dimensional structure of fields of salinity, temperature, and velocity.  To realistically specify all these ocean parameters as a function of space and time, we must utilize numerical wave and ocean circulation models.  Such models are prognostic in the strictest sense: the ocean parameters are determined based on energy and mass conservation expressions, typically by primitive, non-linear, partial differential equations.  Using such models provides significantly more accurate predictions than statistical relationships.  Unfortunately, these models can require significant computational resources, and the predictions are only as good as the accuracy of the energy and mass source and sink terms in the governing equations (e.g., the forcing data).  Moreover, to provide the most accurate predictions, the wave and circulation models should be coupled in two-way fashion: the wave model produces terms that act as input to the circulation model and visa versa.  To operate in the most realist manner, the inter-connections and feed-backs depicted need to be resolved over the appropriate spatial and temporal scales.  In addition, the models should be gridded and time-stepped on those scales that will delineate operationally important variations in wave heights, currents, and salinity and temperature structure.Model Details and Requirements3. 1 Ocean modelsTo predict actual variations in ocean circulation patterns and salinity and temperature variations, we must utilized models that formulate the conservation of momentum, salt, heat, and mass in their most basic forms.  For this work, we use a version of the Princeton Ocean Model (POM) called ECOM (Estuarine Coastal Ocean Model).  In ECOM, differential equations are used that account for local variations of a parameter, changes due to non-linear advective and turbulent diffusion, pressure effects due to the three-dimensional differences of density (i.e., salinity and temperature),  and the temporal and spatial changes in the free surface height (tides, wind-induced setup or setdown, etc.; Blumberg and Mellor, 1987).  ECOM accounts for many sources and sinks in the various variable equations.  These include time-varying river inflows as well as fluxes of momentum, rainfall, and heat fluxes through the air-sea interface.The ECOM model has also been adapted to include the major wave effects (Lewis, 1998).  By providing wave model results (wavelength, wave amplitude, wave period, and direction of propagation), ECOM can account the wave-enhanced bottom friction (above and beyond the typical bottom friction), currents induced by wave breaking, and currents resulting by the fact that wave motion is not entirely circular (referred to as Stokes drift).  In addition, formulations exist for including into ECOM the impact of waves in that they result in a non-zero mixing length at the surface of the ocean.3.2 Wave modelsSurface wave fields are significantly different in coastal regions.  Deepwater wave models commonly assume a fully developed sea under the wind conditions at a given time, but the physics of wave generation in deep water typically cannot be directly applied to littoral regions.  In shallower water, we also must consider dissipation, diffraction, and refraction.  At the same time we must take into account that deepwater waves translating into a shallow water region will steepen and eventually break, modifying the wave field while transferring energy from the wave field to the water column.  Wave-generated flow fields result, sometimes including strong longshore and offshore jets of water.	Although we have the basis for adding wave effects in circulation models, one-way coupling is not satisfactory in a number of situations.  In many areas, tidal-wind circulation can induce significant depth changes, and this information should be utilized by wave models as opposed to employing a mean depth field for the prediction of all wave conditions in the area.  In this case, reliable predictions of both waves and circulation requires two-way coupling of the respective models.  Regional wave processes in coastal and open ocean areas involve a variety of physics and spatial scales.  As a result, a number of models for waves have been developed, each adopting a particular modeling strategy and numerical approach.  Using several wave models in a particular area appears to be the most logical approach to allow for the consideration of the major physical processes.  	The SWAN (Simulation of WAves in Nearshore areas) model can be used to predict wave conditions for given wind, bottom, and current conditions (Holthuijsen et al., 1993; Ris et al., 1994).  This spectral model simulates wave growth and decay, explicitly accounting for wind forcing, non-linear wave-wave interactions, wave-current interactions, and dissipation due to white capping, bottom friction, and depth-limited wave breaking.  One effect not modeled in SWAN is wave diffraction.  To have the ability to consider this phenomena, the refraction-diffraction (REF/DIF1) model can be included in the simulation system (Kirby and Dalrymple, 1994).  REF/DIF1 has the ability to deal with complex bathymetry (i.e., islands or semi-enclosed areas) and handles frictional losses due to rough, porous, or viscous bottom types.3.3 Acoustic modelsFrom the salinity and temperature fields, we can calculate the three-dimensional structure of sound speed.  With this information, we can utilize acoustic propagation models to ascertain detection levels within the water column for different ship-board systems.  The acoustic models must use information from both the wave and circulation models to provide realistic predictions of transmission loss throughout the water column.  In addition, bottom characteristics must be considered by any acoustic model in order to account for reflection/absorption/roughness at the ocean bottom.Here the objective is to compute the three-dimensional acoustic field given the three-dimensional ocean/wave input data.  Unlike the ocean models, there are a few true three-dimensional acoustic models.  These are based on finite difference solutions to the wave equation and a three-dimensional solution using the parabolic equation (PE) approach.  None of these methods has been bench-marked, and their accuracies are not known.  The common practice is to treat the problem as a Nx2D (N x two-dimensional) model in which the acoustic field is calculated along N radial lines emanating from the source.The need to make computations in near-real-time means we must use either a PE, wavenumber integration, or normal-mode model.  Finite difference and finite element models take an excessively long time to compute the acoustic field over a large range at higher frequencies (order of 10 kHz).  The PE models are very efficient in computing the field in a range dependent environment.4. Methods for Coupling4.1  Coupling surface waves to circulationWave effects can have a significant impact on the circulation of nearshore and coastal regions as a result of increased wave amplitudes due to shoaling as well as the input of energy into the water column due to wave breaking and wave dissipation.  Wave-enhanced bottom friction or water column stresses induced by wave breaking are the more common wave effects that have been included in hydrodynamic models.  There is also Stokes drift, the wave-averaged flow field resulting from the net displacement of individual fluid parcels due to waves.  In addition, surface waves also result in a body force within the water column (Coriolis wave stress).	Because of the importance of surface waves, coupling should incorporate all the major wave-induced effects into the circulation models of the prediction system.  The circulation models use as input the results from models of surface waves.  These include wave height, wave period, wavelength, and direction of wave propagation.  This information is used to determine all the wave effects in the model governing equations.Stokes drift, the wave-induced, wave-averaged velocity uSt = (uSt,vSt), will be incorporated in the circulation models in the arbitrary depth form of| uSt | =  a2 k cosh (2k (H + z))/(2 sinh2 (kH))where  is the wave frequency, a is the wave amplitude, k  is the wave number, H is the water depth, and z is positive upward from the surface of the water (Xu and Bowen, 1994).  Wave parameters and the direction of wave propagation can be used to calculate (uSt,vSt) for each grid cell.  When model outputs are required, the model-predicted velocities in the horizontal will always have (uSt,vSt) added to them in order to reflect the total Eulerian flow field.Longuet-Higgens and Stewart (1964) detail the physics related to changes in wave energy (a result of conditions such as breaking waves) in nearshore regions of coastal areas and the generation of currents as a result of the input of energy from the breaking waves into the water column.  Breaking waves result in forces on the water column, referred to as radiation stresses.  The form and inclusion of these radiation stresses in hydrostatic, time-dependent, numerical models has been considered in a number of studies.  Radiation stresses can be included in the circulation model momentum equations as forces which are constant with depth but change with the horizontal variations of wave parameters (see Yamaguchi, 1986; O’Connor et al., 1992)The most common wave-related modification to hydrodynamic models has been the enhancement of the bottom friction coefficient Cd as a result of the combined motion of waves and currents in the bottom boundary layer (Signell et al., 1990; Davies and Lawrence, 1994; 1995).  The circulation models use a logarithmic boundary layer formulation to calculate the bottom friction coefficient.  Without wave effects, a value of z0 (user specified) is used in the boundary layer formulation as the distance above the bottom where the logarithmic velocity profile goes to zero.  The bottom drag coefficient is specified in the models as:Cd  = MAX (2.5x10-3, [ 0.4 / ln ( zbottom / z0 ) ]2 )where zbottom is equal to half the thickness of the bottom level of the model grid cell.When coupling the wave and circulation models, the enhancement of Cd due to waves will follow the formulations of Glenn and Grant (1987) and is included in the circulation model equations (Signell et al., 1990; Davies and Lawrence, 1995).  In such formulations, the presence of the turbulent boundary layer induced by the surface waves results in the need for using a bed roughness scale kb for calculating the bottom drag coefficient as opposed to z0 in equation (2) (Fredsoe and Diegaard, 1992).  Following Nikuradse (1932), it has been found that the bed roughness kb is approximately z0 x 30, and this will be used in the models.The bottom boundary layer discussed by Longuet-Higgens (1953) results in an accelerated velocity that equals 1.5 times the Stokes velocity at the very bottom of the water column (z = -H in equation (1)) (Xu and Bowen, 1994).	The bottom boundary layer results in a wave-averaged velocity within millimeters of the bottom which is enhanced to a value of 1.5 uSt|z=-H where H is the total water depth (Xu and Bowen, 1994).  This “bottom streaming” is in the direction of wave propagation and, unlike the wave-current interactions that always leads to an enhancement of Cd, bottom streaming will either reduce or increase the velocity due to winds, tides, or density structure at the bottom of the water column.  The model incorporates bottom streaming by modifying the Stokes velocity in the bottom level of the model for each grid cell in a weighted average sense.  If z is the thickness of the bottom level of a grid cell, then the Stokes velocity at the mid-depth of the bottom layer, (uST,b,vSt,b), is modified to be(uSt,b z + 1.5 uSt|z=-H (0.001)/(z + 0.001)		(vSt,b z + 1.5 vSt|z=-H (0.001)/(z + 0.001).This assumes that the bottom streaming is acting over about the bottom millimeter of the water column. The incorporation of bottom streaming into the Stokes drift will allow the bottom streaming to produce an enhanced shear at the bottom of the water column since, as will be shown below, the Stokes drift will be included in the vertical shearing stress terms in the equations of motion.  This phenomena is referred to as “bottom streaming” and is in the same direction as the wave propagation.  The bottom boundary layer is thin, the order of a millimeter.  As such, coupling can be incorporated into the circulation models by increasing the Stokes drift for the bottom level of a grid cell, uSt|bottom, touSt|bottom ( z + 1.5 x 10-3) / ( z + 10-3)where z is the thickness of the bottom level.Pollard (1970) and Hasselmann (1970) showed analytically that a wave-averaged Reynolds stress arises as a result of the wave velocity component parallel to the wave crests being in phase with the vertical wave velocity component in a rotating frame.  For a progressive wave moving in the x direction, the resulting wave velocity field u = (u,v,w) is such that, in an Eulerian frame work,<v w>/z = f uStwhere f is the Coriolis parameter, < > denotes an average over the wave period, and this force is in the crest-parallel direction.  This term can be readily included in the momentum equations of a circulation model.In an invisid ocean, the Coriolis wave stress <v,w>/z drives a current which oscillates at the inertial period but has a mean flow that exactly mirrors the Stokes drift.  With friction, the total, wave-averaged, current regime (after including the Stokes drift) is one that oscillates at the inertial period but with a net transport smaller than the Stokes drift: the Stokes drift is almost exactly canceled by its mirror image generated by the Coriolis wave stress.  In dynamically complex situations (e.g., along coastlines), the Coriolis wave stress may not necessarily have such a great of an effect (Lewis, 1998).4.2  Coupling circulation to surface wavesThe modification of the depth of the water column is the most obvious impact that the circulation due to tides, atmospheric forcing, and freshwater flows has on surface waves.  Common tidal and wind-driven sea level variations can cause significant changes in the depths around islands, in inlets, and along the shoreline, and these changes will result in variations in the way waves are refracted and diffracted in littoral regions.  In strategic areas such as the western coast of the Korean peninsula, water depth changes over 6-12 hours can be of the order of 4+ m.  Besides wave propagation characteristics, such depth variations can result in significant changes in where waves will break.	For our system, we allow for the input to the wave models different sets of depth fields as predicted by the circulation models for various times.  Waves are also effected by circulation through wave-current interactions (Holthuijsen et al., 1993; Ris et al., 1994).  Currents that oppose wave energy propagation result in a shift to higher absolute frequencies while currents in the direction of wave energy propagation result in a shift to lower absolute frequencies.  Moreover, in strong opposing currents, some of the wave energy can be carried away by the current.  When the action of some fraction of the higher frequencies cannot propagate against a strong current, wave blocking occurs.  The lowest frequency where wave blocking occurs (the wave is stopped) is the point where the local opposing current velocity is faster than the group velocity of the wave.  These type of circulation effects are incorporated in SWAN which utilizes the vertically averaged current to determine blocking effects.  As such, the application of SWAN with circulation effects should be limited to shallower water as seen over continental shelves.4.3  Coupling with acoustic modelsCoupling with acoustic models is one-way, with ocean information feeding to the acoustic models.  The acoustic models require the three-dimensional sound speed structure, and this is determined from the three-dimensional structure of the water column salinity and temperature as well as the depth of the water column.  At any instance when the system requires transmission loss characteristics throughout the water column, the snap-shot of the three-dimensional sound speeds at that time is utilized.The acoustic models also require bottom type characteristics, and the ones used by the system will be the Navy standard database for the world's oceans.  The other oceanographic parameter required by the acoustic models is the surface roughness.  This characterization comes from the surface wave models.  The simplest approach is to characterize the surface roughness at a given location as a function of the wave amplitude and wavelength at that location.  In this way, acoustic reverberation at the ocean surface can be established as a function of the steepness of the wave (amplitude divided by wavelength) with respect to the wavelength of the acoustic frequency being modeled.  A more complex approach is to consider the direction of the wave propagation with respect to the direction of acoustic propagation.  Suppose we are modeling the transmission loss along an acoustic path that is in the crest-parallel direction (perpendicular to the direction of wave propagation).  In this case, the acoustic ray does not encounter a "roughness" with a specific amplitude and wavelength varying in space.  Instead, the acoustic ray encounters a time-varying water depth that changes with the period of the wave.  Thus, coupling with a surface wave model could conceivably be in terms of a fairly elaborate structure of surface roughness for the acoustic model. 5 .  Data Archiving, Model Grid SizesOnce models are coupled and ocean simulations are being conducted, the results must be archived for eventual use in a tactical training system.  The question arises as to what spatial and temporal resolutions the model results must be archived in order to provide realistic variations of the ocean environment for on-board training.  We must consider data archiving factors related to changes in salinity, temperature, sound speed, etc. as a result of tidal variations, the passage of atmospheric fronts, or changes of freshwater inflows.  And we must have some indication of the spatial extent of such changes.    For realistic training scenarios, we wish to archive model predictions often enough in time to catch the more significant oceanographic variations that impact operations but not so often that data storage and access problems result.  Similarly, we need to archive model results at a high enough spatial resolution to delineate significant variations of important oceanographic parameters both in the longshore and cross-shelf directions.  Moreover, having indications of temporal and spatial scales is especially useful when generating ocean model grids when such models become fully integrated into a tactical training system in a relocatable manner.To get an indication of spatial and temporal scales, we utilized an existing, calibrated, and verified ocean model of the New York Bight region (Fig. 1).  This model has been developed in great detail over the last five years (Blumberg et al., 1999) and has relatively high resolution both in space and time.  As such, the model predictions can provide realistic water column data both in deeper and shallower water.Requirements as to spatial resolution were determined using the New York Bight model by calculating e-folding space scales across the domain of the model.  Time histories of model results (sea surface height, temperature, salinities, sound speed, and current velocity) were correlated with the time histories of adjacent model grid cells.  As we move further away from a given grid cell, the correlations tend to drop, and we use the correlations as a function of distance to determine at what distance the correlation drops to e-1 (i.e., the e-folding space scale).  This allows us to quantify the distance at which we can expect the variations of an oceanographic variable to change significantly.Along similar lines, we correlated the time histories of model results at a given grid cell with itself but lagged in time.  With a greater time lag, the correlations become less, and we use these correlations as a function of time lag to  determine the time when the correlation drops to e-1 (i.e., the e-folding time scale).  The e-folding time scale quantifies the time span during which the variations  Fig. 1.  Domain and grid of the ocean circulation model of the New York Bight.of an oceanographic variable at a given location can be expected to change significantly.Water temperature is a critical factor, often the most variable parameter within the ocean.  In addition, sound speed is strongly dependent on water temperature, with salinity and depth (pressure) having only secondary effects.  As such, we present the results of the e-folding scales for water temperature and sound speed for typical summer and winter conditions in the New York Bight.  During summer, the surface waters can become substantially warmer than underlying water.  In winter, the waters of the New York Bight are relatively well mixed and cold.Examples of the summer e-folding scales for an east-west offshore transect in the New York Bight are shown in Fig. 2.  E-folding calculations were also performed for an east-west transect that is in mostly shallower water running right along the southern shore of Long Island.   A third transect begins in deeper water, runs northward to the east end of Long Island, then curves westward into and through Long Island Sound.  We can use the rule-of-thumb that, to resolve variations over these scales, we must store results at time steps or spatial scales that are one-fifth to one-tenth of the e-folding scale.  Thus, an e-folding time of 20 hrs at a given location translates to saving model results every 2-4 hours.In general for summer-time conditions for temperature, salinity, and sound speed, smaller scales are found in shallower water, with a number of exceptions to this generality.  In water shallower than ~30 m and in the top 6 m of deeper water, model results should be archived about every 0.5 hours.  Saving model results in deeper waters can be about every 2 hours.  To be reliable in all regions, the spatial scale for archiving model results in water shallower than ~20 m should be ~400 m.  In water depths of ~80 m, the spatial scale can be expanded to ~25 km in the longshore direction but only ~2 km in the cross-shelf direction.  The results of the e-folding calculations for the winter period are shown in Fig. 3.  There are some significant differences with respect to the summer results.  For the Fig. 2.  Summer-time e-folding time and space scales as calculated using results from the New York Bight ocean model.  The diagonal line represents the ocean bottom, and contours below this line are an artifact of the contouring software.Fig. 3.  Winter-time e-folding time and space scales as calculated using results from the New York Bight ocean model.  The diagonal line represents the ocean bottom, and contours below this line are an artifact of the contouring software.length scale, if model results are archived at ~2 km resolution, we should be able to provide reasonable spatial variations of parameters.  Results indicate that we could archive model results in water of ~80 depth at a 20 km resolution in the longshore direction and ~2 km in the cross-shelf direction.  Recall that the summer results indicated archive scales of ~400 m in shallower waters, so the archive scales are about 5 times greater in the winter. As for time scales for the winter period, the indicated archive times from results from several of the transects are 1.5 to 2 hrs.  But the results from a shallow transect running along the shoreline just off Long Island indicate fairly small archive times, intervals as small as 12 minutes.  There are also some implied archiving time scales of the order 15 minutes for the summer period, but they are not as extensive as the small time scales in winter for the same shoreline transect.6.  Prediction of the Acoustic FieldThe sonar equation for active systems is given by the expression EMBED Equation.3  where EL is the echo level, SL is the source level, TL is the transmission loss, NL is the noise level, TS is the target strength, and DI is the directivity index.  The performance index is a measure of a system’s ability to detect targets.  In the case of active systems, this index depends on echo level in relation to background noise.  Of the factors that affect echo level, acoustical transmission loss is the one that is dependent on the environment in which the acoustic propagation occurs.  Thus, in studying the effect of the variability of the environment on the performance of sonar systems, we need to investigate the impact of the environment variability on the transmitted acoustic field.In the previous section we quantified the variability of the ocean environment in terms of the e-folding distances and times.  These measures provide an estimate of the frequency at which the environmental data need to be archived.  We now need to confirm that the data archiving suggested for the environmental parameters will be adequate to resolve the variability in the acoustic field.  To investigate the impact that the variability of the environment has on the acoustic field, we considered a typical sonar system operating at 3.5 kHz.  (We emphasize that any measures of the variability of the acoustic field obtained from our analyses conducted at this frequency cannot be extended to other frequencies.)  Again, we consider the general area of the New York Bight along two transects.  Transect A is the east-west transect that is in mostly shallower water running right along the southern shore of Long Island.  Transect B is a cross-shelf transect that begins in deeper water and runs northward to the center of Long Island.  In both cases we consider  acoustic propagation  over short sections of  the Fig. 4.   Bottom contours vs. distance (km) for Transects A and B.transects.  In the case of Transect A, the section is approximately 23 km long.  In the case of Transect B, the section is approximately 15 km long.  The bottom depth varies with range along these sections (see Fig. 4).  The variability of the sound speed profiles at the location of  a source  and  at a  point  farthest  from  the  source  is Fig. 5. Sound speed profiles near the source and at a point farthest from source for Transect B.Fig. 6. Sound speed profiles at source and at a point farthest from source for Transect A.shown in Figs. 5 and 6 for the two transects.  These profiles are calculated using the hourly temperatures and salinities predicted by the ocean model for a summer environment during a 120 hour period.  In the case of Ttransect B, we note that the sound speed shows limited variability at the location of the source while the variability at the farthest point is substantial.In the case of Transect A, the sound speed profiles show considerable variability even at the location of the source.  The variability at the farthest point is not as substantial in that the sound speed variations over time is between 4 to 5 m/s.In computing the acoustic field, we assume that the ocean bottom is silt-like material with a density of 1.6 gm/cc and a compressional wave speed of 1600 m/s.  Since the water depth and the sound speed are range-dependent, we use the parabolic approximation to compute the acoustic field.  A version of the parabolic equation, which makes use of the Pade approximation (Collins, 1993a, 1993b) is used.  This permits accurate computation of the field over a wide angle and the use of large range steps in computation.  In order to prevent spurious reflections caused by the computational method, the attenuation of the sediment layer was set to a very large value in the deeper layers.  The computational grid size  in  the  horizontal  and  vertical was  determined  by Fig. 7.  Acoustic transmission loss fields along Transect B for times 1 hour and 120 hours.performing convergence tests.Fig. 7 shows a contour plot of the transmission loss as function range and depth for the section of Transect B at two times 120 hours apart.  The source is located at a depth of 4 m from the ocean surface.  Fig. 7 also shows the transmission loss as a function range at a receiver depth of 10 m for the same two times.  We note that the acoustic field has the characteristic interference pattern due to constructive and destructive interference of rays arriving at any given location.  In addition to this predicted transmission loss, the acoustic energy will be further reduced by loss due to spreading and other loss mechanisms.  A similar plot of the acoustic field along Transect A is shown in Fig. 8 where the source and receiver depths are 3 m.  These plots show the spatial structure of the acoustic field at a given time. Fig. 8. Acoustic transmission loss fields along Transect A for time 1 hour and 120 hoursFig. 9.  Acoustic transmission loss fields along Transects A and B for summer and winter conditions.Finally, we compare the acoustic field along Transects A and B for summer and winter periods.  In the summer, the sound speed of the warm surface water influences the profiles, and the rays are generally downward refracting.  In the winter, the sound speed is fairly uniform over the entire water column.  This difference results in a substantial difference in the structure of the acoustic field.  The contour plots of the field are shown in Fig. 9.7.  Summary and Future DirectionsAs indicated previously, this project has several objectives, the first of which is to determine the sensitivities of  systems to environmental drivers and then determine the spatial and temporal separation needed to provide a valid synthetic environment.  Once this is done, the simulations themselves must be able to compute the appropriate environmental effects in real-time consistently across all systems in the military environment.  Finally, the objects in the simulations must be programmed to respond to these environmental effects to produce the appropriate motion and behavior.From our initial work, we have established gridding and data archiving needs for accurately representing spatial and temporal variations of oceanographic variables including sound speed.  To summarize our results based on the New York Bight model, variables should be archived every 15 minutes in water shallower than 30 m and in the top 6 m of deeper water.  Below 6 m in water deeper than 30 m, variables should be archived every 1.5 hours.  In addition, variables in waters shallower than 20 m depth should be archived with a horizontal spatial resolution of 400 m.  The spatial archiving of variables can be increased as we move out into water depths of 80 m or more, with horizontal resolutions expanding to ~20 km in the longshore direction but only about 2 km in the cross-shelf direction.Ideally, this approach should provide a bound to the character and amount of natural environmental data required for tactical training systems.  Beyond that goal, we would like to think about simulations that are used for other purposes, for design or testing, for example.  We hope to add a robust scientific approach to setting requirements for a synthetic natural environment.  Together with standardization efforts (such as SEDRIS developed under sponsorship of the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office) and validated processes for generating consistent environmental data, a robust approach for determining requirements should add validity to the simulations that we are beginning to depend on so heavily.8.  AcknowledmentsThe authors wish to express the support and inputs of William Smith and S. K. Numrich of the Naval Research Laboratory, Tom Curtin of the Office of Naval Research, Paul Maassel of VisiTech, L.C., and Richard Schaffer of Lockheed Martin Information Systems.9.  References[1] Blumberg, A. F., and G. L. Mellor, 1987: A description of a three-dimensional coastal ocean circulation model.  Three Dimensional Coastal Models, Coastal and Estuarine Sciences, 4, N. S. Heaps (ed.), Amer. Geophys. Union Geophysical Monograph Board, 1-16.[2]	Lewis, J. K., 1998:  A three-dimensional circulation model with wave effects.  In Estuarine and Coastal Modeling V: Proceedings of the 5th International Conference.  (M. Spaulding et al., eds.)  Am. Soc. Civil Eng., 584-600.[3]	Holthuijsen, L. H., N. Booij, and R. C. Ris, 1993: A spectral wave model for the coastal zone.  Proc., 2nd Int’l. Symp. on Ocean Wave Measurement and Analy., New Orleans, 630-641.[4]	Ris, R. C., L. H. Holthuijsen, and N. Booij, 1994: A spectral model for waves in the coastal zone.  Proc., 24th Int’l. Conf. Coastal Eng., Kobe, Japan.[5]	Kirby, J. T., and R. A. Dalrymple, 1994:  Combined Refraction-Diffraction Model REF/DIF1, Version 2.5, Documentation and User’s Manual.  Rpt. 94-22, Cen. for Appl. Coastal Res., Univ. Delaware.[6]	Xu, Z., and A. J. Bowen, 1994: Wave- and wind-driven flow in water of finite depth.  J. Phys. Oceanogr., 24, 1850-1866.[7]	Longuet-Higgens, M. S., and R. W. Stewart, 1964: Radiation stresses in water waves: a physical discussion, with applications.  Deep Sea Res., 11, 529-562.[8]	Yamaguchi, M., 1986: A numerical model of nearshore currents based on a finite amplitude wave theory.  In Proc. 20th Coastal Eng. Conf. (B. L. Edge, ed.), ASCE, New York.  Vol. 1, 849-863.[9]	O’Connor, B. A., H. Kim, and K.-D. Yum, 1992:  Modeling siltation at Chukpyon Harbour, Korea.  In Coastal Modeling of Seas and Coastal Regions (P. W. Partridge, ed.).  Elsevier Applied Science, New York.  397-410.[10]	Signell, R. P., R. C. Beardsley, H. C. Graber, and A. Capotondi, 1990: Effect of wave-current interaction on wind-driven circulation in narrow, shallow embayments.  J. Geophys. Res., 95(C6), 9671-9678.[11]	Davies, A. M., and J. Lawrence, 1994: Examining the influence of wind and wind wave turbulence on tidal currents, using a three-dimensional hydrodynamic model including wave current interaction.  J. Phys. Oceanogr., 24, 2441-2460.[12]	Davies, A. M., and J. Lawrence, 1995: Modeling the effect of wave current interaction on the three-dimensional wind-driven circulation of the eastern Irish Sea.  J. Phys. Oceanogr., 25, 29-45.[13]	Glenn, S. M., and W. D. Grant, 1987: A suspended sediment stratification correction for combined wave and current flows.  J. Geophys. Res., 92 (C8), 8244-8264.[14]	Fredsoe, J., and Diegaard, R., 1992: Mechanics of Coastal Sediment Transport.  Advanced Series on Ocean Engineering, Vol. 3.  World Scientific, New Jersey.  369 pp.[15]	Nikuradse, J., 1932: Gesetzmassigkeiten der turbulenten Stromung in glatten Rohren.  VDI-Forschungsheft 356., Berlin.[16]	Longuet-Higgens, M. S., 1953: Mass transport in water waves.  Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc., A254, 535-581.[18]	Pollard, R. T., 1970: Surface waves with rotation: an exact solution.  J. Geophys. Res., 75, 5895-5898.[19]	Hasselmann, K., 1970: Wave-driven inertial oscillations.  Geophys. Fluid Dyn., 1, 463-502.[20] Blumberg, A. F., L. Khan, and A. J. St. John, 1999: Three-dimensional hydrodynamic simulations of New York Harbor, Long Island Sound, and New York Bight.  J. Hyd. Eng., 125, No. 8, 799 – 816[21] Collins, M. D., 1993a: A split-step Padé solution for parabolic equation method. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 93, 1736-1742.[22] Collins, M. D., 1993b: Generalization of the split-step Padé solution. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 96, 382-385.Author BiographiesJAMES K. LEWIS is a Senior Scientist in oceanography at Scientific Solutions, Inc.  He has studied coastal and estuarine processes over the past 26 years, has developed and applied a number of models for various processes, and developed a series of boundary condition formulations for ocean models.PETER J. STEIN is a Senior Scientist and President at Scientific Solutions, Inc.  He has been involved with a wide range of acoustic modeling, data acquisition, and data analysis.Subramaniam D. Rajan is a Senior Scientist in acoustics at Scientific Solutions, Inc.  He has researched inferring environmental parameters from acoustic data. His important contribution is the development of an method using modal eigenvalues from acoustic data to calculate ocean bottom acoustic parameters in shallow water. ALAN F. BLUMBERG is Principal Scientist and director of the hydrodynamic group at HydroQual, Inc. He has developed the three dimensional hydrodynamic model, ECOM, which is widely used throughout the world. B. NICHOLAS KIM is a project manager at HydroQual, Inc. He had developed and calibrated hydrodynamic models of many regions since he joined HydroQual in 1989.PAGE  PAGE  1