CLOSED LOOP REAL-TIME TESTING OF AVIONICS SYSTEMS USING DISTRIBUTED INTERACTIVE SIMULATION TECHNOLOGYJohn M. WoodyardAFRL/IFST2241 Avionics CircleWright-Patterson AFB OH 45433woodyajm@sensors.wpafb.af.milJohnny JonesAFRL/SNZW2241 Avionics CircleWright-Patterson AFB OH 45433jonesjt@sensors.wpafb.af.milDouglas C. ReifAmherst Systems Inc.30 Wilson Rd.Buffalo NY 14221dcr@amherst.comKey Words:Real-Time, Distributed Simulation, Hardware-in-the-Loop, Pilot-in-the-Loop, AvionicsABSTRACT:  The Avionics Wind Tunnel SBIR is a project sponsored by the Air Force Research Laboratory at Wright Patterson with Amherst Systems Inc.  The project was done in IFSC and SNZW facilities.  The goal was to perform a closed-loop test, stimulating an operational avionics component, capturing its reaction, and injecting it back into the threat simulation.  The project integrated several existing and new technologies to evaluate cost-effective methods for performing avionics system evaluation.  Due to the limited funding nature of SBIR projects, we focused on technologies we believed had highest probability of success that could yet meet the stringent requirements for hardware/man-in-the-loop testing.  Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) technology was used to interface the system under test (SUT), the ownship platform and the threat environment simulation.  The threat environment was provided by two sets of models.  One set was designed to serve as a campaign level simulation and provided background signals.  The second set of models was considered  “medium” fidelity and provided the primary input to the SUT.  The data from the two sets of models and data from the ownship was blended and fed into the stimulation equipment that provided RF signals for the SUT.  The reaction of the SUT to the stimulation was digitally monitored on a MIL-STD-1553B bus and fed back to the threat models that modified their action.  1. IntroductionThe Sensors Directorate and the Information Directorate of the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) both have hardware testbeds in Building 620 at Wright-Patterson AFB.  The Sensors Directorate facility, called the Integrated Demonstrations and Applications Laboratory (IDAL), has primarily focused on defensive sensor stimulation for test and evaluation.  The Information Directorate facility, called the Integrated Test Bed (ITB), has an aircraft simulator and has been used for development and evaluation of core avionics concepts.Recognizing that most of the important building blocks are already in place, the AFRL is expanding their research capability to include investigation of new integrated avionics and mission concepts.  Some of the key features and capabilities that must be represented to support the research include the following. a.  On-board/off-board sensors b.  Situational awareness c.  Threat avoidance d.   Robust threat environment e.  Threat identification/targeting f.  Self protectionBoth the IDAL and the ITB have extensive closed-loop simulation experience and have been successfully linked for numerous technology evaluations.  The types of testing envisioned by the AFRL requires a much greater level of integration than that achieved in the earlier efforts. Recently developed and maturing technologies have the potential to solve the practical problems inherent in such testing.  The Avionics Wind Tunnel (AWT)  [1] concept represents the implementation of these technologies at the AFRL to produce a total avionics integration environment.  The AWT builds on legacy components and capabilities.  The use of existing proven components and their cost-effective reuse in applications for which they were not originally designed is something the authors consider a major success. AFRL is evaluating the capability and usefulness of Real Time Intelligence In the Cockpit and Real Time Intelligence Out of the Cockpit (RTIC/RTOC) Technologies.  A variety of mission applications are being examined, including reconnaissance and combat.  Component prototypes are integrated into the avionics testbed consisting of core avionics and sensors representative of those on operational aircraft.  Key evaluation criteria include the following. a.  Does the technology function correctly in the mission environment? b.  Is the aircrew situational awareness enhanced? c.  Is mission effectiveness enhanced?Since the evaluation criteria involve dynamic activity of both the aircrew and prototyped components, and the threats must react realistically to the activity of the blue forces, a Human-In-the-Loop/HardWare-In-the-Loop (HIL/HWIL) test capability is required.  The nature of the RTIC/RTOC evaluations places stringent requirements on the integration of the simulation components.A critical factor driving the AWT investigation was the need to develop cost effective technology for testing new avionics concepts.  Like many military facilities, the AFRL and organizations that provide the avionics components have limited money and manpower.  Timely and accurate assessment of avionics concepts at low cost is a major goal.  As a result, the AWT investigation tended to focus on exploitation and integration of existing technologies, and novel applications of such technologies. Technology reuse is key to reducing the cost and risk of new military systems.  The effort, reported about in this paper, is a stepping stone to the full RTIC/RTOC investigation.  The research effort, a Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase II, is also called Avionics Wind Tunnel.  The goals of the AWT SBIR were to investigate the use of Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) technologies for the interactive testing of avionics equipment, to develop a digital monitoring capability for an Electronic Counter Measures (ECM) system for closed loop capability for the experiment, and to combine two constructive simulations resulting in a large area of coverage with a small area of coverage modeled at a higher detail.  A demonstration was held to show the capabilities developed during the AWT SBIR.  The demonstration simulated a covert penetration mission performed by a C-130H aircraft into airspace protected by a hostile integrated air defense system.  An ECM and an RWR system were stimulated with RF as if they were installed on the aircraft.  The response from the ECM system was digitally injected into the simulated threat environment to close the loop. 2.  AWT Facilities The facilities used for this test are part of an AFRL concept called the AWT.  The AWT objective is to perform research and evaluation of advanced integrated avionics technologies through development of real-time interfaces between distributed laboratory facilities.  These AWT interfaces produce a total avionics integration environment with the following characteristics:a.  Interactive pilots-in-the-loop. b.  Core, Electronic Combat, and Communication Navigation and Identification hardware/software in the loop.c. High level combat engagement models (SUPPRESSOR, SWEG, EADSIM, etc.).d.  Control of real-world avionics systems via standard military busses.e.  Real-time operation.f.  Integrated processing architecture.g.  Generation of representative multi-spectral environments (RF/IR/EO) including jamming coordinated with the overall simulation.h.  Ability to participate in long-haul distributed simulations.Existing facility simulation resources in both the IDAL and the ITB were used to support the AWT experiment.  These were augmented with government off-the-shelf (GOTS) components to create the architecture.  The ITB supports the development, test and evaluation of advanced core avionics systems and subsystems.  The ITB provides real-time simulation of military aircraft performing operational missions. The simulation generates the interface signals between the aircraft sensor suite and the core avionics system so the avionics equipment is subjected to a digital data signal environment which is nearly identical to actual flight.  A simulated cockpit is included as part of the simulation for realistic evaluation of the avionics system.  The IDAL is a real-time "hardware/software-in-the-loop" capability implemented to develop/demonstrate integrated electronic warfare (EW) technology.  The EW technologies are linked to the pilot and the remaining aircraft avionics located in the ITB through the IDAL Crew/Vehicle Interface (C/VI).  The C/VI is implemented by a secure fiber-optic network connecting the ITB and IDAL.  The linked set of aircraft avionics is flown as a virtual penetrator in the IDAL’s Composite Mission Simulator (CMS).  The CMS is defined as a “many on many" engagement simulation between multiple threat systems and the penetrating aircraft and their support systems.  The CMS implemented by Real-Time SUPPRESSOR (RTS) as the engagement simulation contains threat command and control doctrine approved by the intelligence community.3.  AWT Experiment DescriptionThe key achievement of the AWT Phase II SBIR effort was the demonstration of avionics hardware/man-in-the-loop using Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) technology.  Table 1 lists the components that were used in the demonstration. These were carefully selected for potential suitability for future laboratory projects.  Only the ECM interface was developed from scratch.  Other components used were GOTS with relatively minor software enhancement to support the project.  Figure 1 illustrates the system architecture.3.1  Component DescriptionsThe AWT investigation used components residing in both the ITB and IDAL facilities.  Subsequent sections provide thumbnail descriptions of the components.3.1.1  Integrated Test BedThe ITB is a reconfigurable man-in-the-loop aircraft simulator used primarily for research of core avionics concepts.  Its data-driven flight simulation software has been used to simulate an A-7, F-15E, and for this project, a C-130.  The ITB comprises numerous computing, display, and interface subsystems.  The key elements that were upgraded or enhanced during the course of the AWT investigation were the simulation and display subsystems.  The simulation subsystem was modified to interact using protocols defined in IEEE 1278.1-1995, commonly called DIS 2.0.  The AWT demonstration also used the newly acquired Evans and Sutherland (E&S) 3000 display system.  The software modifications required to integrate the E&S computer image generator were made by laboratory personnel.3.1.2  SOF ECE/TACTS ModelsThe Special Operations Forces Electronic Combat Environment (SOF ECE) simulates land, sea, and air forces.  The simulated forces can be friendly, neutral, or hostile in nature and can be set up with varying levels of competence.  The detailed multilevel command and control simulation includes one or more networks of command posts, filter centers, and tactical entities.  These networks are designed by the mission planner or instructor.  The availability of different network structures, modes of operation, force affiliation, rules of engagement, and time delays allows networks to be configured to represent almost any geo-political situation.  Simulated tactical entities that can be included in the networks or have autonomous capabilities include aircraft, electronic sites, threat sites (SAM and AAA), ships, and ground forces (tanks, trucks, convoys, command and control sites).Tactical Aircrew Combat Training Systems (TACTS) weapon models were developed for the Navy for use on Navy and Air Force training ranges.  These models provide realistic representation of weapon flyouts in a faster-than-realtime simulation.  The TACTS weapon simulation are modular, with each of the basic missile subsystems (seeker, control system, guidance system, and aerodynamics) modeled separately.  TACTS models are available for a variety of air-to-air, air-to-surface, and surface-to-air weapons. 3.1.3  Terrain ServerThe Terrain Server provides line-of-sight (LOS) and height-above-terrain information to the SOF ECE/TACTS models through a shared memory interface.  The Terrain Server executes as a background process and updates information using an interface protocol designed to prevent  deadlock and readers/writers update problems.  Up to 25 Defense Mapping Agency Digital Terrain Elevation Data (DMA DTED) Level 1 data blocks can be processed simultaneously.  The Terrain Server is capable of calculating the following information:a.  Height of terrain for placing ground playersb.  Height above terrain for airborne players and missilesc.  RF and visual LOS to the SUT for all players and missiles3.1.4  SUPPRESSORSUPPRESSOR is a composite mission simulation commonly used for mission analysis.  It has been adapted for use in real-time simulation applications and was used to generate background threats in the AWT demonstration.  SUPPRESSOR is similar to the SOF ECE/TACTS models described previously.  It has a greater level of detail in command and control (C2) and decision logic, but is weaker in EW interactions and missile flyouts compared to SOF ECE/TACTS.3.1.5  Object BrokerObject Broker is a general term for the data distribution software that links IDAL components.  The “core” Object Broker software module manages simulation objects (they are platforms and emitters for AWT) for the IDAL components.  It is responsible for providing platform location and orientation.  The local brokers are responsible for providing data to and extracting data from the “core” Object Broker.  The local brokers manage the interfaces to the other components.  Their functions include coordinate conversion, message formatting, and interface control.  The DIS Adapter Unit (DAU) provides a DIS interface for the Object Broker.  The DAU was read only for the AWT demonstration.3.1.6  Dynamic Electromagnetic Environment Simulator (DEES)The DEES is a 32-channel radio frequency (RF) level threat simulator designed specifically for high-fidelity simulation of complex radar signals in the 4 to 18 GHz frequency spectrum.  Frequency agility, complex pulse repetition interval (PRI) patterns, complex antenna scan patterns, and simultaneous multimode operation characterize these signals.  The DEES creates a high-fidelity emitter by using a dedicated RF channel to generate a single threat system instead of employing a multiplexing scheme that can result in a significant pulse dropout.  This allows simulation of signals with pulse densities of up to 500,000 pulses per second (pps) in each of the 32 channels without degradation.  Total pulse density of the 32-channel system is greater than 16 million pps.The basic simulator hardware is composed of 32 identical channels, except for frequency coverage.  The system architecture was designed for 64 channels, expandable in groups of eight channels.  The 32-channel configuration is organized as four 8-channel subgroups.  There are 16 channels covering the G/H/I band (4-12 GHz) and 16 channels covering J band (12-18 GHz).  Each channel is composed of 6 output ports and is capable of modeling five receive antenna patterns simultaneously.  The sixth port is designed to be used as a monitor port, and to furnish a signal source to a simulator verification system receiver (Wide Band Verification Instrumentation System).  Each of the six individual channel ports in each 8-channel subgroup are recombined, after modulation, to furnish six composite output ports. The combined outputs from each subgroup are further combined in a “super-combine” to five composite output ports to the Unit Under Test (UUT) or System Under Test (SUT).3.1.7  ALR-56MThe ALR-56M radar warning receiver was one of the SUTs.  RF stimulus to the ALR-56M was provided by the DEES as if the ITB-modeled aircraft were flying through the threat environment provided by SOF ECE/TACTS and SUPPRESSOR.  Video of the ALR-56M display was linked to one of the head-down displays of the ITB to provide situational awareness.3.1.8  ALQ-172The ALQ-172 tactical jamming system was the other SUT.  RF stimulus to the ALQ-172 was provided by the DEES as if the ITB modeled aircraft were flying through the threat environment provided by SOF ECE/TACTS and SUPPRESSOR.  Video of the ALQ-172 display was linked to one of the head-down displays of the ITB to provide situational awareness.  ALQ-172 activity was also provided on a MIL-STD-1553B bus.  Its activity was monitored and was the source of ECM signal data provided to SOF ECE/TACTS.3.1.9  ECM InterfaceThe ECM Interface component was developed specially for the AWT Phase II effort.  It was derived from an ALQ-172 monitoring system currently in use at the IDAL.  The ECM Interface component monitors ALQ-172 status on the MIL-STD-1553B bus and creates DIS Protocol Data Units (PDUs) that describe the RF emissions of the ALQ-172.  These PDUs are used by SOF ECE/TACTS to calculate the effects of the ECM on the modeled threat radars.  An ECM PDU was developed for this experiment.3.1.10  DIS Test SuiteDIS Test Suite (DTS) software is a GOTS product that performs logging, playback, and analysis of DIS PDUs.  The software is written so that these functions can be performed simultaneously.  The DTS is a valuable support tool.  It served as the primary tool for evaluating the activity of the ITB, SOF ECE/TACTS, and the ECM Interface.  3.2  Significance of WorkThis is not the first implementation of a closed-loop electronic combat simulation.  Such an implementation has been achieved several times in the past.  However, previous closed-loop simulation capability has been limited by severe restrictions in the number of players, proprietary interfaces, and modeling limitations.The significant achievement of this work is that a fully interactive closed-loop test bed for EW-related activities has been developed.  The AWT supports detailed EW interactions, including ECM, with ECM activity taken directly from the ALQ-172.  Although not fully demonstrated, AWT also supports combat weapon interactions, both for the SUT and the threat players.  The interface among the simulated players is IEEE 1278.1-1995, a well-accepted standard within the DoD.  Other DIS-compliant simulations could be integrated into the AWT architecture.  There is a large class of existing constructive and virtual simulations with DIS capability, including those operating remotely.  These simulations can all be considered candidates for use in laboratory applications.4.  Potential ApplicationsResearch and testing applications that require the complete AWT technology will, in general, have the following characteristics:a.  Dynamic and reactive simulation.  The AWT architecture fully supports both hardware-in-the-loop and crew-in-the-loop projects.  Research and testing that require both the SUT to react to the threat environment and the threats to react to the dynamic SUT activity can be performed.b.  Electronic warfare.  The AWT technology supports stimulation of operational sensors based on threat activity, monitoring of countermeasure employment, and injection of countermeasure activity into the threat models.  RF stimulus can be used.c.  Digital threat environment.  There will be a strong reliance on digital models of the threat environment.  These models may execute on different computer systems and will be expected to interact with the SUT as well as each other.  The use of actual avionics components means the models must have real-time execution capability.Several applications are considered candidates for use with AWT technologies.  The Quiet Knight (QK) evaluation is the most immediate application of AWT.  Concepts to be evaluated as part of the QK work include dynamic route-planning based on information collected from both onboard and offboard sensors.  The aircraft crew is provided with information that permits them to fly a route that avoids potential threats, including those whose presence was not known at the beginning of the mission.  Stimulation of both the onboard and offboard sensors may be performed.  A related concept that may be explored is the possible engagement of selected threats supported by information provided by the sensors and processing systems.A second application is the evaluation of concepts related to development of unmanned combat aerial vehicles (UCAVs).  Roles that have been discussed for UCAVs include confusing the threats, gathering intelligence, attacking targets, and generally performing missions that may be too dangerous to risk a piloted aircraft.  The anticipated development of low-cost, high-fidelity flight simulators for the ITB, the Reconfigurable Avionics Modeling and Simulation System (RAMSS), can support UCAV simulation.  UCAV activity can also be simulated within SOF ECE, and sensors and processing units can be integrated as necessary.  Some of the planned roles for UCAVs involve operations coordinated with, and controlled from, manned aircraft.  The dynamic nature of potential interactions virtually requires a closed-loop test bed to evaluate the most beneficial ways of employing these resources.5.  Lessons Learneda.  We made a deliberate decision to use IEEE 1278.1-1995 to integrate simulation components for the AWT demonstration.  HLA is now the mandated technology for linking simulation components.  We have no doubt that we could have been successful using HLA, but the authors believe that IEEE 1278.1-1995 currently provides significant cost and development time savings for projects for which it is suitable.  There are several reasons for this.1.  Reusability.  IEEE 1278.1-1995 is a proven technology with a well-defined interface for exchanging the types of information required for this project.  DIS interfaces had been used successfully with both the ITB and SOF ECE prior to this project and were very easy to link.  We believe that other DIS-compliant simulation components could be integrated at low cost.  To reuse HLA-compliant components requires reusing both the Run Time Infrastructure (RTI) and the Federation Object Model (FOM).  There has been slow but steady progress in the development of a standard RTI and reference FOM's.  Costs associated with updating/replacing RTI software and the Federation Development Process, including federate software modification, are presently major expenses when using HLA.  These "overhead" type expenses are generally not as issue with DIS.2.  Resource Utilization.  We were able to implement IEEE 1278.1-1995 interfaces for SOF ECE and the ECM Interface on the same processor as the simulation software.  Most RTI implementations to date have used separate processors, in many cases more powerful and expensive that those used for the accompanying federate simulation.  There has been recent and rapid progress in the use of embedded RTI software.  We believe that this must be the norm for cost-effective HLA usage. Several studies have raised issues about the performance of DMSO's RTI software in the most demanding applications [2][3].  It has tended to lag that of DIS given equal processing power.  This can be a cost issue if existing facility computer resources cannot support the application.3.  Extensibility.  One of the purported drawbacks of IEEE 1278.1-1995 is that it a fixed interface and thus difficult to customize the data.  We encountered this problem trying to represent ECM activity.  The IEEE 1278.1-1995 Electromagnetic Emission PDU assumes only one waveform per antenna.  The ECM we were trying to represent can have several low duty-cycle signals emitted simultaneously from an antenna.  To represent this type of emission, we created a new PDU type, called an ECM PDU.  The ECM Interface produces this PDU and SOF ECE processes it.  We discovered that developing the ECM PDU was no more difficult than developing an interface design through other means.  In fact, it was easier in many ways since UDP/IP broadcast was a given.  Since it fit into an existing data stream, no new I/O procedures needed to be developed.  By nature of DIS interfaces, this new PDU was automatically filtered by the Object Broker and ITB, two components that received (but didn't need) the data.  Adding the ECM data to the PDU stream was no more difficult than it would have been using the HLA Federation Development Process.4.  Support Tools.  There are numerous COTS and GOTS software packages to support IEEE 1278.1-1995.  We made extensive use of the DIS Test Suite software, which is GOTS software produced by Acusoft for the Army STRICOM.  The DTS provides PDU logging, playback and analysis capability.  We made extensive use of the playback capability, which supported testing of components while other critical subsystems were off-line or in use on other projects.  The playback of logged data provided a controlled repeatable environment for scenario verification.  Some of the critical uses were as follows.a.  Playback of SOF ECE and ITB PDU's for Object Broker testing.b.  Playback of ITB and ECM Interface PDU's for SOF ECE testing.c.  Analysis of ECM PDU data for ECM techniques.d.  Analysis of SOF ECE data for radar mode changes.HLA technology in this area is rapidly maturing, but it hasn't reached the level as that available for DIS.  An important fundamental difference between DIS and HLA is that HLA does not support global data capture except by subscription to all data exchanged among the federates.  Depending on the test infrastructure topology, global data logging can affect RTI and network performance of the linked components.  DMSO currently provides tools to log local data at individual federates, but collecting and merging this data presents issues, particularly if simulation components are widely dispersed.  By its nature, all data in DIS is broadcast, and thus available everywhere on the network.b.  In the development of a SOF ECE ECM database several attempts were made to start with the documentation and code listings to develop the proper interaction between the software and the hardware. There were two block upgrades of the ALQ-172 during the course of the project, each resulting in a complete revision of the mission database. The “best engineering estimates” of programs that the ALQ-172 would employ generally did not match ALQ-172 outputs when stimulated at RF by the DEES.	This experience led to the following preferred approach for development of the SOF ECE ECM database.  Once the signal sets for the DEES are developed, use them manually, alone and in combination, to stimulate the ALQ-172.  Use the DTS software to record the ALQ-172 responses.  Identify the program numbers in the ALQ-172 responses and use them to develop the SOF ECE database.  These are the program numbers that are most likely to appear in a test. c.  Run real-time software in debug mode unless performance becomes an issue.  After a few mysterious crashes, we started the practice of running programs in debug mode.  It did not affect performance in any noticeable way and led to quick identification of problems.  Interestingly, many of the crashes were caused by faulty data in DIS PDUs produced by other components.  As long as the real-time software meets performance specifications (no broken frames and latency within tolerance), execution with the debugger will save development time.d.  The DIS Test Suite proved invaluable for data logging, playback, and examination of individual DIS PDUs.  Its playback capability was especially important, because it allowed testing by playing back PDUs from components (such as the ITB and ECM interface) when those components were otherwise unavailable.  The DTS was also a key component for analyzing scenario activity.  (The DTS, a GOTS product, can be acquired via the Internet at address http://www.ads-test.org.) e.  Lack of analytic outputs from SOF ECE/TACTS greatly hindered scenario development and validation.  We were able to use indirect methods, such as analysis of DIS PDUs, the SOF ECE cross-country display, and the Silicon Graphics debugger.  However, this labor-intensive process required deep knowledge and expertise in the software.  In the end, we were still able to achieve only what might be called “face validation” of the scenario; nothing seemed wrong, but we were generally unable to gather hard numeric data for comparison with intelligence documents. f.  Investigating integrating SOF ECE and SUPPRESSOR was one of the goals of this project.   There are numerous complexities in linking the C3 among SUPPRESSOR and SOF ECE modeled players.  SOF ECE modeled players have been integrated in other projects although the interfaces were special purpose and expensive.  To our knowledge, no one has integrated the C3 capability of SUPPRESSOR players with other models.  There are a number of important factors to consider in a C3 integration, namely the message content and format, communication system, and the knowledge the communicating players have of each other (and possibly, commanders and subordinates).  It proved to be too difficult to integrate the two simulations for this demonstration.  The approach taken for the demonstration was to separate the two simulations across a command chain boundary.  The area of interest was covered by one command chain which was assigned to the SOF ECE model.  SUPPRESSOR supplied the rest of the IADS and provided interactions to the SUT from the fringe on the area of interest.  There was no interaction between SOF ECE and SUPPRESSOR.6.  References[1]  Dana Howell, John Woodyard, Capt. John Wiseman, and Ronald Clericus, “Avionics Wind Tunnel Laboratory Interface Development”, NAECON, 24 May 1993[2] Roger Wuerfel, “Real-Time Performance of RTI Version 1.3”, Fall 1998 Simulation Interoperability Workshop, Sept 1998[3]   D. Wright, Clyde Harris, and Jerry Black, “High Level Architecture Runtime Infrastructure Test Report”, JADS JT&E-TR-98-006 Author BiographiesJOHN WOODYARD is an Electronics Engineer with AFRL.  He has been involved with various system integration projects in the ITB.  He is responsible for the distributed simulation integration and demonstrations in the ITB.JOHNNY JONES is an Electronics Engineer with AFRL.  He has managed projects in IDAL developing modeling and simulation technology for use with electronic combat applications. DOUGLAS REIF is a Staff Engineer at Amherst Systems.  Mr. Reif has twenty years experience in electronic warfare test and evaluation.  For the last ten years, his work has focused on test facility design with emphasis on issues related to distributed simulation. EMBED Word.Picture.8  Figure 1 SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 1Table 1 AWT Demonstration ComponentsComponentLocationUsageIntegrated Test BedSOF ECE/TACTS ModelsTerrain ServerReal-Time SUPPRESSORObject BrokerDEESALR-56M, ALQ-172ECM InterfaceDIS Test SuiteITBITBITBIDALIDALIDALIDALIDALITBAircraft simulatorThreat environment (foreground)LOS and height above terrainThreat environment (background)Link IDAL componentsRF Signal GenerationOperational avionics systemsMonitor ALQ-172 and inject digital responseDemonstration monitor and playback