Modeling and Simulation Employment of Common C4I Interfaces—The Challenges and SuccessesJohn W. DiemNational Simulation Center Digital Integration OfficeWhitfill Central Technical Support Facility     53rd and North StreetFort Hood, TX 76544(254) 532-8321 x2067john.diem@hood-ctsfmail.army.milNorman L. (Lane) AllredIITRI/A B Technologies GroupWhitfill Central Technical Support Facility     53rd and North StreetFort Hood, TX 76544(254) 532-8321 x2295lane.allred@hood-ctsfmail.army.milABSTRACT:  This paper discusses the current year in the life of U. S. Army Battle Command Systems (ABCS) development and its use with Modeling and Simulation (M&S) in a broad variety of environments.  The paper further discusses efforts to comply with the mandate to reuse established Command, Control, Communication, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I) interfaces in the employment of supporting M&S systems. The systems examined in the process for reuse are members of the Simulation C4I Interoperability (SIMCI) Consortium.  The consortium is made of M&S systems that directly support C4I.  These systems are varied in their types of support to C4I operations and are also varied in their stages of development.  The examination of the subject M&S systems in recent employments was organized and coordinated through a study entitled, ”Standard C4I Components for M&S/C4I Interoperability Support.”The M&S systems considered in this paper were observed in a wide variety of settings.  They were looked at in C4I test and development activities, in small-scale unit training events, in major large-scale field training exercises at two of the Army’s combat training centers, in field deployments for the development of the modern digitized army, and in large-scale command post exercises.  The observers who collected the data for this study are all seasoned professionals in both M&S and C4I operations.  The collective group of observers reflects a broad background. This group of observers includes training developers, simulation software architects and engineers, military analysts, systems engineers, and C4I developers.  The derived conclusions of this paper and the associated study have application in the development and refinement of associated standards, processes, and reusable components.  These conclusions also have bearing on the preciseness, the broadness or narrowness expected of mandated compliances in a rapidly changing environment.1. IntroductionAs the U. S. Army transitions to the digitized force, via the Army Battle Command Systems (ABCS), the technical development in support of Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I) is increasingly complex.  The parallel work to keep Modeling and Simulation (M&S) development in pace with supported testing, training, and experimentation requirements is likewise complex.  The ability to keep these two worlds -- C4I and M&S -- linked has been challenged in recent years by the Army’s move toward a spiral development process with ABCS.  This paper provides the background and an initial overview of efforts by the Simulation – C4I Interoperability (SIMCI) Overarching Integrated Process Team (OIPT) [1] during the past year to address technical and procedural solutions that must be developed to provide effective M&S support to Army C4I developers and users in the future.  Future papers, as well as those currently being written by other members of the SIMCI OIPT, will provide insights to the sharing of technology, tools, architectures, and processes in future collaborative efforts.  Findings within this initial report are derived primarily from observations and development team feedback. 2. Background: Establishing an M&S Community FocusSignificant resources are committed within DoD and the attendant industry to structure the M&S and C4I development processes, to manage M&S and C4I development, and to look for economies and efficiencies.  The organizations charged with these efforts, as documented below, have well-defined and mature processes, supporting infrastructures, and development timelines with specific objectives and goals.  A variety of test, training, and experimentation requirements over the past twenty years have brought the M&S and C4I communities together.  The number of these collaborations increased over the past nine years as the Army accelerated its efforts to field an integrated, interoperable C4I solution under the ABCS capstone.   Recent moves to an accelerated, spiral development process for ABCS have challenged the M&S community’s ability to keep pace and has placed great emphasis on the sharing of software, tools, resources, and processes to keep pace with ABCS development fielding and spiral. The Army’s C4I integration solution – ABCS – evolved from what were a series of independent C4I programs that were brought together under a single program office, the Program Executive Office for C3 Systems (PEO C3S) to establish what has become a system of systems architecture.  Originally (early to mid 1980s), M&S support to C4I development was primarily for the purpose of creating operational or developmental test environments through a series of “middle-ware” or “black box” interfaces and tools to stimulate ABCS’ predecessor C4I systems or to provide data collection support.  Later (mid-1980s to present), increased M&S and simulation integration efforts generated additional tools [2] that were used to support requirements definition and experimentation, developmental and operational testing, and individual and collective training.  In a very few instances, C4I and M&S development efforts were overseen by the same organization and usually yielded well-integrated efforts.  Two good examples are the Tactical Simulation (TACSIM) for testing automated intelligence fusion systems and the Fire Support Automated Test Systems (FSATS) in support of Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data System (AFATDS).  Most M&S to C4I integration efforts were undertaken by third-party users (testers, trainers, experimenters), who had only limited technical or management support apparatus to coordinate M&S and C4I collaborative efforts. While almost all of these programs continued to use separate “black box” interfaces, they were able to successfully simulate, stimulate, and collect in the C4I environment employed.  Unfortunately, there was almost always a significant void in getting timely, accurate technical and operational information shared amongst simulation and C4I developers.  The programs and events described in this paper are recent actions to, first, define and better understand the void and fill it via the establishment of appropriate standards, processes, and infrastructure.Over the past four years, DoD government agencies and government-industry organizations have set objectives and mandates to lead to the desired M&S responsiveness to C4I needs while they reach for the sought after economies [3].  One particular focus of those concerned organizations is the desire to use or develop reuseable software that is built to established standards, using common components wherever possible.  Some of the leading M&S organizations with parallel and complimentary objectives that govern or give oversight to the issues examined in this paper are: the Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO), the U. S. Army Modeling and Simulation Office (AMSO), and the Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO).  Organizations with similar roles in the areas of C4I and ABCS development are the Director for Information Systems, Command, Control, Communications, and Computers (DISC4), the PEO C3S, and the U.S. Army Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations (DCSOPS) Director of Integration (DOI, formerly the Army Digitization Office, or ADO), and the Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC). TRADOC establishes simulation standards, through the National Simulation Center (NSC), and provides C4I oversight through the TRADOC Program Integration Office for ABCS (TPIO-ABCS).  The roles of these organizations in the integration of simulation and C4I systems are:AMSO: Provides Army-wide M&S policy and technical guidance; oversees M&S Standards, to include the C4I integration category, and serves as the DA-level coordinator for SIMCI activities.DISC4:  Serves as the Army’s C4I systems architect and oversees simulation-C4I data alignment efforts that are core to improved interoperability between M&S and ABCS.  This agency also provides critical technical oversight and coordination for Department of Army level M&S-C4I integration.DMSO: DoD lead for Simulation Architecture; participates in workgroups integration of M&S with DII COE to include leading the DII COE M&S Working Group; provides on-site database engineering support to the SIMCI team at Fort Hood, Texas.DOI: Army charter for C4I standardization and integration; also provides technical and funding support to SIMCI OIPT management and development efforts.  Facilitates integration of Army C4I agencies into the SIMCI OIPT effort.  PEO C3S: Provides oversight of individual ABCS programs (battlefield functional areas, or BFAs) and Army-wide system fielding support.  It also manages integration efforts at the Central Technical Support Facility (CTSF), Ft. Hood, Texas that also serves as the site for simulation-ABCS certification efforts and is a user of simulations to support its test and systems engineering efforts.TRADOC: provides oversight, guidance, and sponsorship through NSC, with specific focus via the Digital Integration Office (DIO) at Fort Hood and through its support of the Army Standards Category Coordinator for C4I Integration.  The TPIO-ABCS coordinates the efforts of the TRADOC Systems Managers (TSMs) for each ABCS system; it also provides overarching requirements definition to the development, fielding, and training of ABCS.SISO: Provides DoD, industry, and academic coordination and standards for simulation integration and interoperability efforts; specifically, provides a C4I Study Group to inform the larger M&S community on C4I integration issues, methods, and concepts.Each of these organizations has a very challenging set of missions to provide Army simulation or C4I support; none, until recently, had specific charters to oversee the integration of those two key areas [4].  Some have provided a set of parameters for simulation-C4I integration efforts ranging from formal mandates (in the cases of simulation architectures) to general guidance and encouragement (in the areas of C4I interoperability).  These organizations faced significant challenges in establishing Army or DoD levels of mandates guiding the integration and interoperability of simulation and C4I systems due to broad variety and diversity of the M&S applications for each of the three Army domains [5]:Training, Exercises, and Military Operations (TEMO).  TEMO includes most forms of training at echelons from individual simulation trainers through collective, combined arms, joint, and/or combined exercises.  TEMO includes mission rehearsals and evaluations of all phases of war plans.  Analysis conducted during the rehearsal or evaluation validates the plan as best the simulation environment will allow.Advanced Concepts and Requirements (ACR).  ACR includes experiments with new concepts and advanced technologies to develop requirements in doctrine, training, leader development, organizations, materiel and soldiers which will better prepare the Army for future operations.  ACR evaluates the impact of horizontal technology integration through simulation and experimentation using real soldiers in real units.Research, Development, and Acquisition (RDA).  RDA includes all M&S used for design, development and acquisition of weapons systems and equipment.  M&S in the RDA domain are used for scientific inquiry to discover or revise fact and theories of phenomena, followed by transformation of these discoveries into physical representations.  RDA also includes test and evaluation (T&E) where M&S are used to augment and possibly reduce the scope of real-world T&E. Historically, there has been only limited sharing of M&S assets between these three domains due to a combination of unique requirements, divergent and frequently competing timelines, and different funding sources.  The most common roadblock, however, was simply a lack of awareness of what developers in different domains, who frequently were tackling similar problems, were doing to solve them.The lack of a unifying body or process to link the organizations and domains described above was typically overcome through increased coordination, establishment of lengthy development and integration windows, and, frequently, trial and error testing.  This evolving informal process was a sufficient solution in earlier C4I development efforts that were done in a very methodical, traditional, sequential approach, resulting in a single software drop per year.  This method no longer worked as the PEO C3S established a single integrating facility, the CTSF, at Fort Hood, Texas and began to integrate all its subordinate C4I systems with common software.  This foundation software was built on the Defense Information Infrastructure Common Operating Environment (DII COE) and additional applications developed in-house by PEOC3S Program Management (PM) Offices.  This move by the PEO C3S was a part of the Army’s Force XXI program that established an integrated digital C4I system ranging from individual vehicles and weapons platforms through all echelons of command posts.  The other Force XXI objective is to field a unit with its whole digital C4I infrastructure at once and then evolve that infrastructure via a spiral development process.  The resulting hardware, software, and operating procedures that evolved from efforts at Fort Hood and the CTSF would then be deployed to other Army units as an integrated package.  The Force XXI process is the integration of a broad variety of test, development, and training events to accelerate the fielding of ABCS to the unit is a key part of the.  More importantly, this part of the spiral development process involves the user or ultimate customer of the ABCS systems to assure feedback for process improvements as well as functional improvements.  M&S solutions were sought to support every phase of this effort, from the testing of software at the CTSF to the execution of large-scale command post exercises.  Foundation software components that impacted almost every area of simulation and ABCS integration – message processors, communications interfaces, common databases, security systems – were evolved by the ABCS program managers and then tested and placed in configuration management at the CTSF, also as a result of this Force XXI process.  In many instances these components went from an annual update cycle to, in some cases, weekly updates and quarterly baseline changes.  The only way that M&S developers could keep up with these changes was to be on-site at the CTSF, as the rapidity of changes and the transition away from formal system specification documentation mandated the need to be a part of the ABCS systems engineering process.  Otherwise, simulation developers would get too far behind the ABCS development effort and not have access to the most current interface specifications and requirements.The SIMCI OIPT was established to keep pace with the ABCS systems as they were developed, tested, and fielded as part of the rapid spiral development process.  One of the expected outcomes of the SIMCI OIPT’s efforts is to help effect a series of technical and management adaptations that will facilitate synchronization of ABCS and M&S in support of the Army.  A series of architectures and processes for simulation-C4I integration is envisioned.  In many cases, these adaptations will almost be cultural changes as simulation-C4I integration efforts cause two very different communities – M&S and C4I – to work closely throughout the lifecycle of both.  Feedback to both communities from SIMCI OIPT efforts will allow them to establish those technical and management mandates.3.The SIMCI OIPT: Complying with the GuidanceThe Army Deputy Under-Secretary of the Army chartered the SIMCI OIPT in May 2000 for Operations Research (DUSA(OR)) and DISC4 to provide technical and managerial oversight across all Army simulation-C4I integration efforts.  To meet this charter, representatives from the following organizations from across the Army’s simulation and C4I development agencies were requested to participate in this effort: Co-Chairs:-Simulation, Training and Instrumentation Command (STRICOM) Program Manager for Simulation Technology Integration (PM STI)PEOC3S, Chief of Readiness DivisionMembers: [ACR, RDA, TEMO M&S domain representatives noted in brackets]:- AMSO- AMSO C4I Integration Standards Category Coordinator- Communications & Electronic Command (CECOM) Research & Development Engineering Center (RDEC) [RDA]- DOI - DISC4- PEO for Intelligence and Electronic Warfare Systems (PEO IEWS)- PEO for Standard Army Management Information Systems (PEO STAMIS)- Space and Missile Defense Command (SMDC)- Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) Program Integration Office (TPIO) for ABCS (TPIO-ABCS)- TPIO for Synthetic Training Environments (TPIO-STE) [TEMO]- TPIO for Terrain Data (TPIO-TD)- TRADOC Analysis Center (TRAC)- TRADOC Deputy Chief of Staff for Combat Development (DCSCD) [ACR]The representatives of these organizations provide an integrated process team that represents the Army’s most active M&S-C4I integrators, the three PEOs overseeing the bulk of the Army’s C4I system development, and the M&S domain leads overseeing the Army’s simulation development.  The co-chairs, one from the simulation and one from the C4I community, facilitate the OIPT’s execution of its charter co-signed by the Army’s senior M&S official, the DUSA(OR) and the Army’s Corporate Information Officer (to include C4I efforts), the DISC4.  The charter tasks the OIPT to establish collaborative technical efforts that oversee simulation-C4I integration research efforts, to promote collaborative efforts among and between simulation and C4I developers, and to establish the appropriate management infrastructure that sustains both technical and management efforts. As an element of that inquiry, AMSO, DISC4 and SMCI collaboratively sponsored a study entitled, “Standard C4I Components for M&S/C4I Interoperability Support.”  As a part of this study, a sample of M&S to C4I development activities and employment events were examined from April 2000 to December 2000.  This study will also assist the OIPT to establish the technical and procedural standards and inter-agency agreements that will guide future simulation-C4I integration efforts.The M&S systems examined at the various events during the available time period were all members of the SIMCI Consortium.  SIMCI formed the consortium for the express purpose of bringing together a team of M&S–ABCS interface developers, with at least one member from each M&S domain, to explore the technical and procedural challenges with: 1) re-using ABCS common software components, and 2) once software re-use components were established, exploring the potential for use of the same component by multiple consortium members.  The ability of consortium members to address areas of the technical reference model proposed by Hieb and Carr [6] was primary in selecting members of the consortium.  An additional criterion required for selection to the SIMCI consortium was that the participant is or would be involved in any domain in a Force XXI event using ABCS software that was being integrated at the CTSF.  This down-selection of candidate systems allowed the SIMCI team to evaluate the broadest range possible of M&S applications while eliminating additional variables that would have been introduced by using C4I systems that were not under the same rigorous baseline configuration management as that applied for ABCS at CTSF.  These consortium members are widely different in their respective M&S functions in support of C4I.  They are also in varied stages of development.  Many of the members focused on DII COE Common Message Processor (CMP) and Joint Common Database (JDCB) integration while others tackled issues associated with integrating unique BFA software components when there was not a suitable DII COE or ABCS foundation software solution. The SIMCI Consortium members and their functions are [7]:Digital Collection, Analysis and Review System/Data Collection Module (DCARS/DCM).  A data collection and analysis system, DCARS combines a data collection system (DCM) with an after-action review system to provide feedback for training and testing analysts as well as tactical unit commanders.   The primary DCARS/DCM area of investigation was establishing a DII COE compliant segment (the DCM) that could be placed under CTSF configuration management and distributed as an ABCS foundation software component for use by all domains.EAGLE is a combat model that represents the command and control system and physical battlefield dynamics.  The Digital Leaders Reaction Course (DLRC) leverages EAGLE as the core simulation to provide a low-overhead, cost-effective training support and analysis environment focused on the battle staff of a digitized Army unit.  EAGLE focused on CMP and JCDB integration, particularly in the areas of emulating the data server contained within a tactical operations center (TOC).Enhanced Protocol Interface Unit (EPIU).  EPIU translates fire support messages from tactical devises to a simulation standard that can be used by a variety of simulations.  The EPIU was derived from a predecessor program, the Protocol Interface Unit (PIU) and is intended to add additional fire support messaging functionality and simulation interface capabilities to the PIU current ability to generate legacy fire support messages.  EPIU team-members researched approaches to leverage both DII COE solutions and the unique PM software that is currently used for fire support messaging.One Semi-Automated Forces (OneSAF).  OneSAF will be a composable, next generation computer generated force (CGF) for all three M&S domains that can represent a full range of operations, systems, and control processes from the individual combatant and platform level to Brigade level.  Unit behaviors and command entities will be modeled to the battalion level for selected units.  It will accurately and effectively represent specific activities of combat, command, control, communications, computers, and intelligence (C4I), combat support, and combat service support (CSS).  OneSAF consortium efforts focused on JCDB database alignment and on the integration of DII COE components.Run Time Manager (RTM).  RTM is an interface system that permits the Corps Battle Simulation (CBS) or Brigade Battalion Simulation (BBS) to stimulate ABCS subsystems.  It has been frequently used with CBS primarily at Fort Hood, TX and Korea in support of Battle Command Training Program (BCTP) based exercises.  The RTM translates/reformats BBS, CBS, or CBS confederated with CSSTSS data for five ABCS Battlefield Functional Areas.  Consortium research efforts focused on the integration of foundation software and DII COE components for messaging and communications interface.Simulation Testing Operations Research Model (STORM) Role Player WorkStation (RPWS).  STORM is a federation of tools used for developmental and operational testing and training to provide an event driven interface between DIS compliant simulations and live Force XXI Battle Command Brigade and Below (FBCB2) equipped forces [note: FBCB2 is the component of ABCS that provides digital C4I capability to individual vehicles and weapon systems].  STORM provides the blue situational awareness picture of the simulated units to the live units in the field as would be done were those simulated units live.  It also provides command and control messaging capability between the simulated and live units through the use of surrogate FBCB2s and the RPWS.   RPWS tasks focused on the integration of common FBCB2 messaging and map components into the RPWS. Tactical Simulation (TACSIM).  TACSIM serves as both the US Army’s primary simulation for training intelligence soldiers and the Joint Training Confederation’s intelligence simulation model.  The system simulates or stimulates the full spectrum of the United States Intelligence capability from National through tactical levels.  TACSIM consortium efforts concentrated on the re-use of messaging and communications interface software.Enhanced Tactical Simulation Interface Unit (ETSIU).  ETSIU interfaces simulations with tactical C4I systems while minimizing the tactical communications protocol implementation dependencies within the simulations and provides non-intrusive tactical communications with the C4I systems.  The ETSIU interfaces with simulations using Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) Transmitter and Signal Protocol Data Units (PDUs) and High Level Architecture (HLA) interactions to exchange the dynamic data necessary to support C4ISR Interactions between simulated and live systems.  It communicates with C4I systems using tactical messages, and it translates and routes information between the simulated and live systems to enable live tactical system operators/cells/staffs to perform their tasks and missions in the same manner as in a live operation.   Under the consortium, the ETSIU focused efforts on the enhancement of the legacy Tactical Simulation Interface Unit (TSIU) by integrating ABCS messaging and communications software.Warfighter’s Simulation (WARSIM). WARSIM creates a synthetic environment allowing commanders and staff from Division to Echelon Above Corps (EAC) to use their organic Command and Control (C2) equipment to train to Army and Joint training standards.  WARSIM is the land component of the Joint Simulation System (JSIMS).  The WARSIM synthetic environment must represent the full spectrum operational scenarios, from operations other than war to high intensity non-nuclear warfare.  The WARSIM, RTM, Eagle, and ETSIU teams created a software development team (SDT) as part of the consortium efforts to focus specifically on creating a common Application Programmer's Interface (API) for DII COE communications and message software.  Lessons learned and technical insights of this team are being provided to the PEO C3S developers of these software applications to insure that M&S requirements for this common software were documented and communicated to the developers.    Events supported by the SDT and other consortium members were observed by the SIMCI ”Standard C4I Components for M&S/C4I Interoperability Support” study team to validate and certify that the M&S systems could in fact properly support ABCS.4. Opportunities for ObservationAfter initially determining the scope and process of the study at hand, the study organizers chose to collect information on every event reasonably possible where SIMCI Consortium member M&S systems were employed in support of C4I activities through December 2000.  Additionally, all tests, certifications and product development forums would likewise be observed.  The information gathered would be observations of seasoned professionals from many backgrounds who were currently familiar with the M&S systems being observed and with the requirements of the event being supported.  The observer group included training developers, simulation software architects and engineers, military analysts, systems engineers, and C4I developers.   The activities observed and the associated M&S tools were:WARSIM integration efforts at the CTSFEAGLE integration efforts at the CTSF Two (2) National Training Center (NTC) training rotations employing the TSIU, PIU, DCARS/DCM, and STORM as part of the Digital Battle staff Sustainment Trainer (DBST) federationDBST exercises conducted at Fort Hood in support of Force XXI unitsSTORM Certification events at CTSFJoint Contingency Force Advanced Warfighter Experiment (JCF AWE) and train-up exercises employing DBSTCorps Warfighter (CWF) Ramp-up and Command Post Exercises employing the RTM, TACSIM, and DCARS/DCMDBST exercises in Europe employing the EPIUSIMCI Certification event at CTSF with TSIU, ETSIU, PIU, STORM, DCARS/DCMData and observations from these activities are still being analyzed at the time of this writing and will be presented in future efforts.  While some of these events included prior versions of SIMCI consortium projects (for example an older version of the TSIU, which did not include common ABCS software components, was employed at the NTC training rotations) each of these events provided great insights on both the technical challenges of working with ABCS and/or on the status of consortium members as they worked to meet those challenges.5. Observation InsightsThe emerging results and insights from these observation events, while still very early, offer some encouraging results and offer some common themes regarding the integration of the Army’s M&S and ABCS efforts.  The first and foremost result of the SIMCI consortium effort is that ABCS foundation software components can be leveraged by M&S interfaces and that components developed within the M&S community can be leveraged by ABCS.  Results from the SDT have been particularly encouraging as they demonstrated the results of their efforts at the CTSF and during TEMO events such as Eagle's support to Army Transformation analysis and RTM's support to the recent III Corps Warfighter Exercise.  While these successes, and many others, provide an initial level of optimism, there are still major challenges to creating a long-term system of systems approach that creates a fully interoperable M&S and C4I environment.  Study insights that describe these challenges include:Defining C4I architectures -- systems, technical, and operational -- prior to the event is critical.  These architectures define information flows, communications protocols, and the roles performed by the ABCS and C4I systems during the event.  This definition is critical to determining the robustness and characteristics of the M&S system employed for the event.  These characteristics can include what information is generated, how often, how much of the C4I environment must be simulated vice stimulated, and the kinds of databases that must be initialized and synchronized.The ABCS spiral development process offers some unique challenges since that process is basically a moving train with attendant frequent changes.  That spiral hinders establishing and sustaining standard integration solutions and processes that provide enduring guidance.  However, integration solutions and processes derived from the work to support the ABCS spiral can be documented to provide guidance or reference for subsequent integration.Detailed lessons learned are not being captured during M&S - ABCS integration events that can benefit other developers and integrators.The configuration management and documentation of common components of ABCS has had to focus on specific Force XXI and Army Transformation events and are still evolving to a broader Army-wide context.Integrating M&S and ABCS at test, training, and experimentation events still requires a robust technical support infrastructure and often involves some on-site development, integration and testing by both parties.  The truism emerging from the past year is that the level of technical support needed is always more than anticipated.The stability and capability of M&S-C4I integration efforts is often camouflaged by real-world C4I to C4I integration problems.  This masking of the true system of system problems is particularly manifest when there are problems in communications set-up and database development on the C4I systems that inaccurately show that the simulations are not linked or compatible.  However, this frustration can be expected as part of the rapid configuration changes that are part of the spiral development process.  Tight configuration management and knowing what ABCS configurations or versions are in test are essential elements in trouble shooting issues relative to the supporting M&S and the supported ABCS.Lessons learned tend to be very transient and are not often applicable to following events due to software spiral.  The rapid migration in CY2000 from ABCS 6.0 to 6.1 to 6.2, with several sub-versions, witnessed a rapid evolution of DII COE and foundation software components and in basic methods of ABCS operation.  In many cases, the CTSF was supporting parallel development, integration and test efforts for various ABCS 6.x sub-versions, mandating a similar series of parallel integration efforts by M&S teams.  The requirement to parcel M&S integration resources across these many parallel efforts created significant challenges to the establishment of common APIs and other standardization approaches.  Again, onsite presence of the OIPT community agents and technical representatives is essential to facilitate integration and synchronization of M&S and ABCS.Event preparation windows envisioned as being final systems checks end up being combined development, integration, test, and data initialization events.  One of the key lessons learned for event planners is to include more time before their events to do this technical integration - but this can only be a short-term fix.Some problems with the maturity and stability of C4I and M&S software components must be accepted until the ABCS spiral achieves a less compressed development cycle.A system of systems approach in which M&S -ABCS integration efforts are viewed as a key component of ABCS -- just like the other ABCS BFAs -- is the only viable, economical way to get inside the ABCS spiral.  Part of this solution involves continued support and augmentation of the SIMCI team collocated with the PEO C3S at the CTSF.Catching up with the ABCS spiral once doesn’t mean being in compliance with the spiral the next time.  M&S-ABCS interoperability is a continuous process.6. RamificationsTo date, there have been two major themes that seem to recur with each attempt to integrate M&S and ABCS.  First theme:  a lifecycle process for both simulation and C4I systems is required if the Army is to have a truly interoperable M&S and C4I environment.  This lifecycle requirement necessitates an institutionalized process with staff, funding, and the mandate from Army leadership that is sufficiently strong to be able to influence programmatic changes in either the M&S or C4I sector.  Second theme:  the economic impact of achieving greater C4I and M&S interoperability through common components economies may be such that development and integration costs may be reduced or even eliminated; however, there will still be long-term sustainment costs that may not be anticipated in various major-system budgets.  Much of this unanticipated cost is a ramification of the C4I spiral and not a negative comment on the goodness of common components themselves.  In many cases, the costs will be driven by the need to replicate new operational capabilities, tactics, techniques, and procedures in the Army and across DoD that are brought forth through new C4I technologies.   The authors contend that the efforts examined via the SIMCI study are documenting much more than a short point-in-time research effort.  Rather, they are documenting the start of what must be a new way of doing business that is based on collaboration across all M&S domains and the forging of a strong alliance with ABCS and C4I developers.7. References[1]	http:simci.org.[2]	Brennan, J.M.: “The Army Experiment 4 Simulation to Army Battle Command System Experiments,” Paper 98S-SIW-002, 1998 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1998.[3]	Hieb, M.; Griggs, L.: McKenzie, F.; Tiernan, T.; and Zeswitz, S.  “MRCI: Transcending Barriers Between Live Systems and Simulations,” Paper 97S-SIW-197, 1997 Spring Simulation Interoperability Workshop, 1997.[4]	Department of the Army Memorandum, Intra-Army Interoperability Certification, 3 December 2000.[5]	AR 5-11, 10 July 1997, Glossary, Section II, pp. 15&17. [6]		Carr, F.H. and Hieb, M.R.: “Issues and Requirements for Future C4I and M&S Interoperability,” 7th Conference on Computer Generated Forces and Behavioral Representation, 1998.[7]	Program staffs provided descriptive information about consortium members.8. BiographiesJohn W. Diem is Manager of the National Simulation Center Digital Integration Office, Fort Hood, Texas.  During his past 19 years as an Army Officer, defense contractor, and government civilian, he has been involved in the testing and training of automated command and control systems.  To perform these test and training activities, he has employed, developed, or managed a broad variety of simulation-C4I integration efforts to provide test and training environments, data collection and after action reporting, and scenario database development.   He is currently serving as the AMSO C4I Integration Standards Coordinator and supports Army-wide simulation-C4I integration for test, training, and experimentation.  He earned a BA and MS from Texas A&M University and served 14 years on active duty and as an Army Reserve Military Intelligence Officer.Norman L. (Lane) Allred is a Senior Military Analyst with Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute (IITRI) A B Technologies Group.  He has worked the last five years in U.S. Army simulation support and testing and is currently working on a U. S. Army Study titled “Standard C4I Components for M&S/C4I Interoperability Support”.  He served 27 years in the U.S. Air Force in intelligence and space related activities.  He earned a BS in communications from Brigham Young University, a MBA from the University of Montana and a Masters Of Military Arts and Science from the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College.